TOWN OF SCHERERVILLE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-24 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. No. 985K, passed 10-16-24
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
Certification
We, the members of the Town Council, and Janice M. Malinowski, Clerk-Treasurer,
of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, the State of Indiana, pursuant to the
laws of the State of Indiana, hereby certify that the general and permanent
ordinances of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, as revised, amended, restated,
rearranged, renumbered, and codified and presented in the following twelve (12)
Chapters, are correct as printed, and hereby constitutes the Schererville Town
Code.
Signed this                    day
of                                                         , 1997.
 
Attest:                           Town Council of Schererville, Indiana
                           By:
                                                                                                                              
Janice M. Malinowski, Clerk-Treasurer            Edward P. Cook, Jr., Council
President
                                                                                    
                           John H. Fladeland, Council Member
                                                                                    
                           Mark E. Cowan, Council Member
                                                                                    
                           Thomas J. Shanley, Council Member
                                                                                    
                           Michael A. Troxell, Council Member
Attest as to Legality:
                                                         
Visvaldis Kupsis, Town Attorney
Public Officials
of the
Town of Schererville, Indiana
2025
Town Council
Rob Guetzloff, Town Council President
Thomas Schmitt, Council Member
Kevin Connelly, Council Member
Robin Arvanitis, Council Member
Caleb S. Johnson, Council Member
********
Michael A. Troxell, Clerk-Treasurer
Randy Wyllie, Town Judge
Jim Gorman, Town Manager
Andrew Hansen, Director of Operations
Austen Kuiper Jasaitis LLC, Town Attorney     
********
Peter Sormaz,  Chief of Police
Robert Patterson, Fire Chief
Chad Nondorf, Director of Public Works
Thomas Kmiatek, Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent
John Novacich, Park Superintendent
Steven Winarski, Building Inspector
 
********
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3271.jpg]
 
Adopting Ordinance
ORDINANCE NO. 1556
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF SCHERERVILLE, LAKE
COUNTY, INDIANA, REVISING, AMENDING RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF SCHERERVILLE DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of
Schererville are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Indiana empower and
authorize the Town Council of the Town of Schererville to revise, amend,
restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not
heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Town Council of the Town of Schererville has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town of
Schererville of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the Town
of Schererville and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the Town of Schererville that this ordinance take
effect from and after its passage and adoption.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of Schererville,
Lake County, Indiana:
Section 1:   The general ordinances of the Town of Schererville as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana."
Section 2:   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   Chapter 1 - General Provisions
   Chapter 2 - Town Administration
   Chapter 3 - Town Legislative Branch
   Chapter 4 - Fees, Licenses and Permits
   Chapter 5 - Parks and Recreation
   Chapter 6 - Public Health and Safety Matters; Public Nuisances
   Chapter 7 - Building and Construction Regulations
   Chapter 8 - Traffic and Parking Regulations
   Chapter 9 - Utilities
   Chapter 10 - Zoning and Subdivisions
   Chapter 11 - Comparative Tables
   Chapter 12 - Schererville Town Code Index
Section 3:   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4:    Such Code shall be deemed published as of the date of its
adoption and approval by the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, and the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville is hereby authorized and ordered to
file a copy of Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
Section 5:    Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved.
Section 6:    If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance
shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, clause,
provision or portion of this ordinance.
Section 7:    This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of the Town of Schererville, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
ALL OF WHICH IS PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Town Council of the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, this 8th day of May, 2002.
TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF SCHERERVILLE, LAKE COUNTY, INDIANA
         Michael A. Troxell /s/
         Michael A. Troxell, President
         John H. Fladeland /s/
         John H. Fladeland
         Stephen Z. Kil /s/
         Stephen Z. Kil
         Rob Guetzloff /s/
         Rob Guetzloff
         Edward P. Cook. Jr. /s/
         Edward P. Cook, Jr.
ATTEST:
Janice M. Malinowski /s/
Janice M. Malinowski, Clerk-Treasurer
Chapter 1
General Provisions
   
Sec. 1-1   Code Adoption.
   
Sec. 1-2   Code Citation and Designation.
   
Sec. 1-3   Effective Date of Code; Repeal of General Ordinances in Conflict;
Savings Clause.
   
Sec. 1-4   Definitions.
   
Sec. 1-5   Code Application.
   
Sec. 1-6   Title of Office.
   
Sec. 1-7   Interpretation of Language.
   
Sec. 1-8   Grammatical Interpretation.
   
Sec. 1-9   Acts by Agents.
   
Sec. 1-10   Interpretation of Section Numbers.
   
Sec. 1-11   Repeal Shall Not Revive Ordinances.
   
Sec. 1-12   Effective Date of Ordinances.
   
Sec. 1-13   Severability of Code.
   
Sec. 1-14   Construction.
   
Sec. 1-15   General Penalties.
   
Sec. 1-16   Town Seal.
   
Sec. 1-17   Errors and Omissions.
   
Sec. 1-18   Codes - Property of the Town.
   
Sec. 1-19   Town Flag.
   
Sec. 1-20   Applicability.
   
Sec. 1-21   Prohibited Conduct.
   
Sec. 1-22   Acceptance of Gifts/Gratuities, Meals, Entertainment, and Campaign
Contributions.
   
Sec. 1-23   Financial/Personal Interest Disclosure.
   
Sec. 1-24   Ethics Officer and Committee.
   
Sec. 1-25   Procedure.
   
Sec. 1-26   General Provisions.
Sec. 1-1 Code Adoption.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Indiana Code, §§ 36-1-5-1 through 36-1-5-6,
the Schererville Town Code consisting of the following twelve (12) Chapters is
adopted and enacted.
Sec. 1-2 Code Citation and Designation.  1
   The Ordinances contained in the following Chapters, Articles, Divisions, and
Sections shall constitute and be designated as the Schererville Town Code, and
may be cited as the "Town Code" or, in the provisions which follow, as "this
Code".
 
Notes
1 1   I.C., §§ 36-1-5-1 through 36-1-5-6, address the codification of Ordinances by
  all units of government except Townships.
Sec. 1-3 Effective Date of Code; Repeal of General Ordinances in Conflict;
Savings Clause.  2
   All of the provisions of this Code shall be in full force and effect from
the date of passage and the filing of this Code in the offices of the Clerk-
Treasurer, and all Ordinances of a general and permanent nature in force at
that time are hereby repealed from and after said date.
   Such repeal shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any
penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or
occurring before said effective date; nor shall it affect any Ordinance
accepting gifts and dedications of real estate; nor any Ordinance or Resolution
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the Town or authorizing the
issue of bonds of said Town; or other evidence of the Town's indebtedness, or
any contract or obligation assumed by said Town; nor shall said repeal affect
the administration of Ordinances or Resolutions of this Code; nor shall it
affect transfer and appropriation Ordinances; nor shall it affect any Ordinance
concerning annexation or disannexation of territories to or from the Town, or
any Ordinances changing or concerning names of streets, or opening and closing
streets, or Ordinances commonly known as zoning map amendments; nor shall it
affect any Ordinance accepting, releasing or abandoning easements; nor shall it
affect any right, easement or franchise, conferred by any person or
corporation; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending on
said date, except that the proceeding thereof shall conform as far as possible
to the provisions of this Code.
 
Notes
2 2   Adoption of Ordinances and Resolutions and publication of a Town Code. See
  I.C., §§ 365-2-10 and 36-5-12-10.2.
Sec. 1-4 Definitions.  3
   In the construction of this Code and of all Ordinances, the following
definitions shall be applied:
   a.   Clerk-Treasurer means the Clerk and Fiscal Officer of the Town of
Schererville.
   b.   Code means the Schererville Town Code.
   c.    Computation of Time: Except when otherwise provided, the time within
which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first
day and including the last day, unless the last day be Sunday or a holiday, in
which it shall also be excluded.
   d.    Council means the Town Council, formerly known as the Board of
Trustees.  4
   e.    County means the County of Lake, State of Indiana.
   f.    Et Seq. is the Latin phrase meaning and the following.
   g.    I.C., shall refer to state law found in the Indiana Code.
   h.   Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of
the State of Indiana, the Ordinances of the Town of Schererville, and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated
thereunder.
   i.    May is permissive.
   j.   Month means a calendar month.
   k.    Must and Shall are each mandatory.
   l.   Oath includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
   m.   Owner, applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or
a part of such building or land.
   n.   Person includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
   o.    Personal Property includes money, goods, chattels, things in action,
and evidences of debt.
   p.    Preceding and Following mean next before and next after, respectively,
   q.    Property includes real and personal property.
   r.    Public Place means any street or highway, sidewalk, park, cemetery,
school yard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream.
   s.   Real Property shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   t.   Reasonable Time means in all cases where any provision shall require
any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given any
person, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only
as may be necessary in the prompt execution of such duty or compliance with
such notice.
   u.   Sidewalk means that portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   v.   Signature or Subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   w.   State means the State of Indiana.
   x.   Street means all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
squares, places, curbs, or other public ways in the Town which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated in any law of this state.
   y.    Substantial Property Interest means any right in real property that
may be affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by Planning and
Development laws of the State of Indiana, including a fee interest, a life
estate, a future interest, a present possessory interest, or an equitable
interest of a contract purchaser.  5
   z.   Tenant or Occupant applies to a building or land, and shall include any
person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part
of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
   aa.   Town means the Town of Schererville, Indiana, or the area within the
territorial limits of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, and such territory,
outside of the Town of Schererville over which the Town has jurisdiction or
control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
   bb.   Town Council means and includes all former references to the Board of
Trustees.
   cc.   Written includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or
otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
   dd.   Year means a calendar year.
 
Notes
3 3   I.C., §§ 36-1-2-1 through 36-1-2-24, set forth the definitions of general
  applicability.
4 4   On March 30, 1989, House Enrolled Act No. 1042 took effect, officially
  changing the terms "Board of Trustees" to "Town Council".
5 5   I.C., § 36-7-9-2, of the State's Planning and Development Chapter defines
  "substantial property interest".
Sec. 1-5 Code Application.
   This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the
territorial limits of the Town of Schererville and to that territory outside
this Town, if any, over which the Town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of
any constitutional provision or law.
Sec. 1-6 Title of Office.
   Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board, or
commissioner means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of
the Town,
Sec. 1-7 Interpretation of Language.
   All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others
as may have acquired a particular and appropriate meaning in the law shall be
construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
Sec. 1-8 Grammatical Interpretation.
   The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the Town,
unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is
intended:
   a.   Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
   b.   Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   c.   Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
Sec. 1-9 Acts by Agents.
   When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be
done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent.
Sec. 1-10 Interpretation of Section Numbers.
   a.   Each Chapter is comprised of Articles which address subject matter
classifications within the Chapter. Articles may then be divided into
Divisions, which further define the particular topics.
   b.   Each Section of this Code shall be numbered consecutively by Chapter.
The number shall consist of two (2) component parts separated by a dash, the
figure before the dash referring to the Chapter number and the figure after the
dash referring to the position of the Section within the Chapter.
   c.   The decimal system shall be used for all additions or amendments to
this Code. When a Chapter or Section is to be added, the new Chapter or Section
shall be given a decimal character.
Sec. 1-11 Repeal Shall Not Revive Ordinances/Effect of Code on Past Actions.
   a.   The repeal of an Ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
Ordinance or revive any Ordinances which have been repealed thereby.
   b.   Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment by this
Code of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the Town shall in
any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which
violations were committed prior to the effective date of this Code, nor be
construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the effective date due
and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the
provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license,
fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof,
nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required
to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and
obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
Sec. 1-12 Effective Date of Ordinances.
   Unless otherwise expressly provided, an Ordinance shall take effect when
passed according to Indiana Code, § 36-4-6-14.
Sec. 1-13 Severability of Code/Constitutionality.
   a.   If any Chapter, Article, Division, Section, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Code.
   b.   If any Section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is
for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Town Council
declares that it would have passed this Code, and each Section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more Sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared
invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code should be declared
invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be
in full force and effect.
Sec. 1-14 Construction.
   The provisions of the ordinances of the Town, and all proceedings under them
are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice.
Sec. 1-15 General Penalties.
   a.   Whenever in the ordinances of the Town, any act or omission is made
unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission.  6
   b.   General Penalty:
      1.   Any party violating an ordinance for the Town of Schererville,
Indiana, which subjects said party to a potential penalty shall pay a fine
ranging from a minimum of twenty ($25.00) dollars and a maximum fine of two
thousand five hundred ($2500.00) dollars.
      2.   Said minimum fine of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars and maximum fine
of two thousand five hundred ($2500.00) dollars shall be applicable to each
violation of Schererville ordinance and in a situation in which multiple
violations exist and are charged under the same ordinance number the violating
party shall be assessed separate fines for each specific act.
      3.   This ordinance does not apply to any ordinance violation which has a
fine specifically prescribed by Indiana state statute and in such cases the
Indiana state statute shall apply as to fine range.
      4.   Any and all prior nonconflicting provisions contained in the
existing Schererville ordinances shall remain in full force and effect and it
is not the intent of the Town Council to modify any provisions of existing
ordinances other than to provide for the standard penalty section which is set
forth here above.
(Ord. No. 1345, §§ 1-4,7-17-96)
   c.   Each day a violation of this Code is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense.  7
   d.   The Town may bring a civil action to enjoin any person from:
      1.   violating any Ordinance regulating or prohibiting a condition or use
of property; or
      2.   engaging in conduct without license if an Ordinance requires a
license to engage in the conduct.  8
   e.   The Court may suspend all or any part of a penalty imposed for an
Ordinance violation and may require as a condition of such suspension that the
defendant shall perform uncompensated work that benefits the community.
 
Notes
6 6   I.C., § 34-4-32-4, addresses Ordinance violations, and I.C., § 36-1-3-8,
  authorizes a maximum fine of $2,500 for an Ordinance violation.
7 7   I.C., § 9-4-1-127.1, addresses Class C infractions.
8 8   I.C., § 36-1-6-4, addresses injunctions.
Sec. 1-16 Town Seal.
   a.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the custodian of the Town's Seal and affix
it to such documents and instruments as required.
   b.   The Town Seal of Schererville shall be the form and style as affixed to
the certificate page of this Code.
Sec. 1-17 Errors and Omissions.
   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, or the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same affect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exits regarding the nature or extent
of the error.
Sec. 1-18 Codes - Property of the Town.
   All copies of the Schererville Town Code, except those sold by the Town to
private individuals or given or sold to the public library, shall be the
property of the Town of Schererville. Any Schererville Town Codes delivered to
elected or appointed officials shall not be retained by said individuals after
the expiration of his or her term or office or appointment.
Sec. 1-19 Town Flag.  9
   Reserved.
 
Notes
     Editor’s Note: Mary Andrews designed a flag for the Town of Schererville in the
9 late 1970's as part of the Town’s “Flag Designing Contest”. Said flag has not been
  formally adopted as of the completion of the codification process.
Sec. 1-20 Applicability.
   The provisions of Sections
1-20 through
1-26, as amended from time to time, shall apply to all elected officials of the
Town; all members of all Commissions, and Boards established by state statute,
town ordinance, resolution or motion; individuals appointed by the President
and/or Town Council; the Town Manager; the Town Attorney; and, to the extent
possible all Town hired Independent Contractors (collectively referred to as
“official”); and all department and division heads, and all other employees of
the Town (collectively referred to as “employee”). The provisions of Sections
1-20 through
1-26 herein are in addition to the rules and requirements as set forth in the
Town Code, the Town Personnel Policy Manual, the Police Department Polices and
Procedures, and all applicable federal, state, and local laws. The provisions
of Sections
1-20 through
1-26 shall not, however, replace statutory rights, powers, duties or
responsibilities of Town officials or employees in the performance of their
duties and responsibilities. Further, written acceptance of Sections
1-20 through
1-26 shall be a condition for initial and continuing service for the Town by an
official or employee.
(Ord. No. 1726, § 1, 1-17-08; Ord. No. 1750, § 1, 2-25-09)
Sec. 1-21 Prohibited Conduct.
   a.   Non-Discrimination. No official or employee shall grant or make
available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond
that which is the Town policy to grant or make available to the public at large
without prior Town Council or Town Manager approval. No official or employee
shall discriminate against any person in violation of federal, state, or local
law, or the ordinances of the Town of Schererville.
   b.   Confidential Information. No official or employee shall use or permit
the use of any confidential information regarding Town of Schererville
government business to advance the financial or personal interest of said
official or employee or any other person or entity, unless and until such
information is available to the public.
   c.   Electoral Activities. No official, employee, or others who are engaged
in any activities to gain public office, or to assist another person or group
to gain public office, shall violate any provisions of any and all local,
state, and federal laws. No official or employee shall instruct or induce other
officials or employees to engage in conduct prohibited by the Town, including
the use of other employees or Town assets for any activity related to the
political campaign of said official or employee, or for any purpose other than
authorized Town business.
   d.   Use of Public Property. No official or employee shall use, or induce,
order, or allow other persons to use, Town funds or property for a purpose
which is for private benefit unless the property is available to the general
public on equal terms, or unless the use is in accordance with other Town
municipal policies or ordinances.
   e.   Assistance. No official or employee shall assist any person in any
transaction with the Town when such assistance is or would reasonably appear to
be improperly enhanced by the position of the official or employee unless said
assistance is provided in the course of official Town duties.
   f.   Financial or Personal Interest Conflicts. Unless a disclosure statement
is completed and filed within five (5) days of the conflict arising, no
official or employee shall engage in the following:
      1.   No official or employee shall represent any individual petitioner
other than the Town or himself or herself before the Town Council, any
Commission, any Board, or any Committee of the Town. An official or employee
may represent an entity before the Town, its Boards and Commissions, if the
official or employee is an owner of at least fifty (50%) percent of that
entity, or represents at least fifty percent (50%) of the property or business
that is the subject of a petition.
      2.   No official or employee shall participate or represent another
person or entity in the procurement of any contract or purchase by the Town if
such contract or purchase involves the official or employee, a member of said
official or employee’s family, or other entity in which the official or
employee has a financial interest.
      3.   No official or employee, either on that person’s behalf or on behalf
of any other person, shall have any financial or personal interest in any
business or transaction with the Town Council, as well as any Board,
Commission, Committee or other Town public body unless that official or
employee makes full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such
interest, and if required, disqualifies himself or herself from participating
in and acting upon the business or transaction.
      4.   No official, in his or her public capacity, shall vote on any issue/
matter or participate in any discussion if the matter has a potential financial
benefit to the official, his or her immediate family members or their business.
In the event that an official is required to abstain from voting on a
particular issue, the official or employee shall announce the abstention and
the reason for the abstention, or that a filed disclosure form provides the
reason for the abstention, prior to discussion and voting on the particular
issue. In the event that the abstention from voting would result in a lack of a
quorum for the public body to officially act, then the affected official may
vote after full disclosure of the conflict.
      5.   All conditions and requirements herein are supplemental and in
addition to the responsibility and duty of any official or employee to execute
and deliver for processing to the Town Council a Uniform Conflict of Interest
Disclosure Statement pursuant to the provisions of I.C. § 35-44-1-3, as amended
from time to time, as well as any and all other applicable and relevant laws.
(Ord. No. 1726, § 2, 1-17-08; Ord. No. 1750, § 2, 2-29-09)
Sec. 1-22 Acceptance of Gifts/Gratuities, Meals, Entertainment, and Campaign
Contributions.
   a.   Gifts/Gratuities.
      1.   No official or employee shall solicit personal gift(s) from any
entity with which the Town does business unless the gift of donation is for a
charitable or non-profit agency. Unsolicited gifts may be accepted and kept by
an official or employee if the gift is in the amount of fifty dollars )$50.00)
or less. All gifts with an estimated monetary value of more than fifty dollars
($50.00) are given to the Town of Schererville and must remain Town property.
All gifts received are reportable, and are to be recorded in the Office of the
Town Clerk-Treasurer noting a description of the gift, donor of the gift, date
of the giving of the gift, and location/use of the gift. This record shall be
open to public inspection.
      2.   The acceptance of items of a general advertising nature (i.e., the
item must be clearly marked with company advertising logos) are acceptable. Any
general advertising item having an estimated retail value of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more must be reported to the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer
which will maintain a record of the description of the item, donor of the gift,
and the date of the giving of the gift. This record shall be open to public
inspection.
   b.   Meals. A meal which occurs in the pursuit of normal day-to-day business
is considered a simple courtesy. Meals that are a result of business
discussions that extend into/during/or beyond working hours are a normal part
of doing business. Meals that occur when an official or employee accepts an
invitation to visit a business facility or in which the discussions extend into
or beyond normal working hours are also normal parts of doing business. All
meals of an estimated monetary value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more will be
recorded in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer noting a description of the
meal, who paid for the meal, and the date of the meal. This record shall be
open to public inspection.
   c.   Entertainment.
      1.   Any entertainment which occurs in the pursuit of normal day-to-day
business is considered a simple courtesy as are activities that are a result of
business discussions which extend into/during/or beyond working hours
considered a part of doing business. Activities that occur when an official or
employee accepts an invitation to visit a business facility and in which the
discussions extend into or beyond normal working hours are also part of normal
business relationships. Each official or employee who participates in
entertainment exceeding an estimated monetary value of fifty dollars ($50.00)
will have such event recorded in the Office of Town Clerk-Treasurer, noting a
description of the entertainment, who paid for the entertainment, date of the
entertainment, and the purpose of the entertainment. This record shall be open
to public inspection. No gifts shall be accepted when ongoing contractual
negotiations are being conducted and are in process.
      2.   Invitations to functions of a general nature, rather than specific
or individual nature, where a business sponsors and pays for clients from
multiple businesses or governmental agencies, may be accepted. For example, if
a business sponsors a training course, seminar, golf outing, sporting event
admission or banquet for clients from multiple government entities, then these
offers may be accepted. However, an official or employee must report all
participation to the Town Clerk-Treasurer of any event exceeding an estimated
monetary value of fifty dollars ($50.00). The reported participation will be
recorded in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and will be open for public
inspection during business hours. Any additional offers of hospitality from
businesses such as paid lodging, transportation, etc. shall be declined.
   d.   Campaign Contributions. An official or employee may accept campaign
contributions reported in full compliance with any applicable federal and state
statutes, and local Town ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1726, § 3, 1-17-08; Ord. No. 1750, § 3, 2-29-09)
Sec. 1-23 Financial/Personal Interest Disclosure.
   All Town elected officials and all candidates for elected Town offices shall
meet all requirements regarding disclosure of financial interests including,
but not limited to, filing of approved disclosure forms. Copies of all approved
forms shall be filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer. Additionally, all Town
elected officials and all candidates for elected Town offices shall comply
fully with Indiana statutes with respect to conflict of interest and disclosure
of conflicts pursuant to I.C. § 35-44-1-3, and other statutory sections
applicable to the specific public body.
(Ord. No. 1726, § 4, 1-17-08)
Sec. 1-24 Ethics Officer and Committee.
   a.   Except as set forth hereafter in this subsection a., the Town Clerk-
Treasurer shall be Ethics Officer, except when the Town Clerk-Treasurer is the
subject of a citizen complaint of alleged non-compliance with the provisions of
Sections
1-20 through
1-26, as amended. In the event that the Town Clerk-Treasurer is the subject of
a citizen complaint, then the Town Council President shall be the Ethics
Officer. The duties and responsibilities of the Ethics Officer shall be as set
forth herein, in addition to any and all other duties and responsibilities
given such Ethics Officer by the Town Council. The Ethics Officer shall serve
with or without additional compensation, as determined from time to time by the
Town Council, and shall be reimbursed for all reasonable costs and expenses
incurred in the furtherance of the Ethics Officer’s duties and
responsibilities.
   b.   The Ethics Committee shall consist of five (5) members, whose
nominations shall be made as follows:
      1.   The President of Hyles-Anderson College, Crown Point, Indiana, shall
nominate and appoint one (1) member for an initial term of one (1) year. The
member appointed herein shall be a full-time faculty member of the college,
board member of the college administrative board, or administrative staff
employee. Any appointee other than as set forth hereinabove shall be a resident
of the Town of Schererville;
      2.   The Executive Director of Campagna Academy, Schererville, Indiana,
shall nominate and appoint one (1) member for an initial term of two (2) years.
The member appointed shall be a full-time faculty member of the academy, board
member of the academy board of directors, or administrative staff employee. Any
appointee other than as set forth hereinabove shall be a resident of the Town
of Schererville;
      3.   The Board of Directors of the Schererville Chamber of Commerce shall
nominate and appoint one (1) member for an initial term of one (1) year. Any
appointee other than as set forth hereinabove shall be a resident of the Town
of Schererville;
      4.   The President of the Lake Central School Board shall nominate and
appoint one (1) member for an initial term of two (2) years. The member
appointed herein shall be a member of the school board of trustees or a school
administrative staff member. Any appointee other than as set forth hereinabove
shall be a resident of the Town of Schererville;
      5.   The four (4) other appointed Ethics Committee members shall nominate
and appoint a fifth (5th) member who shall serve for an initial term of one (1)
year. Any appointee herein shall be a resident of the Town of Schererville.
   c.   After the initial appointment term, all nominating bodies shall make
appointments for a period of two (2) years. No Ethics Committee member may
serve more than three (3) two (2) year terms. The Schererville Town Council
shall confirm and ratify the nominations made to the Ethics Committee. No
Ethics Committee member may be a Town official or employee.
(Ord. No. 1726, § 5, 1-17-08; Ord. No. 1750, § 4, 2-29-09)
Sec. 1-25 Procedure.
   a.   Ethics Officer Review. In the event that a citizen has a complaint, on
personal knowledge, of an alleged violation of Sections
1-20 through
1-26, as amended from time to time, by a Town official or employee, the citizen
complainant shall deliver a written complaint of such alleged violation on a
form prescribed by the Town, and verified under the penalties for perjury, to
the Town Clerk-Treasurer in a sealed envelope. The complaint filed shall
contain specific reference and identification of the provisions of Sections
1-20 through
1-26 alleged violated. In the event that the subject of the citizen complaint
is the Town Clerk-Treasurer, then the person submitting the notice shall
address the envelope to the Town Council President. The Ethics Officer shall
review the verified citizen complaint to determine whether a violation of the
provisions of Sections
1-20 through
1-26, as amended from time to time, has been properly states and made
consistent with the requirements herein. In the event that the Ethics Officer
determines that no violation has been stated or occurred, then the Ethics
Officer shall so notify the citizen complainant in writing, and there shall be
no further proceedings herein. In the event that the Ethics Officer determines
that a citizen complaint has been properly stated or presented, and may have
occurred, then the Ethics Officer shall notify the Ethics Committee and
transmit the verified citizen complaint and all information gathered on the
citizen complaint to the Ethics Committee for further review and next
consideration. The Ethics Officer shall have the right and authority to
receive, review and assess a citizen complaint for substantive compliance with
the terms of Sections
1-20 through
1-26 for further processing of any citizen complaint, and is authorized to
utilize staff and legal counsel for assistance whenever deemed appropriate and
necessary.
   b.   Ethics Committee Review.
      1.   The Ethics Officer shall inform the official or employee of the
citizen complaint made and provide the official or employee an opportunity to
explain in writing any response deemed necessary by the official or employee
pertaining to the alleged violation, which response will be forwarded to the
Ethics Committee for review with the citizen complaint and information gathered
by the Ethics Officer pertaining to the citizen complaint.
      2.   When required, the Ethics Officer shall notify and convene the
Ethics Committee in an executive session meeting to review any complaint and
response thereto. The Ethics Committee may review the citizen complaint as the
Ethics Committee deems appropriate and required.
      3.   (a)   In the event that the Ethics Committee, upon completion of its
review of all information provided pertaining to the citizen complaint,
determines that an official or employee has violated the terms of Sections
1-20 through
1-26, the Ethics Committee may:
            (i)   As to an official, recommend an appropriate notice and/or
corrective action;
            (ii)   As to an employee, refer the matter to the Town Council,
Town Manager, or jurisdictional Board or Commission for notice, hearing and
action in accordance with the Town Personnel Policy Manual or applicable
Indiana Statutes, as appropriate; and
            (iii)   As to an official, employee, or other person, take any
other action as may be required by the particular circumstances of the
violation determined to have occurred.
         (b)   The Ethics Committee shall have not authority to require or
compel any action, including corrective, but only the authority to report its
determination on the citizen complaint submitted, with recommendations thereon.
      4.   After determination of violation or no violation, the Ethics Officer
shall report the findings and recommendations of the Ethics Committee to the
Town Council, and file such report in a file designated for such purposes.
(Ord. No. 1726, § 6, 1-17-08; Ord. No. 1750, § 5, 2-29-09)
Sec. 1-26 General Provisions.
   a.   Sections
1-20 through
1-26 shall be construed broadly, and in no way limits, affects, or minimizes
the other rights and affirmative duties required of, vested in, and granted to
officials, employees, or public bodies pursuant to applicable Indiana Statutes.
   b.   All officials and employees shall receive a copy of Sections
1-20 through
1-26 from the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer within fifteen (15) days of its
adoption, or any amendments adopted thereto hereinafter. Any candidate for
public office or any individual being considered for appointment shall be given
a copy of Sections
1-20 through
1-26, and any amendments thereto.
   c.   In the event that the terms of Sections
1-20 through
1-26 or any amendments thereto are in conflict with any federal, state, or
local law, regulation, or ruling, such law, regulation or ruling shall
supersede the terms of Sections
1-20 through
1-26, as amended from time to time.
   d.   Sections
1-20 through
1-26 shall not prohibit an official or employee from being reimbursed for
expenses, receiving money as a campaign contribution, participating in
collective bargaining, or being paid for a service as an official or employee
as provided for by applicable ordinances or Indiana Statutes.
   e.   The Town Council shall review Sections
1-20 through
1-26 and make reasonable and necessary amendments thereto at least once every
four (4) years, or as frequently as needed.
(Ord. No. 1726, § 7, 1-17-08; Ord. No. 1750, § 6, 2-29-09)
Chapter 2
Town Administration
Article 1. Town Boundaries.
   
Sec. 2-1   Official Map Adopted By References.
   
Sec. 2-2   Annexation.
   
Sec. 2-3   through Sec. 2-4 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. The Town Clerk-Treasurer.
Division I. General Powers and Duties.
   
Sec. 2-5   Term of Office of Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 2-6   Powers and Duties.
   
Sec. 2-7   Compensation of Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 2-8   Deputies and Employees.
   
Sec. 2-9   Office Space for the Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 2-9A   Electronic Wire Transfers by Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 2-9B   Emergency Purchases.
   
Sec. 2-9C   Disbursements or Emergency Payments Prior to Confirmation of Claims
   
Sec. 2-9D   Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Municipal Matrimony Bureau.
   
Sec. 2-10   Creation of Matrimony Services.
   
Sec. 2-10A   Municipal Matrimony Bureau.
   
Sec. 2-10B   Powers and Duties of Municipal Matrimony Bureau.
   
Sec. 2-10C   Matrimony Service Charge Schedule.
   
Sec. 2-10D   Waiver of Charges Authorized.
   
Sec. 2-10E   All Charges Belong to Municipality.
   
Sec. 2-10F   Personal Fees Prohibited.
   
Sec. 2-10G   Construction of Clause and Headings.
   
Sec. 2-11   Reserved for Future Use.
 
   
Sec. 2-49   Definitions.
   
Sec. 2-50   Parks and Recreation Board; Membership; Appointment.
   
Sec. 2-51   Board of Parks and Recreation; Initial Appointments; Vacancies.
   
Sec. 2-52   Board of Parks and Recreation; Removal; Procedure.
   
Sec. 2-53   Board of Parks and Recreation; Advisory Member.
   
Sec. 2-54   Regular and Special Meetings; Election of Officers; Quorum of the
Board.
   
Sec. 2-55   Compensation of Board Members.
   
Sec. 2-56   Board Duties.
   
Sec. 2-57   Board Powers.
   
Sec. 2-58   Sale of Surplus Property; Notice.
   
Sec. 2-59   Superintendent of Parks and Recreation; Appointment and
Qualifications.
   
Sec. 2-60   Assistants.
   
Sec. 2-61   Bonds of Park Officers and Employees.
   
Sec. 2-62   Gifts, Donations and Subsidies.
   
Sec. 2-63   Taxing District for Special Benefit Taxes.
   
Sec. 2-64   Establishment Procedures for a Special Nonreverting Capital Fund.
   
Sec. 2-65   Establishment Procedures for a Cumulative Building Fund.
   
Sec. 2-66   Fees for Particular Activities; Disposition and Disbursements.
   
Sec. 2-67   Advisory Council and Special Committees.
   
Sec. 2-68   Legal Authority.
   
Sec. 2-69   Repeal of Conflicting Laws.
   
Sec. 2-70   Transfer of Documents.
   
Sec. 2-71   Severability.
   
Sec. 2-72   Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund.
   
Sec. 2-73   through Sec. 2-79 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Metropolitan Police Department.
   
Sec. 2-80   Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners.
   
Sec. 2-81   Procedure to Advertise for Employment of Certified Police Officers.
   
Sec. 2-82   Definitions Used in the Police Department.
   
Sec. 2-83   Legal Authority of the Town Council.
   
Sec. 2-84   Chief of Police.
   
Sec. 2-85   Rules of Interpretation.
   
Sec. 2-86   Safety Regulations.
   
Sec. 2-87   Uniform Allowance for Civilian Fire and Police Employees.
   
Sec. 2-88   Uniform Allowance for Paid Full-Time Police Officers.
   
Sec. 2-89   Police Reserve Officer Program.
   
Sec. 2-90   through Sec. 2-94 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Policies and Procedures Governing the Metropolitan Police
Department.
   
Sec. 2-95   Purpose.
   
Sec. 2-96   Policy.
   
Sec. 2-97   General Requirements.
   
Sec. 2-98   Vacation.
   
Sec. 2-99   Sick/Injury Leave.
   
Sec. 2-100   Disability Retirement.
   
Sec. 2-101   Military Leave.
   
Sec. 2-102   Emergency Leave/Bereavement Leave.
   
Sec. 2-103   Family and Medical Leave.
   
Sec. 2-104   Holiday Leave.
   
Sec. 2-105   Leave of Absence.
   
Sec. 2-106   Incentive Leave Days.
   
Sec. 2-106A   Retirement Procedure.
   
Sec. 2-106B   Resignation Procedures.
   
Sec. 2-107   Wages.
   
Sec. 2-108   Overtime.
   
Sec. 2-109   Compensation Regarding the Alcohol Counter-Measures Program.
   
Sec. 2-110   Compensatory Time.
   
Sec. 2-111   Uniform Allowance for Full-Time Police Officers.
   
Sec. 2-112   Funeral Benefits.
   
Sec. 2-113   Police Department to Accept Applications for Licensing Handguns.
   
Sec. 2-114   Deferred Prosecution Cost into L.E.C.E.F. Fund.
   
Sec. 2-115   Death Benefits.
   
Sec. 2-116   through Sec. 2-119 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Fire Department.
   
Sec. 2-120   Fire Department Administration.
   
Sec. 2-121   Uniform Allowance for Fire Department/EMT Members.
   
Sec. 2-122   Wages and Compensation.
   
Sec. 2-123   Powers and Duties in General.
   
Sec. 2-124   Definitions.
   
Sec. 2-125   Fire Pension Board Established; Duties.
   
Sec. 2-126   Trustees.
   
Sec. 2-127   Election of Trustees; Initial.
   
Sec. 2-128   Election of Trustees; Active Members.
   
Sec. 2-129   Election of Trustees; Retired Members.
   
Sec. 2-130   Officers; Adoption of Rules; Quorum; Proceedings.
   
Sec. 2-131   through Sec. 2-133 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Public Works Department.
   
Sec. 2-134   Divisions of the Public Works Department.
   
Sec. 2-135   Public Works Director.
   
Sec. 2-136   Term of Employment of Public Works Director.
   
Sec. 2-137   Powers and Duties.
   
Sec. 2-138   Extent of Services.
   
Sec. 2-139   Vacancy.
   
Sec. 2-140   through Sec. 2-149 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Planning and Building Department.
   
Sec. 2-150   Planning and Building Department.
   
Sec. 2-151   through Sec. 2-154 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Department of Redevelopment.
   
Sec. 2-155   Department of Redevelopment Established.
   
Sec. 2-156   Redevelopment District.
   
Sec. 2-157   through Sec. 2-159 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Department of Waterworks.
   
Sec. 2-160   Department of Waterworks Created.
   
Sec. 2-161   Waterworks Board of Directors.
   
Sec. 2-162   Terms and Bonds of Board of Directors.
   
Sec. 2-163   Powers and Duties of Department of Waterworks.
   
Sec. 2-164   through Sec. 2-169 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 6. OTHER ADMINISTRATION POSITIONS AND POLICIES.
Division I. Code Enforcement Officer.
   
Sec. 2-170   Code Enforcement Officer.
   
Sec. 2-171   Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Town Recording Secretaries.
   
Sec. 2-172   Town Recording Secretaries.
   
Sec. 2-173   Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Personnel Policy.
   
Sec. 2-174   Personnel Policy Manual Incorporated By Reference.
   
Sec. 2-175   Alcohol and Substance Abuse Policy and Testing Procedure
Incorporated by Reference.
   
Sec. 2-176   Mileage Allowance.
   
Sec. 2-177   Credit Card Regulations.
   
Sec. 2-178   Clothing Allowance for Police Department and Fire Department
Civilian Employees.
   
Sec. 2-179   Reserved for Future Use.
   
Sec. 2-180   Town Travel Policy.
   
Sec. 2-181   Cellular Telephone Usage Policy.
   
Sec. 2-182   Nepotism Policy.
   
Sec. 2-183   through Sec. 2-209 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 7. Boards and Commissions.
Division I. Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals.
   
Sec. 2-210   Plan Commission Created.
   
Sec. 2-211   Terms of Citizen Members.
   
Sec. 2-212   Terms of Government Members.
   
Sec. 2-213   Vacancies.
   
Sec. 2-214   Powers and Duties.
   
Sec. 2-215   Compensation.
   
Sec. 2-216   Zoning Regulations.
   
Sec. 2-217   Board of Zoning Appeals.
   
Sec. 2-218   through Sec. 2-223 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Economic Development Commission.
   
Sec. 2-224   Establishment.
   
Sec. 2-225   Membership.
   
Sec. 2-226   Incorporation and Implementation of State Statutes.
   
Sec. 2-227   through Sec. 2-254 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Redevelopment Commission.
   
Sec. 2-255   Five-Member Redevelopment Commission.
   
Sec. 2-256   Powers of the Redevelopment Commission.
   
Sec. 2-257   through Sec. 2-259 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Sanitary Board of Appeals and Utility Board of Trustees.
   
Sec. 2-260   Sanitary Board of Appeals.
   
Sec. 2-261   Utility Board of Trustees.
   
Sec. 2-262   through Sec. 2-267 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Safety Committee.
   
Sec. 2-268   Intent.
   
Sec. 2-269   Safety Committee Created.
   
Sec. 2-270   Committee Duties and Responsibilities.
   
Sec. 2-271   Investigations By Police.
   
Sec. 2-272   Weekly Safety Departmental Meetings.
   
Sec. 2-273   Five (5) Member Committee.
   
Sec. 2-274   Incorporation by Reference of Safety Standards.
   
Sec. 2-275   through Sec. 2-279 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Plat Committee.
   
Sec. 2-280   Plat Committee Created.
   
Sec. 2-281   Authority of Plat Committee.
   
Sec. 2-282   Primary Approval.
   
Sec. 2-283   Rules of Procedure.
   
Sec. 2-284   through Sec. 2-288 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Contractor's Licensing Board.
   
Sec. 2-289   Seven (7) Member Board.
   
Sec. 2-290   Regulations.
   
Sec. 2-291   through Sec. 2-292 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Board of Safety.
   
Sec. 2-293   Created; Intent.
   
Sec. 2-294   Powers; Duties and Responsibilities.
   
Sec. 2-295   Term of Employment; Police Department.
   
Sec. 2-296   Term of Employment; Fire Department.
   
Sec. 2-296A   Disciplinary Actions.
   
Sec. 2-296B   State Law.
   
Sec. 2-296C   Extent of Services; Salary.
   
Sec. 2-296D   Oath.
   
Sec. 2-296E   Legal Authority.
   
Sec. 2-296F   Repeal of Conflicting Laws.
   
Sec. 2-296G   Severability.
Division IX. Reserved.
   
Sec. 2-297   through Sec. 2-299 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 8. Miscellaneous Administrative Regulations.
Division I. Miscellaneous Regulations.
   
Sec. 2-300   Defense and Indemnity of Elected Public Officials.
   
Sec. 2-301   Exemption of the Municipal Corporation From Land Use Regulations.
   
Sec. 2-302   "Cafeteria Plan" for Employee Participation.
   
Sec. 2-303   Self-Funded Employee Benefit Plan.
   
Sec. 2-304   through Sec. 2-334 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Purchase Order Procedure.
   
Sec. 2-335   Purpose.
   
Sec. 2-336   Purchase Order Procedure.
   
Sec. 2-337   Applicability.
   
Sec. 2-338   Emergency Situations.
   
Sec. 2-339   through Sec. 2-343 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Claim Docket Procedure.
   
Sec. 2-344   Procedure Established.
   
Sec. 2-345   Forms Required.
   
Sec. 2-346   Role of Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 2-347   Compliance with Applicable Law.
   
Sec. 2-348   through Sec. 2-359 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 9. Budget and Other Fiscal Policies.
   
Sec. 2-360   Role of Department Heads.
   
Sec. 2-361   Role of Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 2-362   Role of Town Council President.
   
Sec. 2-363   Clerk-Treasurer to Prepare Documents.
   
Sec. 2-364   Town Council to Fix Rate of Taxation By Ordinance.
   
Sec. 2-365   Appropriations.
   
Sec. 2-366   Monthly Reports.
   
Sec. 2-367   Bad Debt/Uncollectible Accounts Receivable Policy.
   
Sec. 2-368   Credit Cards.
   
Sec. 2-369   Erroneous or Irregular Variances, Losses, Shortages and Thefts.
   
Sec. 2-369.1   Policies and Procedures for Authorized Financial Instruments for
Payments.
Division II. Temporary Loan Procedure.
   
Sec. 2-370   Authorization.
   
Sec. 2-371   Warrant Ordinance Required.
   
Sec. 2-372   Contents of Warrant Ordinance.
   
Sec. 2-373   Seal and Signatures.
   
Sec. 2-374   Registration.
   
Sec. 2-375   Interest.
   
Sec. 2-376   Sale of Warrants.
   
Sec. 2-377   through Sec. 2-389 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 10. Funds.
Division I. Specific Funds.
   
Sec. 2-390   Property Seizure Fund.
   
Sec. 2-391   Equipment Fund for the Police Department.
   
Sec. 2-392   Confidential Fund.
   
Sec. 2-393   Firearms Training Fund.
   
Sec. 2-394   Petty Cash Fund for the Police Department.
   
Sec. 2-395   Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund.
   
Sec. 2-396   Ambulance Fund.
   
Sec. 2-397   Clerk-Treasurer's Separate Fund.
   
Sec. 2-398   Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund for Park Purposes.
   
Sec. 2-399   Civic Expense Budget Account.
   
Sec. 2-400   Municipal Cumulative Development Fund.
   
Sec. 2-401   Employee Benefit Fund.
   
Sec. 2-402   Special Vehicle Inspection Fund.
   
Sec. 2-403   Other Funds Recognized and Continued.
   
Sec. 2-404   Equipment Fund for Fire Department.
   
Sec. 2-405   Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund for the Police Department
D.A.R.E. Program.
   
Sec. 2-406   Schererville E.M.S. Fees Deposited into Ambulance Fund.
   
Sec. 2-407   Building Fund.
   
Sec. 2-408   77th Avenue Road Improvement Fund.
   
Sec. 2-409   Police Training Fund.
   
Sec. 2-410   Downtown Revitalization Fund.
   
Sec. 2-411   Asset Seizure Fund.
   
Sec. 2-412   Petty Cash Fund for Town County.
   
Sec. 2-413   Petty Cash Fund for Park Department.
   
Sec. 2-414   Petty Cash for Clerk-Treasurer's Office.
   
Sec. 2-415   Clerk's Record Perpetuation Fund.
   
Sec. 2-416   Supplemental Public Defender Fund.
   
Sec. 2-417   Supplemental Adult Probation Services Fund.
   
Sec. 2-418   Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419   Safe Kids Chapter Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.1   Police Department Special Grants Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.2   Deposits Non-Reverting Escrow Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.3   U.S. Postage Stamp Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.4   Special Newspaper Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.5   Special Town Ambulance Equipment Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.6   Major Moves Construction Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.7   Special Town Pennsy Greenway Bike Trail Project Non-Reverting
Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.8   Special Non-Reverting Stormwater Permit Fee Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.9   High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Program Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.10   Improvement Inspection Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.11   High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Administrative
Revenue Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.12   Farmers' Market Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.13   Park and Recreation Grants Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.14   Planning and Building Department Subdivision Review
Professional Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.15   Town Promotion Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.16   Police Department Law Enforcement Processing Service Charge and
release Fee Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.17   Perry Ferrini Dog Park Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fee Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.18   Parks Community Center Special Construction Account Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.19   County Economic Development Income Tax (CEDIT) Special Revenue
Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.20   Adjusted Gross Income Tax Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.21   Culvert Repair Project Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.22   Local Option Income Tax (LOIT) Y2016 Special Distribution Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.23   Community Events Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.24   Rainy Day Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.25   Law Enforcement Aid or Confidential Petty Cash Fund.
   
Sec. 2-419.26   Parks and Recreation Department Petty Cash Fund for Park
Concessions.
   
Sec. 2-419.27   ARP Local Fiscal Recovery Grant Fund.
   Sec. 2-419.28   Riverfront Development District Non-Reverting Fund.
Article 11. Miscellaneous Administrative Regulations.
   
Sec. 2-420   South Shore Clean Cities Program Adopted.
   
Sec. 2-421   Standards for Capitalization of Assets.
   
Sec. 2-422   Fixed Asset/Capital Asset Policy.
   
Sec. 2-423   Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Regulations.
   
Sec. 2-424   through Sec. 2-429 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 12. Purchasing Regulations.
Division I. Municipal Purchasing Agency.
   
Sec. 2-430   Purchasing Agency.
   
Sec. 2-431   Powers and Duties.
   
Sec. 2-432   Purchasing Agent.
   
Sec. 2-433   U.S.A. Manufactured Supplies.
   
Sec. 2-434   Central Purchasing Fund.
   
Sec. 2-435   through Sec. 2-439 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Reserved.
   
Sec. 2-440   through Sec. 2-449 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 1. TOWN BOUNDARIES.
Sec. 2-1 Official Map Adopted by Reference.
   The Town of Schererville, Indiana, official map is adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter as fully as if the same were attached hereto and
incorporated herein, and is on public display in the Town Hall of Schererville,
Indiana; and filed with the offices of the Lake County Auditor and Recorder.
The boundaries set forth therein shall constitute the official boundaries of
the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
Sec. 2-2 Annexation.  1
   a.   Annexations are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as
fully as if the same were attached hereto and incorporated here, as filed in
the offices of the Lake County Auditor and Recorder, and in the Town Hall of
Schererville, Indiana. If any phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter shall
be declared invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this chapter shall nevertheless be enforced the same as if it had been passed
without such invalid portion.
(1982 Schererville Town Code, § 9-1-2)
   b.   As new areas are brought into the Town, each annexation ordinance shall
assign said areas to the appropriate legislative district (ward) which are
further described in Section
3-2 of this Code.
 
Notes
1 1   I.C., § 36-4-3-1, et seq., addresses municipal annexation and
  disannexation.
Sec. 2-3 through Sec. 2-4 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 2. THE TOWN CLERK-TREASURER.
Division I. General Powers and Duties.
Sec. 2-5 Term of Office of Clerk-Treasurer.  2
   a.   The Town Clerk and the Town Fiscal Officer of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana shall be the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. No. 11, 9-13-27; 1982 Schererville Town Code, § 2-6-1).
   b.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is an elected position whose term of office is
for four (4) years, beginning at noon on January 1 st after his or her election
and continuing until a successor is elected and qualified.
(1982 Schererville Town Code, § 2-6-2)
   c.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected by the voters of the whole
Town.
(1982 Schererville Town Code, § 2-6-3)  3
 
Notes
2 2   I.C., § 36-5-6-3, addresses the Clerk-Treasurer's term of office, and
  residency requirements.
3 3   I.C., § 36-5-6-4. addresses the election of the Clerk-Treasurer.
Sec. 2-6 Powers  4  and Duties.  5
   a.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer may administer oaths, take depositions, and
take acknowledgments of instruments as required by law.
   b.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall exercise the powers and duties
prescribed by law, which include but are not limited to the following:
      1.   receive and care for all Town monies, and pay them out upon order of
the Town Council;
      2.   keep accounts of all Town monies;
      3.   file monthly reports with the Town Council showing all receipts and
disbursements of the Town Treasury for the preceding month;
      4.   maintain records which are open for inspection by the Town Council;
      5.   issue all licenses; and
      6.   attend all Town Council meetings and maintain a recording of its
proceedings and such other powers and duties as may from time to time be
authorized.  6
   c.   The Clerk-Treasurer is both the Town Clerk and Town Fiscal Officer
pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-5-6-2.
 
Notes
4 4   I. C., § 36-5-6-5, authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to administer oaths and
  related powers.
5 5    I. C., § 36-5-2-8, sets forth the Clerk-Treasurer's role to the legislative
  body (Town Council).
6 6   I. C., § 36-5-6-6, sets forth the powers and duties of the Town Clerk-
  Treasurer.
Sec. 2-7 Compensation of the Clerk-Treasurer.  7
   a.   The Town legislative body shall, by ordinance, fix the compensation of
the Clerk-Treasurer.
   b.   The compensation may not be changed in the year for which it is fixed,
nor may it be reduced below the amount fixed for the previous year.
 
Notes
7 7    I. C., § 36-5-3-2, addresses compensation for the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
Sec. 2-8 Deputies and Employees.  8
   a.   The Clerk-Treasurer is empowered to hire employees who will serve as
deputies and assist in the performance of his duties. (1982 Schererville Town
Code, § 2-6-4)
   b.   Deputies and employees so hired serve at the pleasure of the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   c.   If the Town owns a utility, and the Clerk-Treasurer is directly
responsible for the billing and collection of that utility's rates and charges,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall appoint those employees who are also responsible for
that billing and collection. These employees serve at the Clerk-Treasurer's
pleasure.
 
Notes
  8   I. C., § 36-5-6-7, authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to appoint deputies and
8 employees. I.C., § 36-5-6-8 authorizes the hiring of attorneys or legal research
  assistants.
Sec. 2-9 Office Space for the Clerk-Treasurer.
   Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-5-6-5.1, if office space exists in a building
owned or leased by the Town, the legislative body shall provide suitable office
space for:
   1.   the Clerk-Treasurer; and
   2.   staff and records of the Clerk-Treasurer.
Sec. 2-9A Electronic Wire Transfers by Clerk-Treasurer.
   The Clerk-Treasurer for the Town of Schererville, Indiana is authorized by
the Town Council to transfer funds within existing accounts via electronic wire
transfer without prior approval from the Town Council.
(Res. No. 99-24, § 1, 8-11-99)
Sec. 2-9B Emergency Purchases.
   a.   Town Manager and the Town Clerk-Treasurer agree that an emergency
situation exists which requires an expenditure of town funds. They shall state
the nature of the expenditure and basis of their determination that an
emergency exists and sign said document.
   b.   Upon the completion of the aforesaid documentation, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall be authorized to expend up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the
emergency purchase item.
   c.   A separate file shall be kept by the Clerk-Treasurer's office and the
documentation justifying the emergency expenditure shall be kept within said
file.
(Ord. No. 1462, §§ 1-3, 6-9-99)
Sec. 2-9C Disbursements or Emergency Payments Prior to Confirmation of Claims.
   a.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to make
claim payments in advance of Town Council allowance for the following expenses,
namely:
      1.   Property or services purchases or leases from:
         (a)   The United States government; or
         (b)   An agency or a political subdivision of the United States
government;
      2.   License fees or permit fees;
      3.   Medical and life insurance premiums or fund reimbursements;
      4.   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      5.   Federal grant programs, if:
         (a)   Advance funding is not prohibited; and
         (b)   The contracting party provides sufficient security for the
amount advanced;
      6.   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
      7.   Maintenance agreements or service agreements;
      8.   Lease or rental agreements;
      9.   Principal and interest payments on bonds;
      10.   Payroll;
      11.   State, federal, or county taxes;
      12.   Credit card payments;
      13.   Postage; and
      14.   Other emergency purchase situations up to five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   b.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to disburse
all employee-related federal and state tax obligations at the time required by
federal and state law, provided, however, that any such disbursement requiring
claim approval shall be submitted for confirmation to the Town Council at its
next Public Meeting for consideration of such claims.
   c.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to
distribute all employee funds withheld from his or her pay in the manner and at
the time provided by applicable federal and state law, with employee
authorization, or as required in the normal course of business. The said funds
may include, without limitation, federal, state, and county income taxes,
federal Social Security taxes, state retirement funds, credit union payments,
charitable contributions, garnishments, and the like.
   d.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to disburse
non-taxable funds temporarily or tentatively held for payment for a specific
purpose or to a specific person, as described hereinabove, in the manner and at
the times required by the time of the receipt of said funds; provided, however,
that written notice of the receipt and the disbursement of said funds shall be
made to the Town Council, and either approved by the Town Council prior to
disbursement, or confirmed by the Town Council following the disbursement.
   e.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to disburse
appropriated funds for the above-specifically designated purposes only;
provided that such payment is required as an emergency matter, and the claim is
submitted to the Town Council at its next Public Meeting for consideration of
claims.
   f.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to issue
drafts and pay checks in the normal course of business to Town employees whose
positions and range of pay have been approved by the Town Council, without
prior approval by the Town Council; provided that said payroll data is
submitted to the Town Council at its next Public Meeting for consideration of
claims.
   g.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to disburse
appropriated funds prior to claim approval; provided that said payment is for a
product or service, the bid for which has been accepted by the Town Council,
that acceptance of the product or service has been approved by the Town
Council, or its delegate, and the claim is submitted to the Town Council for
confirmation at its next Public Meeting at which claims are considered.
   h.   Each payment of expenses permitted to be paid pursuant to the terms of
this section, as amended from time to time, in advance of formal claim approval
by the Town Council, shall be completely supported by a fully itemized claim.
   i.   Nothing herein is intended to relieve the Clerk-Treasurer and the Town
Council of their responsibilities and obligations generally required with
respect to claims, approval of claims, and disbursement of funds by the laws of
the State of Indiana, and the rules and regulations of the supervising agencies
thereof.
(Ord. No. 1767, § 1-9, 3-10-10)
Sec. 2-9D Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Municipal Matrimony Bureau.
Sec. 2-10 Creation of Matrimony Services.
   There is authorized and established a municipal service to be called the
Municipal Matrimony Service, to be a companion to and associated with marriage
solemnizations performed by the proper officer pursuant to and under the
authority of Indiana Code, § 31-11-6-1, et seq., as amended from time to time.
The proper officers to solemnize marriages in the Town of Schererville include
the Town Clerk-Treasurer and the Town Judge.
(Ord. No. 1476, § 1, 12-8-99; Ord. No. 1489, § 1, 5-10-00)
Sec. 2-10A Municipal Matrimony Bureau.
   In order to support the organization and administration of the Municipal
Matrimony Service as well as carry out the collection of service charges, there
is established in the office of the town Clerk-Treasurer a Municipal Matrimony
Bureau to be under the supervision of its administrator, who shall be the
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. No. 1476, § 2, 12-8-99)
Sec. 2-10B Powers and Duties of Municipal Matrimony Bureau.
   The Municipal Matrimony Bureau (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the
“Bureau” is:
   a.   authorized and empowered:
      1.   to charge and collect on behalf of the municipality, such service
charges as hereinafter may be identified and authorized for the performance of
marriage solemnization's to be paid by the parties desiring the service; and
      2.   to provide such materials and forms as may be desirable and proper
to efficiently administer the purposes and objects of this ordinance including
the development of a uniform application form to be used in support of the
Municipal Matrimony Service, subject to applicable provisions of Indiana Code,
§ 36-5-6(2)(3) and Indiana Code, § 5-11-9-2;
   b.   instructed and directed:
      1.   to design and provide an application form to be used in support of
the Municipal Matrimony Service which contains the same information called for
and indicated in the most current versions of State Form 27553, known as the
Record of Marriage, time, date, place of the wedding service, and such other
information as may be reasonably related to the administration of this service;
and
      2.   to develop, compile, and maintain records of the services offered,
charges collected, and such other information as may be desirable and to
transmit a report of the activities of the Bureau from time to time to the
municipal legislative body.
(Ord. No. 1476, § 3, 12-8-99)
Sec. 2-10C Matrimony Service Charge Schedule.
   The service charges as set forth and contained in the following Schedule of
Charges are deemed to be reasonable related to the administration of the
Municipal Matrimony Bureau and its delivery of services. The Schedule is
authorized and approved.
Schedule of Charges - Municipal Matrimony Bureau
   The users of services administered and provided by the Municipal Matrimony
Bureau will be charged a standard service charge based upon the list herein
provided. The payment by the users will support the following:
   I.   Standard Ceremony of Solemnization. Performance of the solemnization by
the proper municipal officer authorized pursuant to Indiana Code, § 31-7-5-1,
at the premises of the municipal building during regular business hours which
includes:
      (i)   a pre-solemnization meeting at which the user(s) deliver the
wedding license as issued by the proper authority pursuant to Indiana Code, §
31-7-5-1, to the Clerk-Treasurer;
      (ii)   authorization and selection of vows and ceremony, and delivery to
the users five (5) copies of the vows in pamphlet form; and
      (iii)   preparation of the license and forms including posting by USPS
the completed and certified license to be mailed to the Circuit Court Clerk as
the issuing authority.
   II.   Additional Charges. The bureau may charge and collect charges for the
additional services pursuant to the schedule of charges outlined. Such charges
will be in addition to the standard ceremony charge to be paid by users of the
services of the bureau.
Service Charges:
Standard Ceremony    $25.00
Plus the additional charges in addition to the standard ceremony for the
following services described:
Service performed on weekend or after regular business hours   $12.50
Service performed away from the municipal building premises:
   in the municipality    $10.00
   out of the municipality   $25.00
For each additional copy of the vows booklet   $ 1.00
In order to reserve a date for the services, the Bureau shall charge and
collect a scheduling and administration fee, which shall serve as a non-
refundable deposit. The scheduling and administration fee shall be applied to
the credit for all fees which may be charged to users pursuant to this
ordinance. However, if the user cancels without reasonable notice, the
Scheduling and Administration fee may be charged as non-refundable, and
deducted from the balance of any refund applied for the user.
Scheduling and Administration Fee (Deposit)   $10.00
   If the Clerk-Treasurer cancels for any reason, the non-refundability of the
fee will be waived and all charges will be refunded upon proper application.
(Ord. No. 1476, § 4, 12-8-99)
Sec. 2-10D Waiver of Charges Authorized.
   The Clerk-Treasurer may waive in part or in whole the service charges and
fees herein authorized and established when, in the Clerk-Treasurer's
judgement, such waiver is proper and desirable; provided that such waiver shall
be regularly recorded with the user application and such waivers will be
included in the Bureau's report made from time to time to the legislative body.
(Ord. No. 1476, § 5, 12-8-99)
Sec. 2-10E All Charges Belong to Municipality.
   All charges and amounts collected by the bureau pursuant to this ordinance
shall:
   a.   be deposited and credited to the General Fund of the Municipality upon
its receipt;
   b.   not belong to or be the property of any public official including the
Clerk-Treasurer or a deputy, employee or appointee serving under same, but
shall belong to and be the property of the municipality;
   c.   not be construed as a personal fee for service contemplated under any
other authority nor be construed as a fee, allowance tax or charge as outlined
and prescribed under Indiana Code, § 5-7-2, Indiana Code, § 33-16-17, and
Indiana Code, § 36-5-6-6(10);
   d.   be construed as collected and charged by the Municipal Matrimony Bureau
on behalf of the municipality, not for the benefit of an public officer or any
individual.
(Ord. No. 1476, § 6, 12-8-99)
Sec. 2-10F Personal Fees Prohibited.
   Any public official including the Clerk-Treasurer or a deputy, employee, or
appointee serving under same, is prohibited from personally receiving and shall
not charge or collect any fee or amount for services performed under this
ordinance that is not authorized or not deposited with the municipality,
according to its terms.
(Ord. No. 1476, § 7, 12-8-99)
Sec. 2-10G Construction of Clause and Headings.
   The clause headings appearing in this division have been provided for
convenience and reference and do not purport and shall not be deemed to define,
limit, or extend the scope or intent of the clause to which they appertain.
(Ord. No. 1476, § 8, 12-8-99)
Sec. 2-11 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Town Manager.  9
 
Notes
  9   I.C., § 36-5-5-1 through I.C., § 36-5-5-9, address the Town Manager. Ord. No.
9 925 passed on February 9, 1983 addressing a "Town Manager" has specifically been
  deleted at the Town's request as a part of the codification process.
Sec. 2-12 Town Manager as ADA Coordinator.  10
   The members of the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana appoint the Town Manager, and his successors, as Americans with
Disabilities Act (A.D.A.) Coordinator. He is directed to coordinate the
activities of the Town of Schererville to carry out its responsibilities under
the applicable law.
(Res. No. 94-1, 1-12-94)
 
Notes
   10   The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 is set fort at Title 42
10 United States Code § 12101, et seq., (Public Law 101-336, July 26, 1990, 104
   Statutes at Large 327)
Sec. 2-13 Powers and Duties.  11
   Unless a subsequent written ordinance of the Town of Schererville or a
written order of the Town Council of said Town directs to the contrary, the
Town Manager shall have the following duties, responsibilities, powers and
authority:
   1.   He shall attend the meetings of the Town Council and recommend such
action as he may deem necessary or desirable.
   2.   He shall report directly to the Town Council in regard to all his
duties, responsibilities, and action as Town Manager.
   3.   He shall be responsible for the efficient and effective operation of
the following departments and personnel assigned thereto and he shall monitor
the receipt and expenditures of such departments:
      a.   Engineering.
      b.   Street, General Sanitation, and General Maintenance.
      c.   Park and Recreation.
      d.   Utility, Drainage and Storm Sewers.
      e.   Planning and Building Department.
   He shall appoint and remove heads of such departments with the advice and
consent of the Town Council.
   4.   He shall receive, investigate, rectify when justified, and otherwise
handle, ah complaints concerning all Town services and functions, including,
but not limited to, street department, sanitation services, park department,
lighting, drainage, utilities, and general maintenance.
   5.   He shall be responsible for all office personnel of the Town, excluding
those specifically assigned to the Clerk-Treasurer and Police Department.
   6.   He shall conduct all administrative work relative to the Town
employees, including, but not limited to, insurance, personnel records,
vacation, and time records and payroll information.
   7   He shall formulate and administer all reimbursement agreements in regard
to all utility services of the Town.
   8.   He shall hire all Town employees to fill positions authorized by the
Town Council in accordance with pay schedule standards and qualifications as
are fixed by the Town Council or applicable law. When, in his discretion, the
welfare of the Town requires the same, he shall suspend, discharge, remove, or
transfer any such Town employee.
   9.   He shall administer the execution and enforcement of all resolutions,
orders, and ordinances of the Town Council, and see that all laws of the State
required to be enforced by the Town Council or other Town officials subject to
the control of the Town Council are faithfully executed.
   10.   He shall prepare and submit to the Town Council budget estimates as
required from time to time.
   11.   He shall coordinate with other departments of the Town, including the
police department and fire department, the budget estimates as required from
time to time.
   12.   Subject to applicable state laws concerning appropriations, public
notices, and competitive bidding, he shall execute on behalf of the Town the
contracts for goods, materials, services, construction or improvements
authorized by the Town Council.
   13.   He shall administer all contracts and agreements for services and work
provided to the Town by outside contractors, consultants, and concerns and he
shall act as the Town's liaison to all such contractors, consultants, and
concerns.
   14.   He shall be responsible for all special public works related projects
in conjunction with the Public Works Director.
   15.   He shall formulate and recommend overall policies regarding areas
under his administration.
   16.   He shall perform such other legally permissible and appropriate duties
and functions as required by the Town, state and federal law or as shall be
lawfully assigned to him by the Town Council.
   17.   He may delegate any such powers to any employee responsible to him if
he deems it advisable to do so.
   18.   All bills, claims, or invoices addressed to the Town, including, but
not limited to, the Public Works, Fire and Police Departments, shall be
received by the Town Manager. He shall then verify if said bills, claims or
invoices were duly authorized and should be paid by the Town. The Town Manager
shall then forward, together with his recommendation requiring payment of same,
said bills, claims, or invoices to the Clerk-Treasurer in order that the
payment docket can be prepared and forwarded to the Town Council for action.
Following approval of the docket by the Town Council, the Town Manager shall be
advised by the Clerk-Treasurer of the amount and dates when said bills, claims
or invoices, were paid by the Town and the Town Manager shall report said facts
to the Town Council.
   19.   The Town Manager shall receive and appropriately distribute all mail
addressed to the Town or any of its officers with the exception of mail
addressed to the Clerk-Treasurer. (See also: §
2-176 addressing credit cards)
 
Notes
11 11   Editor's Note: The provisions of §
   2-13 were included as part of the recodification request of the Town.
Sec. 2-14 through Sec. 2-27 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 4. Ordinance Violation Bureau.  12
 
Notes
12    I. C., § 33-6-3-1, addresses the Ordinance Violations Bureau.
Sec. 2-28 Ordinance Violations Bureau Established.
   The Town Council for the Town of Schererville herein establishes an
Ordinance Violations Bureau to be headed by the Clerk-Treasurer for the Town of
Schererville who will fill the position of Violations Clerk.
(Ord. No. 1128, § 1, 9-13-89)
Sec. 2-29 Authority of Violations Clerk.
   The Violations Clerk shall have the authority to accept written appearances,
waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and payment of civil penalties of
not more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) in ordinance violation cases.
(Ord. No. 1128, § 2, 9-13-89).
Sec. 2-30 Assessment of Fines and Penalties.
   The Violations Clerk shall assess fines and penalties pursuant to the
provisions of the various Ordinances providing for such penalties.
(Ord. No. 1128, § 3, 9-13-89)
Sec. 2-31 Payment of Civil Penalties.
   Payment of civil penalties under this Article shall be paid in person or by
mail to the Violations Clerk or an agent or agents designed by said Clerk.
(Ord. No. 1128, § 4, 9-13-89)
Sec. 2-32 Receipt and Accounting Procedures for Payments.
   Civil penalties shall be paid to, receipted, and accounted for by the
Violations Clerk and/or an agent or agents designated by the Violations Clerk
under procedures provided for by the State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. No. 1128, § 5, 9-13-89)
Sec. 2-33 Denial or Failure to Satisfy Penalty.
   If a person denies an ordinance violation, fails to satisfy a civil penalty
assessed by the Violations Clerk after having entered an admission of
violation, or fails to deny or admit an ordinance violation; the Violations
Clerk shall report this fact to the official having the responsibility to
prosecute ordinance violation cases for the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1128, § 6, 9-13-89)
Sec. 2-34 Chart on Schedule of Ordinances.
   The following schedule of Ordinances as set forth in the Schererville Town
Code shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Ordinance Violations Bureau
and shall be subject to the Civil Penalty set forth for first time violations
in the calendar year in the following charts.
Chart on Schedule of Ordinance Violations.
Section of Code Topic Penalty
Section of Code Topic                Penalty
§              Alcoholic Beverages  $50.00
6-34
§
6-17, §        Animals              $25.00
6-25
§              Building Code        $25.00
7-63
§              Burning              $25.00
6-52
§              Business Licenses    $25.00
4-45
§              Cats & Dogs          $10.00
4-183
§              Curfew               $25.00/ $50.00
6-44
§              Excavations          $50.00
7-136
§              False Alarms         $25.00
4-73
§              False Alarms after 3 $50.00
4-75
§              Firearms             $25.00
6-186
§              Fire Prevention Code $50.00
7-116
§              Fires-R.R. Rt of Way $10.00
6-190
§              General Ord. Fine    $25.00
3-99
§ 8-97         Old Lincoln Highway  $50.00
§              Parks - Parking      $15.00/$25.00/$50.00
8-108
§              Parks - Traffic      $15.00/$25.00/$50.00
5-83
$7-136          Right-of-Ways        $50.00
§              Sidewalks/Driveways  $25.00
7-40
§              Street Numbers       $10.00
7-73
§              Traffic Code         $25.00
8-141
§              Trucks Operating     $50.00
8-126
§              Truck Parking        $25.00
8-52
§              Vandalism            $25.00
6-236
§              Zoning               $25.00
10-203
 
(Ord. No. 1370, 2-12-97)
Sec. 2-35 through Sec. 2-37 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 5. Departments.  13
 
Notes
13 13   I. C., § 36-1 3-2, addresses the power of units for the "effective
   operation of government as to local affairs".
Division I. In General.
Sec. 2-38 Departments of the Town.
   a.   The following departments of the Town are recognized:
      1.   Administration
         a.   Town Council
         b.   Utility Board of Trustees
         c.   Clerk-Treasurer
         d.   Town Administrator
         e.   Town Attorney
         f.   Utilities Attorney
         g.   Town Engineering (Consultant)
         h.   Other Positions Established by Ordinance.
      2.   Fire Department
         a.   Chief of Volunteer Fire Department
         b.   Positions Established by Ordinance.
      3.   Metropolitan Police Department
         a.   Chief of Police
         b.   Positions Established by Ordinance
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 11-10-87)
      4.   Park and Recreation Department
         a.   Superintendent
         b.   Positions Created by Ordinance.
      5.   Planning and Building
         a.   Planning and Building Administration
         b.   Building Commissioner
         c.   Plan Commission Members
         d.   Board of Zoning Appeals Members
         e.   Other Positions Established by Ordinance
      6.   Public Works
         a.   Director of Public Works
            1.   Street Department
            2.   Department of Waterworks
(Ord. No. 1426, § 1, 6-10-98; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 7-8-98)
            3.   Water Works Treatment Plant
               aa.   Sewage Treatment Division
            4.   Department of Sanitation
(Ord. No. 1466, § 1, 9-8-99)
      7.   Redevelopment Department
(Ord. No. 1274, § 1, 7-13-94)
   b.   Each department shall carry out such duties assigned to it by
applicable state law, and duties and responsibilities assigned to it by the
Town Council to effectively carry out the needs and services of the Town.
Sec. 2-39 Termination or Transfer of Functions.
   The Town Manager may, by ordinance passed upon the recommendation of the
Town Council, terminate the departments established by Section
2-38 or transfer to or from those departments any powers, duties, functions, or
obligations.
(Schererville Town Code, § 2-12-4)
Sec. 2-40 Appointment of Department Heads.
   The Town Manager, with the approval of the Town Council, shall appoint the
head of each department established by Section
2-38 provided, however, that the appointment is subject to any statutory board
or commission established in the department as set out in Indiana Code, § 36-4-
9-2.
Sec. 2-41 Organizational Chart.
   The Organizational Chart on the following page depicts the various divisions
of the Town Government of Schererville, Indiana.
   Additional charts regarding the Clerk-Treasurer's Office, the Public Works
and Wastewater Treatment Plant and the Police Department can be found on file
in the Office of the Town Manager.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3273.jpg]
 
Division II Department of Parks and Recreation.
Sec. 2-48 Department of Parks and Recreation Created.  14
   A Department of Parks and Recreation of the Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana, is created.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-1)
 
Notes
14    I.C., § 36-10-3-1, et seq., sets forth the enabling legislation addressing
   parks and recreation.
Sec. 2-49 Definitions.
   The definitions herein shall apply throughout this Division, namely:
   a.   Town means Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
   b.   Town Council refers to the Town Council of the Town of Schererville.
15
   c.   Board refers to the Parks and Recreation Board created hereunder.
   d.   Department refers to the Department of Parks and Recreation created
hereunder.
   e.   Superintendent refers to the Administrative Head of the Department of
Parks and Recreation.
   f.   District means the area within the jurisdiction of the Department of
Parks and Recreation.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 2, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-2)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1048 used the term "Town Board" which has been
15 replaced with "Town Council," throughout this Division to be consistent with
   current Indiana law; sec also §
   5-2 of the Code.
Sec. 2-50 Parks and Recreation Board; Membership; Appointment.
   a.   A municipal board consists of four (4) members to be appointed by the
Town Council President. The members shall be appointed on the basis of their
interest in and knowledge of parks and recreation, but no more than two (2)
members may be affiliated with the same political party. Two (2) ex officio
members may be appointed as follows:
      1.   A member of the governing body of the school corporation selected by
that body;
      2.   A member of the governing body of the library district selected by
that body; or
      3.   Both (1) and (2).
   b.   Ex officio members shall have all the rights of regular members,
including the right to vote. A vacancy in an ex officio position shall be
filled by the appointing authority.
   c.   Neither the Town Council President nor a member of a county fiscal
body, county executive, or the Town Council may serve on the Board.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 3, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-3)
Sec. 2-51 Board of Parks and Recreation; Initial Appointments; Vacancies.
   a.   The initial appointments to the Board of Parks and Recreation shall be
as follows:
      1.   One (1) member for a term of one (1) year.
      2.   One (1) member for a term of two (2) years.
      3.   One (1) member for a term of three (3) years.
      4.   One (1) member for a term of four (4) years.
   As a term expires, each new appointment is for a four (4) year term. All
terms expire on the first Monday in January, but a member shall continue in
office until his successor is appoint ed.
   b.   The Town Council President shall make initial appointments within
ninety (90) days after the creation of the Board.
   c.   In the event an appointment for any new term is not made by the first
Monday in April, the incumbent shall serve another term.
   d.   In making initial appointments, as described herein, the Town Council
President, in order to provide continuity of experience and programs, shall
give special consideration to the appointment of members from previous Boards.
   e.   In the event a vacancy on the Board occurs, the Town Council President
shall appoint a person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 4, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-4)
Sec. 2-52 Board of Parks and Recreation; Removal; Procedure.
   A member may be removed from the Board only for cause, upon specific written
charges filed against him. The charges shall be filed with and heard by the
Town Council President, unless the Town Council President is bringing the
charges. If the Town Council President is bringing the charges, the Town
Council shall appoint a hearing officer. The person to hear the charges shall
fix a date for a public hearing and give public notice at least ten (10) days
in advance of the hearing. At the hearing the member is entitled to present
evidence and argument and to be represented by counsel.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 5, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-5)
Sec. 2-53 Board of Parks and Recreation; Advisory Member.
   The Town Board of Parks and Recreation may designate a member to sit with
the Lake County Board of Parks and Recreation in an advisory capacity, but only
in the event that a member of the Lake County Board of Parks and Recreation
designates a member to sit with the Town Council of Parks and Recreation in an
advisory capacity.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 6, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-6)
Sec. 2-54 Regular and Special Meetings; Election of Officers; Quorum of the
Board.
   a.   All meetings of the Board are open to the public. The Board shall fix
the time and place of its regular meetings, but it shall meet at least
quarterly.
   b.   Special meetings of the Board may be called by the President or by any
two (2) members by written request to the Secretary. The Secretary shall send
to each member, at least two (2) days before a special meeting, a written
notice fixing the time, place, and purpose of the meeting. Written notice of a
special meeting is not required if the time of the special meeting is fixed at
a regular meeting or if all members are present at the special meeting.
   c.   At its first regular meeting each year the Board shall elect a
President and a Vice President. The Vice President may act as President during
the absence or disability of the President. The Board may select a Secretary
either from within or outside its membership.
   d.   A majority of the members constitutes a quorum. Action of the Board is
not official unless it is authorized by at least three (3) members present and
acting.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 7, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-7)
Sec. 2-55 Compensation of Board Members.  16
   a.   The members of the Board may receive a salary not to exceed the maximum
amount set by annual ordinance passed by the Town Council.
   b.   In the event the Board determines that members or employees should
attend a state, regional, or national conference dealing with park and
recreation problems, it may authorize the payment of the actual expenses
involved in attending the conference. However, the amount must be available as
part of the Board's appropriation.
   c.   The Town Council shall provide suitable quarters for holding meetings
and conducting the work of the Board.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 8, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-8)
 
Notes
16    I.C., § 36-10-3-9, provides lhat board members "may receive a salary not to
   exceed three hundred ($300.00) dollars per year".
Sec. 2-56 Board Duties.
   a.   The Board shall:
      1.   Exercise general supervision of and make rules for the Department;
      2.   Establish rules governing the use of the parks and recreation
facilities by the public;
      3.   Provide police protection for its property and activities, either by
requesting assistance from state, municipal, or county police authorities, or
by having specified employees deputized as police officers; the deputized
employees, however, are not eligible for police pension benefits or other
emoluments of police officers;
      4.   Appoint the necessary administrative officers of the Department and
fix their duties;
      5.   Establish standards and qualifications for the appointment of all
personnel and approve their appointments without regard to politics;
      6.   Make recommendations and an annual report to the Town Council
concerning the operation of the Board and the status of parks and recreation
programs in the Town;
      7.   Prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner as other
departments of the Town; and
      8.   Appoint a member of the Board to serve on another kind of board or
commission, whenever a statute allows a Board to so appoint.
   b.   The Board shall fix the compensation of officers and personnel
appointed pursuant to the authority granted herein, and in compliance with
Indiana Code, 36-4-7-5 and 36-4-7-6, as amended from time to time, and all
other applicable law.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 9, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-9)
Sec. 2-57 Board Powers.
   a.   The Board may:
      1.   Enter into contracts and leases for facilities and services;
      2.   Contract with persons for joint use of facilities for the operation
of parks and recreation programs and related services;
      3.   Contract with another Board, or a school corporation, Town Council,
Township, or County, for the use of park and recreation facilities or services,
and a township or school corporation may contract with the Board for the use of
parks and recreation facilities and services;
      4.   Acquire and dispose of real and personal property, either within or
outside the State of Indiana;
      5.   Exercise the power of eminent domain under statutes available to
Towns;
      6.   Sell, lease, or enter into a royalty contract for the natural or
mineral resources of land that it owns, the money received to be deposited in a
non-reverting capital fund of the Board;
      7.   Engage in self-supporting activities as prescribed by the provisions
of this Division;
      8.   Contract for special and temporary services and for professional
assistance;
      9.   Delegate authority to perform ministerial acts in all cases except
where final action of the Board is necessary;
      10.   Prepare, publish, and distribute reports and other materials
relating to activities authorized by this Division;
      11.   Sue and be sued collectively by its legal name, as the "Town of
Schererville Parks and Recreation Board", with service of process being had
upon the President of the Board, but costs may not be taxed against the Board
or its members in any action;
      12.   Invoke any legal, equitable, or special remedy for the enforcement
of this Division, or the Board's own action taken hereunder; and
      13.   Release and transfer, by resolution, a part of the area over which
it has jurisdiction for parks and recreational purposes to park authorities of
the County or Township, or another Town, for parks and recreational purposes
upon petition of the park or recreation Board of the acquiring County, Township
or Town.
   b.   The Board may also lease any buildings or grounds belonging to the Town
and located within a park to a person for a period not to exceed twenty-five
(25) years. The lease may authorize the lessee to provide upon the premises
educational, research, veterinary, or other proper facilities for the
exhibition of wild or domestic animals in wildlife parks, dining facilities,
swimming facilities, golf courses, skating facilities, dancing facilities, or
amusement rides generally found in amusement parks, or other recreational
facilities. A lease may be made for more than one (1) year only to the highest
and best bidder, after notice that the lease will be made has been given by
publication in accordance with Indiana Code, § 5-3-1, et seq., as amended from
time to time.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 10, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-10)
Sec. 2-58 Sale of Surplus Property; Notice.
   The Board may sell, or order sold through a designated representative, by
public or private sale, any personal property that the Board has declared to be
surplus at a regular or special meeting and has declared to be surplus at a
regular or special meeting and has declared to have an aggregate appraised
value of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) or less. Whenever the Board decides
to sell at a private sale, the Board must employ a qualified appraiser to
determine a reasonable selling price for each kind of surplus items and must
publish, in the manner provided in Indiana Code, § 5-3-1, et seq., as amended
from time to time:
   a.   The fact that a private sale will be held;
   b.   The location of the sale;
   c.   The dates of the beginning and end of the sale;
   d.   The time of day during which the sale will take place;
   e.   The kinds of items to be sold at the sale; and
   f.   The price of each kind of item, which may not be less than the
reasonable selling price determined by the qualified appraiser.
   In the event the Board decides to sell at a public sale, the Board shall
conduct the sale in the manner provided by law for the Town.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 11, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-11)
Sec. 2-59 Superintendent of Parks and Recreation; Appointment and
Qualifications.  17
   a.   The Board may appoint a Superintendent of Parks and Recreation. The
Board may not consider political affiliation in the selection of the
Superintendent.
   b.   The Superintendent must:
      1.   Be qualified by training or experience in the field of parks and
recreation; or
      2.   Have a certification or an advanced degree in the field of parks and
recreation.
   c.   An incumbent performing park and recreation functions in a supervisory
capacity at the time the Town Council adopts the Ordinance herein is eligible
for appointment as Superintendent or as an assistant, but the incumbent must
have the required training, experience, or certification.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 12, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-12)
 
Notes
      I.C., § 36-10-3-13, addresses Superintendents of Paries and Recreation. It
17 authorizes the Board to appoint the Superintendent and sets forth the
   Superintendent's qualifications.
Sec. 2-60 Assistants.
   a.   In the event the Board determines that the size of the Department's
operation requires assistants for the Superintendent, the Board may appoint,
upon the recommendation of the Superintendent, one (1) or more assistants. The
Board shall determine the qualifications on a basis similar to that prescribed
for the Superintendent.
   b.   Assistants are directly responsible to the Superintendent and shall
perform the duties specified by the Superintendent.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 13, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-13)
Sec. 2-61 Bonds of Park Officers and Employees.
   a.   Each officer and employee who handles money in the performance of his
duties as prescribed by this Division shall execute an official bond for the
term of his office or employment before entering upon the duties of his office
or employment. In the event tenure is indeterminate, then the bond must be for
a term of one (I) year and renewed each year as the employment continues.
   b.   All bonds must be individual surety company public official bonds
conditioned on the faithful performance of duties. The penal amounts of the
bonds shall be fixed by the Town Council.
   c.   All bonds shall be filed and recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder of the county in which the Department is located.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 14, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-14)
Sec. 2-62 Gifts, Donations and Subsidies.
   a.   The Board may accept gifts, donations and subsidies for park and
recreational purposes. However, a gift or transfer of property to the Board may
not be made without its approval.
   b.   A gift or grant of money shall be deposited in a special non-reverting
fund to be available for expenditure by the Board for purposes specified by the
Grantor. The disbursing officer of the Town may draw warrants against the fund
only upon vouchers signed by the President and Secretary of the Board.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 16, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-16)
Sec. 2-63 Taxing District for Special Benefit Taxes.
   a.   The territory within the boundaries of the Town compromises a special
taxing district for the purpose of levying special benefit taxes for park and
recreational purposes as provided in this Division.
   b.   The Town Council shall determine and provide the revenues necessary for
the operation of the Department or for capital expenditures not covered by the
issuance of bonds by:
      1.   A specific levy to be used exclusively for these purposes;
      2.   A special appropriation; or
      3.   Both of these methods.
(Ord. No. 1048, $ 17, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-17)
Sec. 2-64 Establishment Procedures for a Special Non-Reverting Capital Fund.
   a.   Upon the request of the Board, the Town Council shall establish, by
ordinance, a special non-reverting capital fund for the purposes of acquiring
land or making specific capital improvements. The Town Council may include in
the Board's annual budget an item and an appropriation for these specific
purposes.
   b.   Money placed in the non-reverting capital fund may not be withdrawn
except for the purposes for which the fund was created, unless the Town Council
repeals the Ordinance. The Town Council may not repeal the Ordinance under
suspension of the rules.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 18, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-18)
Sec. 2-65 Establishment Procedures for a Cumulative Building Fund.
   a.   The Board may establish a cumulative building fund to provide money
for;
      1.   Building, remodeling, and repair of parks and recreation facilities;
or
      2.   Purchase of land for parks and recreation purposes.
   Before a fund may be established, the proposed action must be approved by
the State Board of Tax Commissioners. In the event a cumulative building fund
is established, it shall be administered pursuant to the provisions set forth
in Indiana Code, § 36-10-3-21 (a) - (g), as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 19, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-19)
Sec. 2-66 Fees for Particular Activities; Disposition and Disbursements.
   a.   Parks and recreation facilities and programs shall be made available to
the public of charge as far as possible. However, in the event it is necessary
in order to provide a particular activity, the Board may charge a reasonable
fee.
   b.   The Town Council may establish by Ordinance, upon request of the Board:
      1.   A special non-reverting operating fund for park purposes from which
expenditures may be made as provided by Ordinance, either by appropriation by
the Board or by the Town Council; or
      2.   A special non-reverting capital fund for the purpose of acquiring
land or making specific capital improvements from which expenditures may be
made appropriation by the Town Council. The Town Council shall designate the
fund or funds into which the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall deposit fees from golf
courses, swimming pools, skating rinks, or other similar facilities requiring
major expenditures for management and maintenance. Money received from fees
other than from major facilities or received from the sale of surplus property
shall be deposited by the Town Clerk-Treasurer either in the special non-
reverting operating fund or in the non-reverting capital fund, as directed by
the Board. However, in the event neither fund has been established, money
received from fees or from the sale of surplus property shall be deposited in
the Town General Fund. Money from either special fund may be disbursed only on
approved claims allowed and signed by the President and Secretary of the Board.
   c.   Money placed in the special non-reverting capital fund may not be
withdrawn except for the purposes for which the fund was created, unless the
Town Council repeals the Ordinance creating the fund. The Town Council may not
repeal the Ordinance under suspension of the rules.
   d.   Money procured from fees or received from the sale of surplus property
under this Division shall be deposited at least once each month with the Town
Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 20, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-20)
Sec. 2-67 Advisory Council and Special Committees.
   a.   The Board may create an Advisory Council and special committees
composed of citizens interested in parks and recreation.
   b.   In selecting an Advisory Council or special committees, the Board shall
give consideration to the groups in the community particularly interested in
parks and recreation. In a resolution creating an Advisory Council or a special
committee, the Board shall specify the terms of its members and the purpose for
which it is created.
   c.   The advisory council or a special committee shall:
      1.   Study the subjects and problems specified by the Board and recommend
to the Board additional problems in need of study;
      2.   Advise the Board concerning these subjects, particularly as they
relate to different areas and groups in the community; and
      3.   Upon the invitation of the Board, sit with and participate in the
deliberations of the Board, but without the right to vote.
   d.   The Advisory Council or a special committee shall report only to the
Board and shall make inquiries and reports only in those areas specified by the
Board's resolution creating the council or committee.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 21, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-21)
Sec. 2-68 Legal Authority.
   The Town Department of Parks and Recreation shall have the authority to do
any and all acts permitted by law, and particularly Indiana Code, § 36-10-3, et
seq., as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 22, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-22)
Sec. 2-69 Repeal of Conflicting Laws.
   All existing Ordinances, Resolutions, or parts thereof, creating separate
Parks and Recreation Authorities, if any, are repealed.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 23, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-23)
Sec. 2-70 Transfer of Documents.
   All papers, documents and other property of prior Park and Recreation
Authorities shall be transferred to and become the property of the Town of
Schererville Parks and Recreation Board.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 24, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-24)
Sec. 2-71 Severability.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Division shall be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of
this Division.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 25, 11-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 2-7-25)
Sec. 2-72 Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund.  18
   a.   There is created a special non-reverting operating fund for the
Department of Parks & Recreation of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1323, § 1, 12-13-95)
   b.   Said fund is created and directed to be maintained pursuant to the
guidelines and procedures established by the State Board of Accounts for the
operation and maintenance of said non-reverting operating fund.
(Ord. No. 1323, § 2,12-13-95)
 
Notes
18    Editor's Note: Park & Recreation Board Res. No. 95-1, dated September 14,
   1995 recommended a special non-reverting operating fund.
Sec. 2-73 through Sec. 2-79 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Metropolitan Police Department.
Sec. 2-80 Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners.  19
   a.   The membership of the Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners of the
Town of Schererville is designated as five (5), pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-
8-9-3(b).
(Ord. No. 1194, § 2, 11-18-91)
   b.   The members of the Town Council shall hereafter name two (2) additional
members to the Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners, whose terms shall
commence on the 1st day of January, 1991. The additional commissioners may not
be members of the same political party.
(Ord. No. 1194, § 3, 11-18-91)
   c.   One (1) Commissioner so appointed shall serve for a period of one (1)
year, and the other shall serve for a period of two (2) years from date of the
initial appointment. At the expiration of each Commissioner's term, unless the
same is terminated for cause prior to such expiration, a replacement
Commissioner (or re-appointment) shall be appointed to serve a three (3) year
term. Pursuant to law, each Commissioner is subject to removal by the members
of the Town Council for any cause that is deemed sufficient.
(Ord No. 1194, § 4, 11-18-91)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Ord. No. 378, passed on January 1, 1994, formally abolished
19 the Office of Town Marshall and established the first Board of Metropolitan
   Police Commissioners.
Sec. 2-81 Procedure to Advertise for Employment of Certified Police Officers.
   a.   The Town Council for the Town of Schererville, Indiana, may ratify a
Resolution of the Metropolitan Police Commission, and may authorize said Police
Commission to advertise for the hiring of police officers outside the
department with police academy training for the purposes of filling vacancies
existing in the Schererville Police Department.
(Ord. No. 1152, § 1,7-11-90)
   b.   The Town Council may authorize the Police Commission to offer the
inducements set forth in appropriate Resolution form in order to attract
qualified police officers to the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1152, § 2, 7-11-90)
   c.   The Town Council hereafter authorizes the metropolitan Police
Commission of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, to advertise for the
employment of officers outside the Town of Schererville with police academy
training, should said Commission feel that the situation merits such steps.
(Ord. No. 1152, § 3, 7-11-90)
Sec. 2-82 Definitions Used in the Police Department.  20
   a.   Chief shall mean the Chief of Police of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
   b.   Council shall mean the Town Council of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
   c.   Town shall mean the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
   d.   Commission shall mean the Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners of
the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 6-14-89; Schererville Town Code, § 2-11-1-1)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: On May 3, 1989, Lake Superior Court declared Ord. No. 1066
20 invalid. Ord. No. 1112, passed June 14, 1989, replaced those invalid
   provisions. The Superintendent of Police is addressed in § 3 of Ord. No. 1112,
   was deleted at the town's request during the codification process.
Sec. 2-83 Legal Authority of the Town Council.
   The Town Council has authority to act and adopt this Ordinance under the
following section of the Indiana Code but not limited to the following
sections:
 
I.C., § 36-1-3-3 I.C., § 36-1-3-4I.C., § 36-1-3-5
I.C.,§ 36-1-3-6  I.C., § 36-1-4-7I.C., § 36-1-4-11
I.C., § 36-1-4-14I.C., § 36-1-4-1I.C., § 36-5-3-2
 
(Ord. No. 1112, § 2, 6-14-89; Schererville Town Code, § 2-11-1-2)
Sec. 2-84 Chief of Police.
   a.   The Chief shall have the powers and duties conferred upon all chiefs of
police under Indiana Code, § 36-8-3-10, and other applicable Indiana Code
sections, subject to the terms and conditions of this Division.
   b.   The Chief is responsible to the Town Council and the Commission to the
extent authorized by statute or other law, rule or regulation .
   c.   The Chief shall supervise the day to day activities of the police
department pursuant to law, rule or regulation.
   d.   The Chief shall assist the Council and the Commission in implementing
the policies of the Council and Commission.
   e.   The Chief shall assist the Commission in implementing and carrying out
the rules, regulations, and discipline of the police department.
(Ord. No. 1112, § 4, 6-14-89; Schererville Town Code, § 2-11-1-4)
Sec. 2-85 Rules of Interpretation.
   a.   Whenever the singular is used or the plural is used and it is more
appropriate to use the other, it may be substituted.
   b.   Whenever the male gender is referred to or the female gender is
referred to and it is more appropriate to use the other, it may be substituted.
   c.   Should any section, paragraph, clause, term, or condition herein be
declared unlawful, unenforceable or term shall be stricken or excised without
nullifying or affecting the remainder of this Division.
(Ord. No. 1112, § 5, 6-14-89)
Sec. 2-86 Safety Regulations.
   Specific public safety regulations are set forth in
Chapter 6 of this Code, and specific traffic regulations enforced by the Police
Department are set forth in
Chapter 8 of this Code.
Sec. 2-87 Uniform Allowance for Civilian Fire and Police Employees.
   All civilian employees of the Town of Schererville Police Department and
Fire Department shall be allowed a clothing allowance of up to two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00) per year. The clothing shall be purchased through the
Town of Schererville purchase order system. Any difference in the cost of
clothing and the two hundred and fifty dollar ($250.00) allotment shall remain
with the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1334A, § 1, 3-10-99)
Sec. 2-88 Uniform Allowance for Paid Full-Time Police Officers.
   a.   The Town Council for the Town of Schererville, Indiana, has provided
for a uniform allowance for its paid full-time police department of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year.
   b.   The Clerk-Treasurer for the Town of Schererville, Indiana is authorized
to issue the June quarterly uniform payment to all full-time police department
employees on an expedited basis, said amount being payable instantor.
   c.   From this point forward, the normal quarterly payments shall be
recommended regarding the uniform allowance.
(Ord. No. 1452A, §§ 1-2, 4-14-99) (See also Sec.
2-111 of this Code.)
Sec. 2-89 Police Reserve Officer Training Program.
   The Town Council approves the formation and operation of a Police Reserve
Officer Program, to be established in conformance with the provisions of
Indiana Code, § 36-8-3-20, and as such is amended hereafter from time to time.
The formation and operation of the Police Reserve Officer Program established
hereby shall commence upon adoption hereof. The Police Reserve Officer Program
General Order is appended to Ord. No. 1980, marked as Exhibit A, and is
incorporated herein by reference.
(Res. No. 2022-1, 1-12-22; Ord. No. 1980, 3-9-22)
Sec. 2-90 through Sec. 2-94 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Policies and Procedures Governing the Metropolitan Police
Department.  21
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The Metropolitan Police Commission adopted a Resolution on
21 April 11, 1989 recommending approval of the policies set forth in this
   Division.
Sec. 2-95 Purpose.
   To provide officers with guidelines and direction for requests for
authorized department leave.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-96   Policy.
   Officers are provided, as employee benefits, certain periods of time off
from regularly scheduled duty in the form of vacation, holiday leave, sick/
injury leave, incentive time and other leave as required by this policy.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-97 General Requirements.
   a.   Officers must request official leave on the departmental "Leave
Request" form.
      1.   Requested leave shall not be authorized without the written approval
of the Shift Supervisor and/or the Division Commander.
      2.   Leave requests should be submitted to the officer's immediate
supervisor with advanced time to consider the request and make any necessary
personnel adjustments.
         (a)   Leave decisions by supervisors are based upon personnel
availability and shift requirements.
         (b)   Appeals regarding supervisory leave decisions may be taken to
the Division Commander whose decision is final.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-98 Vacation.
   a.   An officer becomes eligible for vacation after completing one (1) year
of service. The vacation year is the calendar year. An officer's entitlement,
during the calendar year of their one (1) year anniversary will be in
accordance with the following schedule:
         Month of Hire:         Entitled to:
         January            10 Days Vacation
         February            10 Days Vacation
         March               9 Days Vacation
         April               8 Days Vacation
         May               7 Days Vacation
         June               6 Days Vacation
         Month of Hire:         Entitled to:
         July               5 Days Vacation
         August               4 Days Vacation
         September            3 Days Vacation
         October            2 Days Vacation
         November            1 Day Vacation
         December            1 Day Vacation
   b.   Officers shall receive vacation benefits based upon the following
schedule:
         Completed Years of Service:   Entitled:
         1 Year completed         10 Duty Days
         5 Years completed         15 Duty Days
         10 Years completed         20 Duty Days
      Thereafter, officers shall receive 20 duty days plus one (1) additional
duty day for each year completed beyond the (10) years of service.
      1.   Officers shall not attain in excess of twenty-five (25) duty days of
vacation regardless of years of service.
         (a)   Vacation time shall not be accrued from year to year.
      2.   Officers shall request and take accumulated vacation time during
their eligible period or have that time arbitrarily scheduled by proper
authority.
      3.   Effective January 1, 2013 all compensatory time and vacation time
may be taken on an hourly basis. However, all Holidays or incentive days must
be taken in one-half (½) days or full days.
      4.   Vacation time granted should be limited to 7 days for officers
working 12 hour shifts and 10 days for officers working 8 hour shifts.
Exceptions may be granted when work schedule and manpower allocation allows.
      5.   Vacation time requests will be authorized based on shift seniority.
      6.   Sickness/injury leave shall not be granted during vacation time.
      7.   Upon termination of employment with the Town or upon the death of an
officer, the officer shall be eligible to receive pay for any unused vacation
time in the year of termination plus vacation accrued for the following
calendar year on a prorated basis. The prorated payment will be the rate of
one-twelfth of the full vacation allotment for each full month worked in the
calendar year up to the date of termination. Such prorated application does not
apply to an officer who has been employed for a period of less than one (1)
year.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-99 Sick/Injury Leave.
   Defined as that leave granted to an officer who is physically sick or
injured to the extent that their performance would be restricted or they would
jeopardize the health of others with whom they would come in contact. This
definition also includes mental illness and surgical procedure performed at the
election of the officer as well as disease and non-duty related injury.
   a.   Officers shall earn sick/injury leave at the rate of six (6) days per
year of continuous service accrued at the rate of eighteen (18) hours per
quarter of continuous service for patrol personnel assigned to 12 hour shifts
and twelve (12) hours per quarter for personnel on 8 hour shifts.
   b.   Officers may not be allowed to accrue in excess of 1040 hours of sick/
injury leave.
   c.   Any authorized sick/injury leave taken will be deducted from the
officer's accrued total.
   d.   Paid sick/injury leave will not be granted unless the officer has
accumulated the sick/injury leave prior to sickness or injury.
      1.   Any sickness or injury that occurs without accumulated sick/injury
leave shall be without pay.
      2.   Officers shall not be allowed paid sick/leave based upon future
accruals of sick/injury leave.
   e.   The Town of Schererville, through the Chief of Police reserves the
right to require psychological or medical examination by a physician of its
choice when a department employee exceeds three (3) consecutively scheduled
work shifts on sick/injury leave.
      1.   Officers on authorized sick/injury leave shall be required to
provide any medical information required by proper department authority.
      2.   Officers on sick/injury leave may be required to sign medical
information releases if requested by proper authority.
   f.   Officers utilizing three (3) consecutively scheduled work shifts on
sick/injury leave shall provide the officer's physician's documentation
indicating nature or sickness/injury and authorization to return to work.
   g.   Misrepresentation, untruthfulness or omission regarding circumstances
of sick/injury leave requests or regarding employee's individual physical or
mental health may be considered cause for disciplinary action and/or
termination.
   h.   Routine sickness/injury leave requests require that an officer must
contact the duty supervisor who will complete the required leave form and
advise the officer's supervisor or the Division Commander.
   i.   Officer should make every effort to advise the on-duty supervisor of
sickness/injury at least two (2) hours prior to their scheduled tour of duty.
   j.   Compensation of sick/injury leave will not be paid to an officer who
retires under a disability or medical retirement.
   k.   Duty-related injury leave. Officers injured while on duty or officers
injured while engaged in authorized police actions while off-duty are covered
by the Town's Workers Compensation Insurance health plan. An officer on duty -
related injury leave shall remain on the Town payroll system receiving the same
benefits as if they were an active officer. The officer may be granted injury
leave as described below:
      1.   The Chief of Police shall be authorized at his/her sole discretion
to place an officer on duty-related injury leave status upon consultation with
the Workers Compensation physician(s). The Chief of Police shall be authorized
to evaluate and review all the facts and circumstances involving the injury
leave request and make a final determination on such request. The Board of
Safety shall be informed of the Chief of Police's decision and action and
receive monthly status reports.
      2.   Officers on duty-related injury leave may be authorized up to a
maximum of 1,040 hours of such leave at the sole discretion of the Chief of
Police, who shall utilize all related medical reports from the officer's and/or
Town's appointed physician in making the injury leave determination.
      3.   Duty-related injury leave requests may be denied based upon an
obvious full disability injury or obvious recovery time, which exceeds
available time allocated. Under such circumstances, officers may be required by
the Chief of Police to apply for disability retirement under the state
retirement plan.
      4.   Misrepresentation, untruthfulness or omission regarding
circumstances of sickness/injury leave requests may be considered cause for
disciplinary action and/or termination.
      5.   Upon recommendation of the Schererville Board of Safety, the Town
Council reserves the right to extend injury leave for duty-related injury
should the circumstances justify the same. The Town Council's determination
shall be made on a case-by-case basis and any such injury leave extension shall
be evidenced by a duly adopted resolution of the Town Council.
      6.   Any authorized, duty-related injury leave granted to individual
officers will not be deducted from their accrued sick/illness leave.
   l.   Non-duty related injury leave. 
      1.   Officers injured in a non-duty related incident and not performing a
police related action may only utilize their accrued sick/illness leave or
accrued vacation time in lieu of work.
      2.   Officers who exhaust their accrued sick/illness leave on a non-duty
related injury shall be on leave without pay status. Such officers shall also
not continue to earn vacation and sick/injury leave benefits as outlined
herein.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-100 Disability Retirement.
   a.   Officers who are unable to perform required duties and responsibilities
or who have exhausted all injury, sick/illness leave will submit disability
retirement requests to the proper Public Employees Retirement Fund as described
by applicable State Statute and administrative rules or regulation in seeking
additional retirement/disability benefits.
   b.   Officers requesting benefits will be governed by regulation, policy and
procedure as required by the State retirement fund.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-101 Military Leave.
   a.   A leave of absence with pay shall be granted to any officer who is a
member of and is required to participate in the National Guard or other reserve
components of the military service of the United States.
   b.   Military leave shall not exceed fifteen (15) duty days in any one (1)
year period.
   c.   To receive such leave, the officer shall forward notification papers
upon receipt to their Division Commander.
   d.   Activation steps.
      1.   The Chief of Police or his designee will notify a department peer
liaison member of the pending deployment.
      2.   The peer liaison member will establish contact with the member's
family to offer assistance and support throughout the deployment period.
      3.   The Chief of Police or his or her designee will be responsible for
notifying human resources to cover benefits and leave rights.
      4.   The member will be provided contact numbers for the peer liaison
member and Employee Assistance Program, as well as, phone numbers for his/her
family to contact should questions or problems regarding benefits, and the
like, by the Chief of Police or designee.
      5.   The Chief of Police or designee will meet with the member to ensure
that his/her needs are met.
      6.   The member has the option of receiving non-confidential e-mail
through his/her military account.
      7.   Provisions will be made to store the member's agency owned equipment
during their deployment.
   e.   Activation phase.
      1.   The program goal is to maintain contact as often as possible with
the activated member.
      2.   Contact may be through e-mail, packages, skype or similar medium,
and written correspondence.
      3.   The peer liaison should maintain contact with the member's family
and provide support as needed.
   f.   Deployment steps.
      1.   If available, the member may have non-confidential office e-mail
forwarded to his/her military account.
      2.   The agency will assign one voluntary member (this could be the peer
liaison member) as the point of contact for the family and the deployed member.
At a minimum, the liaison/volunteer should have contact with the family at
least once a month.
      3.   The Chief of Police or designee should avail themselves to the
family members for face to face meetings, at the family's request, to assure
needs are being addressed.
   g.   Post deployment. The agency's goal is to support the returning member
and assist with the transition back to work. The pace of re-entry will be
determined by the returning member, who will develop a transition plan with the
Chief of Police or Deputy Chief.
   h.   Work re-entry phases. Returning to work:
      1.   The Chief of Police or his designee should meet the member on the
first day of work, primarily to welcome them back, but to also discuss any
questions or areas of concerns.
      2.   The Chief of Police or designee will notify human resources of the
return and have a representative contact the member to cover benefits.
      3.   The member will be provided with appropriate peer support and
Employee Assistance Program contact number.
      4.   The member shall visit an appropriate mental health clinician
mutually agreed to by the member and the Chief of Police or designee. Time will
be granted to attend the appointment with the clinician or the Veteran's
Administration. There will be a minimum of five (5) visits to include: within
the first 2 weeks of return; at the end of reintegration; 3 months; 6 months;
and 1 year of return. An optional waiver is available for the member to
consider signing which allows for dialogue with management concerning issues of
reintegration.
      5.   The member has ninety (90) days from termination of military orders
to return to work. He/she should set the time frame to start back.
      6.   The member will be afforded use of accrued leave time for up to
thirty (30) days during this 90 day period.
      7.   Upon return to work, the member shall be put into a modified duty
status to re-adjust to daily work routines, as well as, to get reacquainted
with police changes, current issues, policies, procedures and protocols.
   i.   Sworn members. Sworn members shall not be assigned to patrol work
without first completing a reorientation period for a minimum of two weeks.
      1.   Week one return to work.
         (a)   Modified duty week.
         (b)   Member will meet with his or her appropriate commander to
obtain/reissue all necessary equipment and agency owned equipment which had
been stored during deployment.
         (c)   Member will attend mandatory briefing with human resources to
cover benefits.
         (d)   Member will obtain training facilitated by the police department
to include; first aid, control and restraint, legal updates, policy changes,
and firearms. They must also attend a mandatory meeting with a mental health
clinician.
      2.   Week two return to work.
         (a)   Upon the successful completion of week one, the member shall be
placed with a sergeant, senior officer, or upon request, a former deployed
officer (willing and available) working patrol, for a minimum of one week or an
amount of time agreed upon by the member and the Deputy Chief.
         (b)   The member shall be allowed to assist in the design of the
reintegration process in order to cover areas the member feels should be
addressed.
         (c)   The final step in the reintegration process will be a follow-up
visit to an approved mental health clinician upon completion of the
reintegration plan.
      3.   Six month follow-up.
         (a)   The member shall meet with an approved mental health clinician.
         (b)   The Chief of Police or designee will make contact with the
returning member after working in the field for six (6) months as a final
departmental check-in unless the situation dictates otherwise.
   j.   The goal should always be to support the returning member and the
member's family through the entire activation and deployment, ending with the
member's healthy transition back to work. The pace of the reentry phase will be
determined by the deployed member and the specific needs as mutually identified
by the Chief of Police or designee and the member.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-102 Emergency Leave/Bereavement Leave.
   Defined as that leave utilized in the event of death or major illness in an
officer's immediate family or any family emergency, which in the opinion of the
Chief of Police constitutes a valid emergency or bereavement leave requirement.
   a.   Immediate family shall include.
      1.   Spouse.
      2.   Child.
      3.   Parent.
      4.   Brother and sister.
      5.   Mother-in-law.
      6.   Father-in-law.
      7.   Grandparent.
      8.   Grandchild.
      9.   Stepchild.
      10.   Brother-in-law.
      11.   Sister-in-law.
   b.   Emergency bereavement leave shall be generally limited to three (3)
working days but may be extended at the discretion of the Chief of Police when
valid circumstances require additional time.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-103 Family and Medical Leave.
   a.   Employee eligibility. Family/Medical Leave of Absence (FMLA leave) is
available to employees who have been employed by the Town of Schererville for
at least one (1) year prior to the date on which FMLA leave is to commence and
who has worked at least 1,250 hours during the 12 months immediately preceding
the date on which FMLA leave is to commence.
   b.   Definitions. The terms of this section shall have the following
meanings:
      1.   Health Care Provider - A licensed physician, dentist, optometrist,
podiatrist, chiropractor, practitioner, occupational therapist or psychologist.
      2.   New Child FMLA Leave - To care for the employee's son or daughter
immediately after the birth of that son or daughter.
      3.   Family FMLA Leave - To care for the employee's spouse, son, daughter
or parent who has a serious health condition which is defined as an injury,
illness or physical or mental condition that requires inpatient hospital care
of continuing treatment by a health care provider.
      4.   Employee Medical FMLA Leave - To care for the employee's own
condition defined as a serious health condition, which renders the employee
unable to perform his or her job.
      5.   Spouse - Means a husband or wife as defined by Indiana Law.
      6.   Parent - Means a biological parent or an individual who stands or
stood in loco parentis to an employee when the employee was a child. This term
does not include parents-in-law.
      7.   Son or Daughter - Means a biological, adopted or foster child, a
stepchild, a legal ward or a child of a person standing in loco parentis, who
is either under the age 18 years of age or older and incapable of self-care
because of mental or physical disability.
   c.   FMLA leave availability. An eligible employee is entitled to FMLA Leave
as follows:
      1.   New child FMLA leave: for the birth of a child or the placement with
the employee of a child for adoption or foster care.
         (a)   FMLA leave may be taken prior to the actual birth or placement
as circumstances may require.
         (b)   An eligible employee's entitlement to FMLA Leave expires 12
months after the birth or placement.
         (c)   In the event that the parents of a son or daughter are both town
employees, they shall be entitled to a combined total of twelve (12) weeks New
Child FMLA.
      2.   Family FMLA leave: to care for the employee's seriously ill spouse,
child or parent. FMLA Leave is not available to care for unmarried domestic
partners.
      3.   Employee medical FMLA leave: due to a serious health condition that
makes the employee unable to perform his or her job functions.
   d.   Notice and certification requirements.
      1.   In cases of foreseeable medical FMLA leave, employees shall be
required to provide thirty (30) days advance FMLA leave notice and medical
certification. FMLA leave shall be denied if these requirements are not met. A
medical certification shall also be required to support an employee's request
to return to work.
      2.   In case of family FMLA leave, the town shall also require a
certification from a health care provider that the employee is needed to care
for the family member.
      3.   The town shall also require periodic reports from an employee on
FMLA leave regarding the employee's status and intent to return to work.
   e.   Implementation of FMLA leave benefits.
      1.   An eligible employee is entitled to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid
FMLA leave per 12-month period, measured backward from the date FMLA leave is
used.
      2.   An employee who has taken FMLA is entitled to be restored to the
same or an equivalent position upon his/her return to work at the end of the
FMLA leave period, except in the case of key employees. The town may deny
restoration of a key employee to that employee's position if necessary to
prevent substantial injury or disruption to the town's operations. The town
will notify employees of their status as key employees if it believes there is
a possibility that the employee will not be restored at the end of the leave
period, upon which notification the employee may voluntarily elect to return to
work.
      3.   Employees seeking FMLA leave for any purpose will be first required
to exhaust all available accrued sick leave and vacation leave. Thereafter:
         (a)   New child FMLA leave: the employee shall be eligible for the
balance of the 12 weeks FMLA leave on an unpaid basis. During the balance of
the 12 weeks, the town will pay its share and employee will pay the employee's
share of the employee's health insurance premiums.
         (b)   Family FMLA leave: the employee shall be eligible for the
balance of the 12 weeks FMLA leave on an unpaid basis. During the balance of
the 12 weeks, the town will pay its share and employee will pay the employee's
share of the employee's health insurance premiums.
         (c)   Employee medical FMLA: upon exhaustion of the entire employee's
sick and vacation days, the balance of the 12 weeks FMLA leave will be
exhausted through the use of short-term disability payments under the town's
medical benefits plan. During the balance of the 12 weeks, the town will pay
its share and the employee will pay the employee's health insurance premiums.
Upon the exhaustion of the 12 weeks, the employee may extend health insurance
coverage under COBRA.
   f.   Employment protection/limitations.
      1.   The use of FMLA Leave will not result in the loss of any employment
benefits (except accrued sick and vacation leave, as provided herein) that
accrued prior to the start of the FMLA leave.
      2.   Sick leave benefits shall not accrue during the FMLA leave. Any
vacation leave that accrues during FMLA leave shall, at that time, be taken as
a part of the approved FMLA leave.
      3.   Employees have no greater right to restoration or continuation of
benefits than if the employee had been continuously employed during the FMLA
Leave period.
      4.   If an employee fails to return to work after the employee's FMLA
leave entitlement has expired, the town may recover health insurance premiums
it paid for maintaining the employee's health insurance benefits during any
period of unpaid FMLA leave.
   g.   This policy is subject to and is to be interpreted consistent with 29
C.F.R. Part 825.
   h.   A request for leave of absence for sickness, disability or for
sabbatical purposes as addressed in I.C. 36-8-6-1 et seq. shall not be affected
by the terms of this policy and past practices and procedures governing this
state authorized leave shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-104 Holiday Leave.
   a.   Defined as those holidays officially recognized by the Town of
Schererville. The Schererville Police Department recognizes the following eight
(8) holidays:
      1.   New Year's Day - January 1st
      2.   Martin Luther King, Jr. Day - 3rd Monday in January
      3.   Memorial Day - May
      4.   Independence Day - July 4th
      5.   Labor Day - 1st Monday in September
      6.   Veteran's Day - November 11th
      7.   Thanksgiving Day - 4th Thursday in November
      8.   Christmas Day - December 25th
   b.   All officers assigned to work regular business hours and not assigned
to duty requiring shift work will have the option to receive the listed
holidays as days off with pay or may work the holiday and use the day as an
addition to their regular vacation benefit.
   c.   All officers assigned to work shift work, generally the Patrol
Division, will earn the above-identified floating holidays (8 days) as
additions to their regular vacation benefit.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-105 Leave of Absence.
   Defined as a leave period of extended duration without pay after exhaustion
of all accrued leave time.
   a. Leave of absence shall be requested by affected officer through the
office of the Chief of Police.
      1.   The Chief of Police's recommendation will be submitted to the
Schererville Board of Safety which will submit its recommendation to the Town
Council for final decision.
      2.   Requests must include specific leave date, duration and specific
reasons for leave of absence application.
   b.   Leave of absence will not be granted except on a without pay basis
unless otherwise defined in this policy or authorized by the Town Council.
   c.   During approved leaves of absence, employees shall be 100% responsible
for and must pay the full health insurance premium (employee contribution and
town contribution) to remain covered by the Town health insurance policy.
   d.   During approved leaves of absence, employees shall not continue to earn
either vacation time or sick/injury time.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-106 Incentive Leave Days.
   a.   Officers shall be granted incentive leave days at the rate of one (1)
duty day for each three (3) month quarterly period in which the officer records
perfect attendance.
      1.   Incentive leave days may be accumulated from year to year, up to a
maximum of twenty (20) days.
      2.   Earned incentive leave days may be authorized by the officer's
supervisor based upon workload and manpower availability and shall be scheduled
at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance.
   b.   Perfect attendance - defined as an officer appearing for, and actually
working each and every one of the officer's scheduled work shifts during a
three (3) month quarterly period.
      1.   This includes periods of authorized vacation and on-duty sickness/
injury.
      2.   Excluded are days off assessed as a result of disciplinary action,
non-duty sick/injury leave, the Family Medical Leave Act time and/or any
unauthorized leaves of absence.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-106A Retirement Procedure.
   a.   Prior to retirement, any eligible officer shall submit a letter,
through the proper chain of command, to the Chairman of the Board of Safety,
advising that said officer intends to retire and provide the effective date of
retirement.
      1.   Attached to the retirement policy is a form retirement letter. The
officer should follow the retirement letter format and provide all information
requested in same including any and all other pertinent information deemed
necessary by the officer.
   b.   Any officer having twenty (20) or more years of service meeting the
requirements for police officers of the State of Indiana and the Public
Employees Retirement Fund shall be eligible to retire from the Schererville
Police Department by selecting one (1) of the two (2) pay options below:
      1.   Lump sum final paycheck payout.
         (a)   Upon retirement from active service, including completion of the
State of Indiana continuous service requirements, the retiring officer will be
compensated at their current hourly rate of pay for the unused balance of their
accrued sickness/injury, vacation, incentive and earned holiday leave at the
time of their retirement. The compensation will be paid in a lump sum and
placed on the officer's final paycheck following the retirement date.
         (b)   A retiring officer shall be allowed to utilize accrued sickness/
injury, vacation, incentive and holiday leave as authorized by the Board of
Safety for the purpose of reaching the mandatory minimum service requirements
of the Indiana Public Employees Retirement Fund for police officers (20 years).
It is the policy of the Board of Safety that accrued days may be utilized prior
to the officer having completed twenty (20) years of service with the
department and that said time may be credited to allow the officer to reach the
twenty (20) year active service time period. Once credited and the twenty (20)
year mark has been reached, the retiring officer shall be compensated at their
current hourly rate of pay for any unused balance of their accrued sickness/
injury, vacation, incentive and earned holiday leave. The compensation will be
paid in a lump sum and be placed on the officer's final paycheck following the
retirement date.
      2.   Payment over time/remaining on town payroll. Upon retirement from
active service, an officer who was in active service on January 1, 2015 shall
be limited to the number of accrued or remaining sickness/injury, vacation,
incentive and earned holiday leave hours the officer had on record as of
January 1, 2015 for payment over time by remaining on the Town Payroll. (A list
of active duty officers and their accrued time as of January 1, 2015 is
attached hereto). Said accrued hours as of January 1, 2015 will be paid to the
retiring officer by and through the officer remaining on the Town of
Schererville payroll system for that set length of time. Any other accrued
sickness/injury, vacation, incentive and earned holiday leave time above and
beyond that which existed on January 1, 2015, shall be paid out in a lump sum
on the retired officer's final paycheck after leaving active service. A retired
officer that remains on the Town payroll as outlined herein shall also qualify
for all Town insurance benefits, longevity pay and earned holiday pay as if
still an active member of the police department.
   c.   At the time of retirement, all retired officers shall be required to
relinquish any and all equipment and/or property belonging to the Schererville
Police Department that is in his/her custody. A retired officer's clothing
allowance shall cease immediately upon end of active service/last day of duty.
   d.   Each retiring officer will be presented with a Schererville Police
Department badge. The badge will reflect the retiring officer's rank and will
be engraved "Retired". The retiring officer will also be awarded his/her
service weapon from the Schererville Police Department.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-106B Resignation Procedures.
   a.   If an officer resigns from active service prior to reaching retirement
date, any accrual of incentive time, earned holiday pay, and longevity pay
shall be paid in a lump sum and be placed on the resigned officer's final
paycheck following the resignation date.
   b.   A resigned officer's clothing allowance shall cease immediately upon
resignation from active service.
   c.   If an officer resigns from active service, the officer may submit a
written request to the Board of Safety to purchase the officer's service
weapon. The Board of Safety's decision on such a proposed purchase shall be
final.
(Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 7-8-15)
Sec. 2-107 Wages.
   All wage rates for the Police Department shall be set by annual ordinance of
the Town Council.
Sec. 2-108 Overtime.
   A Schererville Police Officer may be required to work overtime, in addition
to his or her established work period, as scheduled by the appropriate
department personnel. Overtime work is work in addition to the established
schedule of hours of work per week. Overtime shall be kept to a minimum.
Overtime work may be authorized by the appropriate department personnel only
when necessary. Police Officers may be compensated for authorized overtime by
being granted compensatory time off at the rate of one and one-half hour for
each hour worked in excess of the established and scheduled work period, or
may, at the option and election of the designated department personnel, under
the direction of the Chief of Police, be paid for such overtime work at the
rate of one and one-half the rate of regular pay for each hour of overtime
worked. Compensatory time off for an individual Schererville Police Officer
will be scheduled with the approval of the authorized department supervisory
personnel.
(Ord. No. 1164, § 1 [b] ii, 10-10-90; Ord. No. 1501, § 1, 10-11-00)
Sec. 2-109 Compensation Regarding Alcohol Counter-Measures Program.
   Compensation for hours assigned to Police Department Law Enforcement
Officers, pursuant to the Alcohol Counter-Measures Program, as provided for by
the Public Safety Council of Northwest Indiana, Inc., in the State of Indiana,
Department of Highways shall be one and one-half times the contracted hourly
rate of pay, when the hours worked by a law enforcement officer of the town
causes said officer to work in excess of the scheduled time period set forth in
Section
2-108. Compensation to police department law enforcement officers, pursuant to
the Alcohol Counter-Measures Program shall continue to be drawn upon special
reimbursement funding consistent with the policies requirements of public
safety council of Northwest Indiana, Inc., and the State of Indiana Department
of Highways.
(Ord. No. 1164, § 1[c], 10-10-90)
Sec. 2-110 Compensatory Time.
   Each individual police officer shall have the choice of electing to accept
overtime compensation as set forth herein or in lieu of overtime each
individual officer may elect to take compensatory time at the rate of one and
one-half hour of compensatory time for each hour worked in excess of the
aforementioned work periods. All civilian employees of the Schererville Police
Department as designated under Subsection A of Ordinance No. 896 shall also
have the option of electing to take compensatory time in lieu of overtime pay.
(Ord. No. 1164, § 1[d], 10-10-90)
Sec. 2-111 Uniform Allowance for Full-Time Police Officers.  23
   a.   The Town of Schererville shall each year provide a uniform allowance to
all full-time police officers or to active members of the police department,
who qualify for such allowance, or provide uniforms and/or equipment equivalent
to the amount established by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 4-12-89)
   b.   This allowance or provision of uniforms and/or equipment shall be
provided in two (2) equal installments, the dates of same being June 30th and
December 31st of each year.
   c.   Any uniform allowance or provision of uniforms and/or equipment
provided prior to passage and adoption of this ordinance are ratified and
reaffirmed.
(Ord. No. 1334, §§ 3-5, 4-10-96; Ord. No. 1502, § 1, 10-11-00; Ord. No. 1452C,
5-9-07)
   d.   All active police officers of the Town of Schererville shall either
provide or be provided with uniforms and equipment which qualifies or is
required by rule, regulation, directive, order, resolution or ordinance of the
Town of Schererville, the Metropolitan Police Commission of the Town of
Schererville, or Police Chief of the Town of Schererville.
   e.   Any uniform or equipment provided by the Town of Schererville to any
police officer shall be credited against this uniform allowance.
   f.   All uniforms, equipment, arms, or clothing either provided by the Town
of Schererville or purchased by any police officer of the Town with his uniform
allowance or as a requirement or condition of employment shall remain on the
property of the Town. The Town may sell or otherwise dispose of this property
if and when it becomes unfit, for any reason, for use, and any money received
from any sale thereof shall be placed in the general fund of the Town.
   g.   Any uniforms, equipment, arms, clothing or other property lost,
damaged, or destroyed through the carelessness or neglect of a member of the
police department of the Town shall be charged against that member and the
value thereof deducted from his pay.
(Ord. No. 1101, §§ 4-8, 4-12-89)
(See also Sec.
2-88 of this Chapter)
 
Notes
      I.C., § 36-8-4-4, addresses uniforms and equipment. The amount of $600 was
23 deleted from this paragraph at the Town's request with “the amount established by
   ordinance” being substituted as part of the recodification process. Eight hundred
   dollars ($800.00) was the amount prior to the 1999 Ordinance.
Sec. 2-112 Funeral Benefits.  24
   The Metropolitan Police Pension Fund of the Town of Schererville, Indiana
shall pay funeral benefits to the heirs or estate of any active or retired
member of the police force who has suffered death from any cause which said
funeral benefits shall be in the amount established by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 572a, § 1, 2-14-73)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The sum of eight-hundred dollars ($800.00) was deleted from
24 this section and replaced with "established by ordinance at the Town's request"
   as part of the recodification process.
Sec. 2-113 Police Department to Accept Applications for Licensing Hand Guns.
   The Police Department by and through its Chief or Acting Chief or designee
shall carry out these powers established by the Town Council regarding the
applications for licensing hand guns as more specifically addressed in
Chapter 4 of this Code.
Sec. 2-114 Deferred Prosecution Cost Into L.E.C.E.F. Fund.
   a.   The Town of Schererville, Indiana, shall designate the sum of twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) to be paid from any and all monies collected as a result
of the deferred prosecution program, said sum being paid directly to the
Schererville Police Department.
(Ord. No. 1371, §§ 1-2, 2-12-97)
   b.   The Town Council now directs that all funds previously paid into the
L.E.C.E.F. Fund from the pre-trial diversion program be transferred into the
Schererville Police Department Training Fund.
   c.   The Town Council directs that the Town court continue to apply the sum
of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) from each pre-trial diversion fee toward the
continuing education of Schererville Police Officers, and that said sums of
money shall be paid into the Schererville Police Department Training Fund.
(Ord. No. 1371A, §§ 1-2, 9-10-97)
Sec. 2-115 Death Benefits.  24.1
   There shall be paid from the Police Pension Fund of the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, a death benefit to the heirs or estate of any active or
retired member of the police department who has suffered death from any cause
in the amount of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00).
(Ord. No. 1358, § 1, 6-13-96; Ord. No. 1358A, § 1, 6-9-99; Ord. No. 1358B, § 1,
7-9-08)
 
Notes
        I.C., § 36-8-8-16 currently provides that for any police pension fund
24.1 member's death after June 30, 1994, a benefit of six thousand dollars
     ($6,000.00) shall be paid.
Sec. 2-116 through Sec. 2-119 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Fire Department.  25
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The "Fire Department Street Map Book" was updated
25 simultaneously with the recodification and is on file in the Office of the
   Clerk-Treasurer and available for public inspection during regular business
   hours.
Sec. 2-120 Fire Department Administration.
   a.   The Board of the Fire Department shall be the Chief of the Volunteer
Fire Department.
   b.   The Town Council, by appropriate ordinance, may establish those
positions it deems necessary to effectively and efficiently operate the
department.
Sec. 2-121 Uniform Allowance for Fire Department/EMT Members.
   a.   The Town of Schererville shall each year provide a uniform allowance to
all members of its Fire Department/EMT, who qualify for such allowance, or
provide uniforms, and/or equipment equivalent to one thousand three hundred
thirty-nine ($1,339.00) dollars per year.
   b.   This allowance or provision of uniforms and/or equipment shall be
provided in four (4) equal installments, the dates of same being March 31st,
June 30th, September 30th and December 31st of each year.
(Ord. No. 1334, §§ 1-2, 4-10-96; Ord. No. 1452C, 5-9-07)
Sec. 2-122 Wages and Compensation.
   The annual salaries of the sworn members of the Fire Department shall be set
by annual ordinance of the Town Council.
Sec. 2-123 Powers and Duties in General.
   The public safety regulations enforced by the Fire Department are set forth
in
Chapter 6 of this Code, and Building Regulations enforced by the Fire
Department are set forth in
Chapter 7 of this Code.
Sec. 2-124 Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply throughout this division, as the same
may be amended from time to time, namely:
   a.   Chief - The Chief of the Town of Schererville Fire Department, or his
designee, unless context clearly indicates otherwise;
   b.   Fire Department - Collectively, all members of the Town of Schererville
Fire Department, unless context clearly indicates otherwise;
   c.   Local Board - The Fire Pension Board of the Town of Schererville;
   d.   Local Standards or Standards - Standards developed by the Local Board
for establishing a passing grade or score on the agility, mental and physical
examination required by Indiana Code, § 36-8-3.2, et seq., as amended from time
to time, for admission to the Firefighters' Public Employees Retirement Fund;
   e.   Member of the Fire Department, Active Member, or Member - A full-time,
paid employee of the Town of Schererville Fire Department, including the Chief;
   f.   Perf - The Public Employee Retirement Fund established pursuant to
Indiana Code, § 5-10-3.1, et seq., as amended from time to time;
   g.   Trustee - Any person elected to a position on the Fire Pension Board
described in Section
2-125, and who is elected pursuant to the procedures contained within Sections
2-127,
2-128, or
2-129.
(Ord. No. 1541, § 1, 10-17-01)
Sec. 2-125 Fire Pension Board Established; Duties.
   a.   There is hereby established in the Town of Schererville a Fire Pension
Board, which Local Board shall perform the following duties, namely:
      1.   Establish the standards for passing the physical agility test,
general aptitude test, and physical examination required for admission of a new
employee to PERF;
      2.   Certify to PERF that an applicant for employment has passed those
examinations listed in subsection (a) above;
      3.   Determine whether member(s) of the Fire Department are entitled to a
leave of absence for purposes of disability;
      4.   Determine whether a member has a covered impairment as defined by
Indiana Code, § 36-8-8-12.3, as amended from time to time, which makes the
member unable, either temporarily or permanently, to perform the member's
duties with the Fire Department;
      5.   Hear and determine all applications for relief or pensions;
      6.   Make all rules necessary for the discharge of its duties; and
      7.   All other duties imposed upon the Local Board by applicable law.
(Ord. No. 1541, § 2, 10-17-01)
Sec. 2-126 Trustees.
   The Trustees of the Local Board shall be as follows:
   a.   The Town Council President and the Chief, who shall be ex-officio
members, and shall be entitled to vote on any matter, and shall be counted
towards a quorum at any meeting;
   b.   When there are three (3) or more retired members of the Fire
Department, one (1) Trustee shall be elected for a two (2) year term from among
those retired members, in accordance with Section
2-129; and
   c.   Four (4) active members of the Fire Department who shall each be
elected to four (4) year terms, in accordance with Section
2-128.
(Ord. No. 1541, § 3, 10-17-01)
Sec. 2-127 Election of Trustees; Initial.
   a.   The first election of the Fire Department Member Trustees shall be held
within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Division. The Chief shall
post a notice in one (1) or more prominent locations at a designated Fire
Station setting the date, time and place of the meeting to nominate candidates
and elect Trustees of the Local Board. Such notice shall be posted at least
forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the scheduled meeting.
   b.   At said scheduled meeting, the Members of the Fire Department shill
nominate candidates from among their membership for election to the Local
Board. Immediately thereafter, the Members shall vote for four (4) candidates;
the four (4) candidates with the most votes shall serve as Trustees of the
Local Board.
   c.   The Trustees so elected shall serve staggered terms of one (1), two
(2), three (3) and four (4) years. A Member's assignment to a particular term
shall be determined by lot.
(Ord. No. 1541, § 4, 10-17-01)
Sec. 2-128 Election of Trustees; Active Members.
   a.   An election shall be held on the second Monday in February every year
after the establishment of the Local Board to elect one (1) Trustee from the
active members of the Fire Department for a term of four (4) years commencing
on the day of his or her election. The Chief shall fix a time for holding a
convention to nominate candidates for Trustees to be elected at each election.
Each convention must be held at least five (5) days before the day on which the
annual election is held, and the notice fixing the time and date of the
convention must be posted at least five (5) days in advance of the convention.
A convention consists of one (1) delegate selected from the Fire Department,
and one (1) delegate who shall be selected by the Chief and his/her Assistants.
The delegate from the Fire Department shall be elected by ballot by the Members
of the department at a time to be fixed by the Chief in the call for a
convention. The election of delegates shall be certified by the Chief or other
Officer of the department, or, if there is not an Officer present, then by the
oldest member of the department present. The convention, when assembled, shall
nominate four (4) members of the Fire Department to be voted upon as Trustees,
and the delegates shall report the names of the persons nominated as candidates
to the Chief in writing.
   b.   The election shall be held at the Fire Station between 9:00 a.m. and 6:
00 p.m. on the second Monday of each February. Votes shall be cast by secret
ballot. Each member of the Fire Department is entitled to one (1) ballot, and
the ballot may not contain the names of more than one (1) candidate chosen from
the six (6) persons nominated by the convention. The candidate receiving the
highest number of votes is elected.
   c.   The Chief or other Officer in command of the Fire Department,
immediately after the casting of the ballots, shall canvass and count the
ballots. He or she shall certify, in writing, the total number of ballots cast
and the number of votes received by each candidate for the Office of Trustee.
After signing the certification, the Officer shall enclose it, together with
all the ballots cast by the Fire Department, in an envelope, securely sealed
and addressed, and deliver them to the Chief. The Chief shall deliver them to
the Town Council President as soon as all certificates and ballots have been
received by him or her. Upon receipt, the Town Council President shall, in the
presence of the Chief and the Clerk-Treasurer, open the envelopes, examine the
certificates, and determine the total number of votes cast for each of the
candidates. The Town Council President shall then issue a certificate of
election to the candidate having received the highest number of votes. If two
(2) or more candidates have received the same number of votes, the Town Council
President and the Chief shall immediately determine by lot who will be Trustee
from the persons who received such equal number of votes.
   d.   An election may not be set aside for lack of formality in balloting by
the members or for lack of formality in certifying of transmitting the returns
of an election by the Officers in charge.
(Ord. No. 1541, § 5, 10-17-01)
Sec. 2-129 Election of Trustees; Retired Members.
   a.   An election shall be held every two (2) years to elect one (1) Trustee
from the retired members of the Fire Department for a term of two (2) years,
commencing on the day of his or her election, if the list of retired members
contains three (3) or more persons at the time of the election. The Chief shall
fix a time for holding a convention to nominate candidates for Trustee to be
elected at each election. Each convention must be held at least fifteen (15)
days before the day on which the biennial election is held. All retired members
of the Fire Department may participate in the convention. The convention, when
assembled, shall nominate not more than four (4) members of the retired list to
be voted upon as Trustee. The Secretary of the Local Board shall mail the names
of the persons nominated, along with an official ballot, to the retired members
within forty-eight (48) hours of the end of the convention.
   b.   The election shall be conducted by mail. Each retired member is
entitled to cast one (1) ballot by mail, and that ballot may not contain more
than one (1) name, chosen from the list of retired persons nominated by the
convention. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes by 6:00 p.m. on
the second Monday in February, or an alternative date in February specified in
the bylaws of the Firefighters' Pension Fund, is elected.
   c.   The ballots must remain closed and inviolate until the close of the
election, at which time, in the presence of the Town Council President, the
Chief and the Clerk-Treasurer, the ballots shall be opened and counted. A
certificate of election shall be issued to the candidate receiving the highest
number of votes. If two (2) or more candidates receive the same number of
votes, the Town Council President and the Chief shall immediately determine by
lot who will be Trustee from the persons receiving such an equal number of
votes.
(Ord. 1541, § 6, 10-17-01)
Sec. 2-130 Officers; Adoption of Rules; Quorum; Proceedings.
   a.   The Chief shall be President of the Local Board. After the first
meeting, the Trustees shall elect a Secretary, who may be elected from among
the Trustees or, in the alternative, the Trustees may consider it proper to
have a member of the Fire Department to serve as a Secretary, in which case,
the Secretary shall serve for a term of four (4) years and shall be elected in
the same manner as Trustees. The Secretary shall keep a full record of the
proceedings of the Local Board in a book designated, kept and maintained for
that purpose.
   b.   A majority of the Local Board shall constitute a quorum for any action.
   c.   A majority vote of all Trustees shall be sufficient to take any action
which the Local Board may take.
(Ord. 1541, § 7, 10-17-01)
Sec. 2-131 through Sec. 2-133 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Public Works Department.
Sec. 2-134 Division of the Public Works Department.
   Public Works is composed of the following:
   a.   Streets and Sanitation headed by a Supervisor;
   b.   Equipment Maintenance;
   c.   Sewer/Water Transmission Division headed by a Superintendent;
   d.   Sewerage Treatment Division headed by a Sewer Treatment and Water
Quality Superintendent.
Sec. 2-135 Public Works Director.
   The position of Public Works Director of the Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana, is created.
(Ord. No. 769, § 1, 12-27-78; Schererville Town Code, § 2-10-1)
Sec. 2-136 Terms of Employment of Public Works Director.  26
   The Public Works Director of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Manager of the Town of Schererville,
Lake County, Indiana, and the employment of the Public Works Director shall
always be terminable with or cause. The salary of the Public Works Director
shall be as fixed by the Town Council in the Town's annual budget or as
authorized from other revenues of the town and all other terms and conditions
of employment, including benefits and payment of dues, shall be as fixed and
agreed to by the Town Council from time to time.
 
Notes
26    Editor's Note: This section was amended at the request of the Town during
   its recodification process.
Sec. 2-137 Powers and Duties.  27
   Unless a subsequent written ordinance of the Town of Schererville or a
written order of the Town Council of said Town directs to the contrary, the
Public Works Director shall have the following duties, responsibilities, powers
and authority:
   1.   He shall be responsible for issuing all Public Works permits and
approving all applications that are required by the Town.
(Ord. No. 769, § 3, ¶1-8, 12-27-78; Schererville Town Code, § 2-10-94)
      All applications or requests for a permit of whatsoever nature and
purpose require by said Town shall be submitted to the Planning and Building
Administrator for filing and review and then to the Public Works Director. Such
applications and permits shall include, but are not limited to the following:
      a.   Permits and applications relating in any manner to streets,
utilities, water, sewers, and sanitation. Upon the filing of said application
or request, the Planning and Building Administrator shall immediately forward
such request or application to the Director of Public Works or secretary of the
proper Town body for consideration. The proper official or Town body shall
review the request and determine whether the application or request should be
approved or rejected and, if approved, what conditions, if any, should attach
to that approval.
      b.   The Public Works Director shall oversee the proper fee to be paid to
the Town for such application or request and upon payment of the proper fee to
the Town Clerk-Treasurer and satisfaction of all conditions attached to said
approval, if any, the Public Works Director shall issue the appropriate permit.
The Public Works Director may delegate his power to review, act upon and issue
any particular type of permit to any official or appropriate employee of the
Town of Schererville, Indiana, which official or employee shall have the
authority and power to act upon all permits of that type to the extent
designated the Public Works Director.
(Ord. No. 770, 12-27-78; Schererville Town Code, § 2-10-4, ¶ 8)
   2.   He shall review and make recommendations on all plans, specifications,
and other engineering data of or pertaining to any of the Town's services.
   3.   He shall be responsible for all special public works related projects.
   4.   He shall have access to all Town records and files, with the exception
of personnel records of individuals not directly under his control.
   5.   He shall be responsible for public relations and news releases for all
public works related items, with the exception of those items which the Town
Council desires to handle itself.
(Ord. No. 769, § 3, ¶8, 9, 16, 18, 19, 12-27-78)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Provisions of Ord. No. 769, § 3, which was passed on
27 December 27, 1978 were re-distributed to the Town Administrator and Planning
   and Building Administrator at the request of the Town during the
   recodification process.
Sec. 2-138 Extent of Services.
   During his term of employment, the Public Works Director shall devote his
full time to his employment and shall not undertake any activity which would be
in conflict with his employment as Public Works Director or inimical to the
best interest of the Town.
   During the terms of his employment, the Public Works Director shall not
engage in any other business activity, whether or not such business activity is
pursued for gain, profit or other pecuniary advantage, without the express
written approval of the Town.
(Ord. No. 769, § 4, 12-27-78; Schererville Town Code, § 2-10-4)
Sec. 2-139 Vacancy.  28
   a.   When a vacancy occurs in the position of Public Works Director, or when
the Town Manager receives notice that a vacancy shall occur in said position,
the Town Manager shall take whatever action it deems necessary and appropriate
to fill such position. If, however, the Town Manager of the Town deems it in
the best interest of the Town to leave said position vacant for whatever period
of time it deems advisable and in the best interest of the Town, nothing
contained herein shall require the appointment of a new Public Works Director
to immediately fill such vacancy.
   b.   If a conflict arises between any of these provisions and its Personnel
Policy, the Personnel Policy shall prevail.
 
Notes
28    Editor's Note: This section was amended at the request of the Town during
   the recodification process.
Sec. 2-140 through Sec. 2-149 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Planning and Building Department.
Sec. 2-150 Planning and Building Department.  29
   a.   The Planning and Building Department shall be headed by a Planning and
Building Administrator.
   b.   The Department shall carry out all applicable responsibilities
addressed in state and local laws.
   c.   All applications or requests for a permit shall be submitted to the
Planning and Building Department for filing and review. Such applications and
permits shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Electrical permit
      2.   Plumbing permit
      3.   Change of use permit
      4.   Zone permit
      5.   Building permit
      6.   Issuance of certificate of occupancy
      7.   Zone change applications
      8.   Subdivision applications
      9.   Special exception applications
      10.   Variance applications
      11.   Contractor's licensing
      12.   Street excavation
      13.   Permits and applications relating in any manner to streets,
utilities, water, sewers, and sanitation. Upon filing of said application or
request, the Planning and Building Department shall immediately forward such
request or application to the proper official or secretary to the proper Town
body for consideration. The proper official or Town body shall review the
request and determine whether the application or request should be approved or
rejected and, if approved, what conditions, if any, should attach to that
approval.
(Ord. No. 769, § 3, 12-27-78)
   d.   Building regulations are set forth in
Chapter 7 of this Code and Zoning regulations are set forth in
Chapter 10 of this Code.
 
Notes
      Paragraph (c) of §
29 2-150 was included at the request of the Town during the recodification
   process.
Sec. 2-151 through Sec. 2-154 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Department of Redevelopment.  31
 
Notes
31    I.C., § 36.7-14 authorizes the establishment of a department ot
   redevelopment.
Sec. 2-155 Department of Redevelopment Established.
   The Council Members establish the Department of Redevelopment of the Town.
The Department will be controlled by a board of five (5) members known as the
Schererville Redevelopment Commission.
(Ord. No. 1274, § 1, 7-13-94)
Sec. 2-156 Redevelopment District.
   Pursuant to the Act, all of the territory within the corporate boundaries of
the Town will be a taxing district to be known as the Redevelopment District of
the Town of Schererville for the purpose of levying and collecting special
benefit taxes for redevelopment purposes as provided in the Act. The Council
Members find and determine that all of the taxable property within the special
taxing district will be considered to be benefited by the redevelopment
projects carried out under the Act to the extent of the special taxes levied
under the Act.
(Ord. No. 1274, § 2, 7-13-94)
Sec. 2-157 through Sec. 2-159 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Department of Waterworks.  32
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1432 and Ord. No. 1426 with the later being passed on
32 June 10, 1998, are similar in content. The codifiers selected Ord. No. 1432 for
   inclusion due to it being more recent.
Sec. 2-160 Department of Waterworks Created.
   A Department of Waterworks, pursuant to Indiana Code, § 8-1.5-4, as amended
from time to time (the "Act"), shall be created with all power and authority
provided to such Department pursuant to the Act. The Town adopts the provisions
of the Act for such purposes.
(Ord. No. 1432, § 1,7-8-09)
Sec. 2-161 Waterworks Board of Directors.
   Such Department of Waterworks shall be controlled by a Board of Directors
consisting of three (3) Directors who shall be appointed by the President of
the Town Council. Not more than two (2) Directors shall be of the same
political party at any one time on the board.
(Ord. No. 1432, § 2, 7-8-98)
Sec. 2-162 Terms and Bonds of Board of Directors.  33
   a.   The initial terms of the Directors shall be as follows:
      1.   One (1) Director shall be appointed for three (3) years.
      2.   One (2) Director shall be appointed for two (2) years.
      3.   One (1) Director shall be appointed for one (1) year.
   b.   Thereafter, Directors either reappointed or newly appointed shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years, or until otherwise replaced. The terms
of the initial Directors shall commence on      1, 1998. The President of the
Town Council may remove a Director at any time when, in Ms or her judgment, it
is for the best interest of the Department. Each Director shall give a bond,
which shall be fixed by and subject to the approval of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. No. 1432, § 3, 7-8-98)
 
Notes
33    Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1432 did not have an exact date included in Section 3
   and therefore, it was included as passed by the Town Council.
Sec. 2-163 Powers and Duties of Department of Waterworks.
   Such Department of Waterworks shall own and operate all water facilities
currently owned by the Town of Schererville and shall provide water service
within the corporate boundaries of the Town of Schererville, all other areas
outside of the boundaries currently or in the future provided water service by
the Town of Schererville or this Department of Waterworks.
(Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 7-8-98)
Sec. 2-164 through Sec. 2-169 Reserved for Future Use.
 
Sec. 2-170.
{'{'}missing text{'}'}
   f.   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to prepare, issue
and present bona-fide citations (complaint and summons) to persons or parties
violating the Town Code or Ordinances, excluding the Town Traffic Code,
Ordinance No. 560, and all amendments passed subsequent thereto. (See
Chapter 8 of this Code) Citations issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall
be in the form and manner required by the pertinent Town Ordinance and
statutory provisions of the Indiana Code.
(Ord. No. 1033, § 6, 6-10-57, Schererville Town Code, § 25-6)
Sec. 2-171 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Town Recording Secretaries.
Sec. 2-172 Town Recording Secretaries.
   a.   The Schererville Town Council finds it necessary to create the new
position of Town Recording Secretary in order to better facilitate the timely
recording and transcribing of all Town official minutes and meetings as herein
described.
   b.   Town Recording Secretaries shall be hired by the Town Council and shall
work exclusively under the direct guidance, supervision and direction of the
Town Council and the Town Manager.
   c.   The chief duties and responsibilities of Town Recording Secretaries
shall include but not be limited to the recording and transcribing of detailed
and accurate minutes of all public Town meetings and hearings including:
      1.   Plan Commission meetings.
      2.   Board of Zoning Appeals meetings.
and such other official Town meetings as requested by the Town Manager.
   d.   The Town Recording Secretaries shall tape, record, and transcribe all
minutes of public hearings and meetings herein described and shall then provide
the Town Council a final typed copy within twenty (20) days after each of the
aforesaid public hearings and meetings.
   e.   The Town Recording Secretaries shall deliver the tape or tapes in
addition to the original transcript containing the recorded public hearing or
meeting to the Clerk-Treasurer upon completion of said transcript. Said tape or
tapes shall be kept on file for a period of no less than one (1) year by the
Clerk-Treasurer. The official transcript shall be made a part of the Clerk-
Treasurer's permanent records.
   f.   The Town Recording Secretaries shall have the employment status of a
regular part-time employee and shall be compensated at the hourly rate as so
specified in the Town's Salary Ordinance, and shall also receive all Town
benefits as outlined in the Town°s Personnel Policy, set forth in Section
2-300 et seq., of this Code.
(Ord. No. 580, 3-11-81)
Sec. 2-173 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Personnel Policy.  35
 
Notes
35    I.C. § 36-1-4-14, authorizes the hiring and discharges of employees.
Sec. 2-174 Personnel Policy Manual Incorporated by Reference.  36
   a.   The Personnel Policy Manual of the Town of Schererville is adopted and
established, and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. No. 1266, § 2, 1-26-
94; Ord. No. 1559, § 1, 8-20-02; Ord. No. 1578 § 1, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 1581 §§
1-4, 4-9-03; Ord. No. 1578A § 1, 7-9-03; Ord. No. 1608A, § 2, 8-11-04; Ord. No.
1624, § 1, 8-11-04; Ord. No. 1625, §§ 1-5, 8-11-04; Ord. No. 1581-A, § 3, 11-
10-04; Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 1-16-19; Ord. No. 1956, § 1, 5-13-20; Ord. No.
1956A, § 1, 4-12-23)
   b.   Every employee governed by the terms of the Personnel Policy shall
receive a copy thereof, and shall be responsible for the understanding of the
terns and conditions contained therein, and further, shall execute a document
of receipt acknowledging awareness of said Personnel Policy.
(Ord. No. 1266, § 3, 1-26-94)
   c.   A copy of the Personnel Policy Manual of the Town of Schererville
located in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer and available for public
inspection during regular business hours.
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1266 specifically repealed Ord. Nos. 812 and 847.
   The Town has established a “Safety Policy Manual” in the Public Works
36 Department, Wastewater Treatment Plant & Park Department, a copy is on file in
   the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer and available for public inspection during
   regular business hours.
Sec. 2-175 Alcohol and Substance Abuse Policy and Testing Procedure
Incorporated by Reference.
   a.   The Alcohol and Substance Abuse Policy and Testing Procedure drafted by
the Safety Committee of the Town of Schererville and incorporated herein by
reference.
(Ord. No. 1226A, § 1, 5-8-96)
   b.   Any and all provisions in conflict with the terms and conditions of
said Alcohol and Substance Abuse Policy and Testing Procedure, particularly
paragraph C(3) of Section 10.6 of the Personnel Policy are deleted and
repealed.
(Ord. No. 1266A, § 2, 5-8-96)
   c.   The Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Policy and Testing Procedure is amended as follows:
DISCIPLINARY ACTION
   If an employee tests positive for drugs or alcohol, that employee shall be
suspended for a minimum of five (5) days. Thereafter, the employee will not
return to work until they successfully pass a drug or alcohol test. The
particular test to which the employee must submit v/ill be for the substance
upon which they originally tested positive. It shall be the responsibility of
the Town Manager to make a determination as to the appropriate discipline for
an employee who tests positive for either drug or alcohol use. The five (5) day
minimum suspension is mandatory, however, the mere fact that an employee passes
a drug or alcohol test, whichever applies in this particular situation, does
not mandate his/her return to employment. This is a decision which will be made
by the Town Manager.
   If an employee is not terminated upon the first positive test for drugs or
alcohol, upon a second positive test within a twenty-four (24) month period of
time, the employee shall be terminated immediately.
   A person who tests positive on an alcohol or drug test, is obligated to sign
a contract with a state-certified Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). The
employee must agree to complete a program recommended by the (SAP), and
furthermore, they are to be randomly tested a minimum of six (6) times during
the twelve (12) months following their positive test. If more than six (6)
tests are deemed necessary by the drug or alcohol counselor, then the employee
must submit to whatever random tests are deemed necessary.
   Failure to comply with the aftercare program shall result in immediate
termination.
   d.   All other non-conflicting provisions of the Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana, Alcohol and Drug Abuse Policy and Testing Procedure shall
remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 1266B, § § 1,2, 4-9-97)
Sec. 2-176 Mileage Allowance.  37
   A motor vehicle travel allowance for duly elected officials, agents and
employees of the Town of Schererville while using their privately owned
vehicles on Town of Schererville business in the sum of thirty-two and one-half
cents (32.50) per mile for each mile so traveled while using said vehicle is
established.
(Ord. No. 1448, § 1, 3-10-99)
 
Notes
37    Editor's Note: § 5.15 of the Personnel Policy Manual also addresses Mileage
   Allowance. Ord. Nos. 782, 1263. and 1356 were prior mileage allowance ordinances.
Sec. 2-177 Credit Card Regulations.
   a.   That the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana, hereby authorizes the use of Town of Schererville-issued credit cards
by employees, including sworn police officers and elected officials as set
forth hereinafter, as needed, under the approval authorization of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer and Town Manager. The usage of Town of Schererville-issued
credit cards will be the responsibility of each of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and
Town Manager to administer. For all credit card usage by town employees and
sworn police officers, as well as elected officials, the chain of communication
and approval authorization shall be through the Department Heads of each of the
responsible Departments of the Town as specified under the current approved
policies and procedures for credit card usage. The Department Heads will be
responsible for the processing of credit card usage and activities, and upon
such review and handling by the Department Heads, detailed and documentary
report and information will be provided to the Town Clerk-Treasurer and Town
Manager by said responsible Department Head(s). (Ord. 1934, § 2, 1-16-2019)
   b.   The policies and procedures established herein shall be directly
administered by the Town Clerk-Treasurer. The rules, regulations, and policies
established hereby shall be supplemental to and in addition to all rules,
regulations, policies and laws promulgated by the State of Indiana or the
Indiana State Board of Accounts for such policies and procedures. Whenever
there is conflict in the policies and procedures established hereby or in any
amendatory ordinance with the rules, regulations, policies and laws of the
State of Indiana or the State Board of Accounts, said State of Indiana and
State Board of Accounts rules, regulations, policies and applicable laws shall
supersede and govern. (Ord. 1934, § 3, 1-16-2019)
   c.   That Schererville town-issued credit cards are issued subject to the
guidelines heretofore established by the Clerk-Treasurer's Office, which shall
include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
      1.   The issuance and monitoring of the use of said credit cards are
hereby delegated to the Clerk-Treasurer, or his/her duly authorized agent.
      2.   All purchases are to be supported with valid and appropriate
itemized receipt(s).
      3.   Standard operating procedures and internal controls for the credit
card system, as amended from time to time, are available from the Clerk-
Treasurer's Office.
      4.   Credit card purchases shall not be used to circumvent the town
purchasing system.
      5.   Allowable use of the credit card shall include, but shall not be
limited to, travel, small purchases, and online purchases, all as appropriately
approved.
      6.   Unacceptable purchases shall include, but are not limited to,
personal transactions, unapproved transactions, and alcohol. (Ord. 1934, § 4,
1-16-2019)
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer is directed and authorized hereby to establish and
implement standard operating procedures and internal controls for the credit
card usage program and system, as amended from time to time, in the Town of
Schererville, The current Standard Operating Procedure for credit card usage/
ordering is attached to Ord. 1934 as Exhibit “A”, incorporated herein by
reference as if laid out in full. A copy of said Standard Operating Procedure
for credit card usage in the Town of Schererville is available from the Office
of the Town Clerk-Treasurer. The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby directed to copy
each Town Department Head, who in turn is directed to copy each Employee with
acknowledgment of receipt document processing to be followed, to be filed in
each town employee file. (Ord. 1934, § 5, 1-16-2019)
   e.   The town employees and officials who are authorized to use a town-
issued credit card will be required to sign an agreement, as amended from time
to time. At the time of the initial issuance of the credit card, the cardholder
will be provided a copy of the signed agreement along with a copy of this
ordinance, or any amendments hereto. A copy of the signed agreement shall be
filed in the Town Clerk-Treasurer's Office. (Ord. 1934, § 6, 1-16-2019)
   f.   For violation of the credit card usage regulations established hereby,
immediate termination of use and privilege of Town of Schererville-issued
credit cards may occur. Further, violation may also subject the violating
individual(s) to discipline consistent with the then-existing Town Personnel
Policy disciplinary provisions, or any other then-applicable law. (Ord. 1934, §
7, 1-16- 2019)
Sec. 2-178 Clothing Allowance for Police Department and Fire Department
Civilian Employees.
   All civilian employees of the Town of Schererville Police Department and
Fire Department shall be allotted a clothing allowance of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) per year. The allotted clothing allowance provided to all
civilian employees of the Town Police Department and Town Fire Department shall
be paid in two (2) equal installments, the dates of same being June 30 and
December 31 of each year.
(Ord. No. 1334, § 7, 4-10-96; Ord. No. 1334B, § 1, 11-8-00)
Sec. 2-179 Reserved for Future Use.
Sec. 2-180 Town Travel Policy.
   a.   Registration Fees. The cost of registration or similar fees for
conferences, seminars and other similar meetings or functions related to Town
affairs will be provided for or reimbursed with proper documentation and shall
include any detailed conference agendas. The approval process policy of the
Town for attendance at such business events, meetings, and functions will be
followed, including specific approval authorization and claim docket processing
arrangements for these affairs, which shall be made by a designated person
using the Town credit card, or by billing the individual directly. All
reimbursements must be requested and submitted and documented by original
itemized receipts.
   b.   Transportation.
      1.   Travel by commercial airlines, rail service, bus, or rideshare will
be provided for at the prevailing “coach” or “tourist” rate when authorized and
supported by itemized receipts.
      2.   Taxi fare and/or the cost of other local rideshare services will be
provided for or reimbursed when supported by original itemized receipts.
      3.   Parking fees and tolls will be reimbursed when supported by original
itemized receipts.
      4.   The use of personal automobiles for Town Travel is permitted and
will be reimbursed at the maximum IRS rate for personal automobile/vehicle use
provided the travel has been authorized by the employee's immediate supervisor
and the proper mileage claims have been submitted.
      5.   The use of personal automobiles for Town Travel is permitted and
will be reimbursed at the maximum IRS rate for personal automobile/vehicle use
provided the travel has been authorized by the employee's immediate supervisor
and that the proper mileage claims have been submitted.
   c.   Lodging.
      1.   Lodging shall be provided for or reimbursed when supported by
original itemized receipts in the following manner, and as approved at the
direction of the Department Head:
         A.   Single occupancy will be provided at the actual cost.
         B.   Double occupancy will be provided at actual cost when both
parties are eligible for reimbursement.
         C.   Double occupancy will be provided at the single occupancy rate
when only one party is eligible for reimbursement unless room is a one rate
charge.
      2.   If using a personal credit card, reimbursement for lodging costs
shall include room costs and associated local taxes. Any other charges made to
the room are the responsibility of the Town Official.
      3.   Every Town Official is required to supply a current Sales Tax-Exempt
Form (ST-105) to the lodging provider.
   d.   Meals.
      1.   Definitions
         MEAL- any of the regular occasions in a day when a reasonably large
amount of food is eaten such as breakfast, lunch, or dinner. Alcohol shall not
be reimbursed.
         GRATUITY - based on meal and non-alcoholic beverage subtotal only- tax
not included.
      2.   Any Town Official that is on official Town business, and the
business portion of the trip is longer than a ten (10) hour period, including
travel time, shall be allowed up to Thirty Dollars ($30.00) per day for a meal,
excluding gratuity [not to exceed twenty percent (20%)]. A Town Official shall
be reimbursed for the meal if a) the Town Official uses a personal credit card;
or b) the Town Official pays with cash. In both instances the Town Official is
required to submit an original itemized receipt.
      3.   Any Town Official that is on official Town business, and the trip
involves an overnight stay, shall be allowed up to Sixty Dollars ($60.00), per
day, not including gratuity, for meals. Gratuities should be reasonable but
shall not exceed twenty percent (20%). Meals purchased using a personal credit
card or cash will be reimbursed when supported by an original itemized receipt.
      4.   When separate checks are not available and a Town Official pays for
other Town Officials, the names of all attending the meal shall be written on
the back of the receipt. Each eligible Town Official shall be allowed the
amount indicated in 2. or 3. The Town Official shall be reimbursed for the
meals if a) the Town Official uses a personal credit card; or b) the Town
Official pays with cash. In both instances the Town Official is required to
submit an original itemized receipt.
      5.   No reimbursement will be made for meals when already provided for in
the registration fee.
(Ord. No. 1515, § 2, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 1995, § 3, 10-11-23)
Sec. 2-181 Cellular Telephone Usage Policy.
   a.   The Town may provide cellular telephones and rate plans/packages for
designated Town employees and officials in order for the duly designated Town
employees and officials to effectively perform their assigned duties and
responsibilities. The designation of the Town employees for whom such cellular
phones are provided is at the direction and authorization of the Town Manager.
   b.   The use of Town-issued cellular telephones is authorized for
communications related to the function and purpose of the Town and in
connection with the performance of assigned duties and responsibilities by the
duly designated Town employees and officials thereof.
   c.   Town employees and officials who are issued cellular telephones and who
incur roaming charges or exceed the minutes provided under the rate plan/
package amount for personal calls (those not related to Town business) will
reimburse the Town for the amount of the additional charges.
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a log of Town employees and
officials issued Town cellular telephones, including the following information:
      1.   an identification number or description, and the phone number of the
Town-owned cellular telephone;
      2.   the name and title/position of each Town employee or official to
whom a cellular telephone has been issued; and
      3.   the Town business use for said cellular telephone.
   e.   Any Town employee determined to have violated this cellular telephone
usage policy will be deemed to have committed a Group I Violation as set forth
in the Town Personnel Policy Manual for Employees, and will be subject to the
provisions of same, including the loss of use of the privilege and possession
of a Town-issued cellular telephone.
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 1-5, 3-10-04; Ord. No. 1608A, § 1, 8-11-04)
Sec. 2-182 Nepotism Policy.
   a.   That the Town Council now finds that it is required, necessary and
appropriate to adopt a policy of conduct with regard to nepotism in employment
with the Town of Schererville, as well as in contracting with the Town of
Schererville, in order to continue to provide local government services to the
residents of the town, as well as to comply with the new laws effective July 1,
2012, specified and set forth in the provisions of I.C. § 36-1-20.2 and I.C. §
36-1-21, respectively.
   b.   That the provisions of this section shall be become effective for the
Town of Schererville July 1, 2012, and whereby the Town of Schererville shall
establish hereby a Nepotism Policy and a Contracting with a Unit Policy, that
complies with the minimum requirements of I.C. § 36-1-20.2 (hereinafter
"Nepotism Policy"), as well as I.C. § 36-1-21 (hereinafter "Contracting with
the Unit by a Relative Policy"). The Town Council further decrees hereby that
implementation of each of the Nepotism Policy and Contracting with a Unit by a
Relative Policy will become effective and whereby implementation will commence
instanter on July 1,2012.
   c.   That the Nepotism Policy of the Town of Schererville is hereby
established effective July 1, 2012, by adoption of the minimum requirement
provisions of I.C. § 36-1-20.2, as the same currently exists, may be
supplemented or amended thereto in the future, and as same exists hereafter.
Such current minimum requirement provisions of I.C. § 36-1-20.2, and as such
are supplemented or amended thereafter and as same is law in the State of
Indiana hereafter from time to time, are made a part hereof and incorporated
herein as though fully set forth and incorporated herein. Further, a copy of
the provisions of I.C. § 36-1-20.2, entitled Nepotism, in effect July 1, 2012,
is attached hereto.
   d.   That the contracting with a Unit by a Relative Policy of the Town of
Schererville is hereby established effective July 1, 2012, by adoption of the
minimum requirement provisions of I.C. § 36-1-21, as the same currently exists,
may be supplemented or amended thereto in the future, and as same exists
hereafter. Such current minimum requirement provisions of I.C. § 36-1-21, and
as such are supplemented or amended thereafter and as same is law in the State
of Indiana hereafter from time to time, are made a part hereof and incorporated
herein as though fully set forth and incorporated herein. Further, a copy of
the provisions of I.C. § 36-1-21, entitled Contracting with a Unit by a
Relative Policy, in effect July 1, 2012, is attached hereto.
   e.   That the Town Council hereby acknowledges and concurs that each of the
provisions of I.C. § 36-1-20.2 arid I.C. § 36-1-21 specifically permit a unit
of local government such as the Town of Schererville to adopt requirements that
are "more stringent or detailed", and that the Town Council hereby finds that
more details are necessary and appropriate.
   f.   That the Town Council further finds and declares that a single Member
of the Town Council, as Legislative Body, shall not act for the Town Council to
make or issue work assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement or a
performance evaluation without prior authority of a majority of the entire Town
Council, and therefore, without such authority by the majority, such individual
Town Council Member will not be in the direct line of supervision, (please note
the provisions of I.C. § 36-4-6-11 and I.C. § 36-5-2-9.4).
   g.   That the Town of Schererville further finds and declares that a single
member of governing bodies with authority over employees in the town shall not
act for said governing bodies to make or issue work assignments, compensation,
grievances, advancement or a performance evaluation without prior authority of
a majority of the responsible governing body, when a statute provides the
majority is needed to act, and therefore, without such authority by the
majority of said governing body, the single member will not be in the direct
line of supervision.
   h.   That all elected and appointed officials and employees of the Town of
Schererville are directed and required to cooperate fully in the implementation
of the policies established by this section, and in demonstrating compliance
with these same policies. The policies established hereby shall be incorporated
by reference in the Town Personnel Policy Manual, as the same is amended from
time to time, as well as in the Town Ethics Regulations Policy Ordinance, as
same is amended from time to time.
   i.   That failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance and certifications connected with the Nepotism Policy is a violation
of this section, as same may be amended from time to time, and may result in
the discipline, including termination, of an employee or transfer from the
direct line of supervision or other curative action. Any elected or appointed
Official of the Town of Schererville who fails to abide by or cooperate with
the implementation, compliance and/or mandated certification submission of
either the Nepotism Policy or the contracting with a unit by a Relative Policy
may be subject to sanctions, penalties or legal procedures and actions in
conformance with by applicable law.
   j.   That the policies established and adopted by this section are hereby
directed to be implemented by any of the following, namely:
      1.   Posting a copy of this section in its entirety in at least one (1)
of the locations in the Town that posts employer posters or other notices to
its employees;
      2.   Providing a copy of this section to each of its employees and
elected and appointed officials, requesting from each distributee an
acknowledgment of receipt of same and filing/depositing of such acknowledgment
in the personnel employment file of each said employee, or elected and
appointed official;
      3.   Providing or posting a Notice of the Adoption of this section in any
other manner deemed appropriate;
      4.   By any such other action or actions that would communicate the
policies established by this section to the town employees and elected and
appointed officials.
      Upon any of the aforesaid actions being made, the policies established
hereby are deemed implemented by the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana. The Town Manager and Town Clerk-Treasurer are additionally directed to
report the implementation actions to the Town Council in its regular public
meeting in July, 2012, for the public record and report to the Town Council of
such.
   k.   That a copy of the provisions of I.C. § 36-1-20.2 and I.C. § 36-1-21,
effective July 1, 2012, are annexed hereto, incorporated herein and made a part
hereof.
   l.   That two (2) copies of I.C. § 36-1-20.2 and I.C. § 36-1-21, as
supplemented or amended, are on file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer of
the town for inspection as maybe required and requested by the provisions of
I.C. § 36-1-5-4.
   m.   That all existing ordinances and Town Code provisions, or portions
thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby deemed
null, void, and of no legal effect, and are specifically repealed.
   n.   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this section shall be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion
of this section.
(Ord. No. 1812, §§ 1-14, passed 6-13-12)
Sec. 2-183 through Sec. 2-209 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 7. Boards and Commissions.
Division I. Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals.  35
 
Notes
35    I.C., § 36-7-4-201, et seq., addresses planning and zoning.
Sec. 2-210 Plan Commission Created.  36
   There is established a Plan Commission for the Town of Schererville,
Indiana, to consist of seven (7) members. The Town Council shall appoint three
(3) persons in the Town government as members. The President of the Town
Council shall appoint four (4) citizen members of the Town of whom not more
than two (2) may be of the same political party.
(Ord. No. 751; Schererville Town Code, § 2-13-1)
 
Notes
36    Editor's Note: Ord. No. 215, passed March 14, 1951, initially created the
   Plan Commission, and was subsequently amended by Ord. No. 751.
Sec. 2-211 Terms of Citizen Members.
   Two (2) citizen members of the Plan Commission shall be appointed for a term
of three (3) years and two (2) citizen members shall initially be appointed for
a term of four (4) years. When an initial term of office of a citizen member
expires, each new appointment of a citizen member shall be for a term of four
(4) years. The term of each citizen member of the Plan Commission shall expire
on the first Monday of January of the third of fourth year, as the case may be,
after the year of the member's appointment.
(Ord. No. 751; Schererville Town Code, § 2-13-2)
Sec. 2-212 Terms of Government Members.
   A government member of the Plan Commission shall serve a term which is
coextensive with the member's term of government office unless the Town
Council, at its first regular meeting in any year, appoints another government
member as a replacement.
(Ord. No. 751; Schererville Town Code, § 2-13-3)
Sec. 2-213 Vacancies.
   If any vacancy occurs among the citizen members of the Plan Commission, the
President of the Town Council shall appoint a member for the unexpired term of
the vacating member. The Town Council shall fill any vacancy occurring among
government members of the Plan Commission by appointing another government
member for the remainder of his elective term.
(Ord. No. 751; Schererville Town Code, § 2-13-4)
Sec. 2-214 Powers and Duties.
   The Plan Commission shall perform all of the duties and responsibilities
required of advisory municipal planning commissions by the statutes of the
state of Indiana as well as those duties and responsibilities assigned to it by
written order or ordinance of the Town Council. The Plan Commission shall have
full and exclusive power to make rules and regulations for its proper
management and may appoint and prescribe the duties of a secretary and such
employees as the duties and responsibilities of the Commission.
(Ord. No. 751; Schererville Town Code; § 2-13-5)
Sec. 2-215 Compensation.
   Each member of the Plan Commission of the Town of Schererville, Indiana
shall receive a salary as set by ordinance. The Plan Commission Attorney shall
be paid at a rate established by ordinance of the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 751; Schererville Town Code, § 2-13-6)
Sec. 2-216 Zoning Regulations.
   Zoning Regulations are set forth in
Chapter 10 of this Code.
Sec. 2-217 Board of Zoning Appeals.  37
   a.   A Board of Zoning Appeals is established to carry out the powers and
duties assigned to it by law.
   b.   Salaries of Board members may be established by proper ordinance of the
Town Council.
 
Notes
37    I.C., § 36-7-4-900, et seq., addresses the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Sec. 2-218 through Sec. 2-223 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Economic Development Commission.
Sec. 2-224 Establishment.
   The Town Council hereby finds it necessary to finance economic development
in the Town of Schererville, and as a consequence thereof, pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. § 36-7-12-4, as amended, hereby establishes a Department of
Economic Development for the Town of Schererville, to be controlled by a
Commission known as "The Town of Schererville Economic Development Commission".
The Town Council further deems it necessary to re-establish a Department of
Economic Development to be controlled by the Schererville Economic Development
Commission as a consequence of its determination that it has become necessary
to finance economic development to promote a substantial likelihood of creating
or retaining opportunities for gainful employment and creating business
opportunities, as well as for all other statutory purposes.
(Ord. No. 1723, § 2, 1-17-08)
Sec. 2-225 Membership.
   a.   Members of the Schererville Economic Development Commission shall be
appointed as follows, namely:
      1.   One (1) of the members shall be selected by the Town Executive;
      2.   One (1) of the members shall be nominated by the Fiscal Body of Lake
County (i.e. Lake County Council); and
      3.   One (1) of the members shall be nominated by the Town Fiscal Body
(i.e. Town Council).
   b.   The Schererville Economic Development Commissioners shall take office
upon appointment, with the terms to run from February 1st after the original
appointment for a period of:
      1.   Three (3) years, if selected by the Town Executive;
      2.   Two (2) years, if nominated by the Town Fiscal Body (i.e. Town
Council); and
      3.   One (1) year, if nominated by the Lake County Fiscal Body (i.e. Lake
County Council).
   c.   At the expiration of the respective terms of each of the original
economic development commissioners, their respective successors shall be
selected and nominated, before the expiration of the term, in the same manner
as the original commissioner, and each succeeding commissioner shall serve for
a term of four (4) years. A commissioner shall hold over after the expiration
of his term until his successor is appointed and has qualified.
(Ord. No. 1723, § 3, 1-17-08)
Sec. 2-226 Incorporation and Implementation of State Statutes.
   The applicable terms and provisions of I.C. §§ 36-7-12, et seq., as amended,
are hereby incorporated herein and are implemented by the enactment of this
division. All such duties, responsibilities, powers, authorities, and related
statutory provisions for a Town unit of government for a Town department of
economic development controlled by the Schererville Economic Development
Commission are hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof as though
fully set forth, and are to be implemented accordingly.
(Ord. No. 1723, § 4, 1-17-08)
Sec. 2-227 through Sec. 2-254 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Redevelopment Commission.  39
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Sections
39 2-155 and
   2-156 of this Code addresses the Redevelopment Department and I.C. § 36-7-14,
   sets forth the enabling legislation in this area.
Sec. 2-255 Five-Member Redevelopment Commission.
   a.   The Schererville Redevelopment Commission shall consist of five (5)
members, who shall be ex-officio and without compensation, the Council Members
from each of the five (5) wards as districted for election of Town Council
members by wards.
(Ord. No. 1274, § 4, 7-13-94)
Sec. 2-256 Powers of the Redevelopment Commission.
   The Commission shall have all powers, authorities, and duties provided by
statute.
(Ord. No. 1274, § 4, 7-13-94)
Sec. 2-257 through Sec. 2-259 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Sanitary Board of Appeals and Utility Board of Trustees.
Sec. 2-260 Sanitary Board of Appeals.
   a.   The Sanitary Board of Appeals or "Board" shall mean the Town of
Schererville Sanitary Board of Appeals, the membership which shall be three (3)
persons appointed by the Town Council, serving one (1) year terms.
   b.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep all minutes and records of the meetings
of the Board. All meetings of the Board shall be governed by the rules of
procedure then in effect governing the conduct of business of the Town Council
of the Town, or such other rules as are specifically adopted by the Board from
time to time.
(Ord. No. 1177, 5-8-91)
   c.   Regulations of the Sanitary Board of Appeals are set forth in
Chapter 9 of this Code.
Sec. 2-261 Utility Board of Trustees.
   a.   The Utility Board of Trustees or "Utility Board" shall mean the
elective or appointed Town Council charged with the legal responsibility of
overseeing, managing and/or operating the Sanitary Sewer Utility of the Town of
Schererville, and shall be the Board charged with enforcing the terms of the
provisions of
Chapter 9 of this Code, and where deemed necessary, shall be deemed to be the
branch of the government of the Town charged with the decision making
requirements prescribed herein, although the same may be delegated to a Town
Official by proper action of this Board.
(Ord. No. 951, 4-25-84; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-14)
   b.   Regulations of the Utility Board of Trustees are set forth in
Chapter 9 of this Code.
   c.   The Town Council for the Town of Schererville, Indiana, ratifies the
continuing existence of a Utility Board for the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
   d.   The Utility Board shall be comprised of the members of the duly elected
Town Council for the Town of Schererville, Indiana and shall be limited to said
members.
   e.   The Utility Board shall be responsible to serve as a advisory board
regarding planning and development within the Town of Schererville and the
provision of water and sewer related to aforesaid development.
   f.   The Utility board shall further be responsible for issues related to
trash collection, drainage, cable television, and telecommunications throughout
the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1474, § § 1-4, 12-8-99)
Sec. 2-262 through Sec. 2-267 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Safety Committee.
Sec. 2-268 Intent.
   The Town of Schererville, Indiana, feels that it is beneficial to the
employees of the Town of Schererville and the community to establish and adopt
safety policies and procedures in order to preserve and protect life, limb and
property.
(Ord. No. 854, 4-22-81)
Sec. 2-269 Safety Committee.
   It is necessary to establish a Safety Committee to institute and maintain
the above.
(Ord. No. 854, 4-22-81)
Sec. 2-270 Committee Duties and Responsibilities.
   It is the duty and responsibility of the Safety Committee to perform the
following:
   a.   Upgrade and continuously maintain the Town of Schererville's safety
policies and procedures to meet the Recognized Safety Standards For
Municipalities and State Agencies,
   b.   Monitor all work environments including personnel, vehicles, and
equipment to assure that the Town's adopted safety requirements and procedures
are met and continuously practiced and implemented on a daily basis.
   c.   Investigate all unsafe locations and work practices in existence and
take such steps as are necessary to eliminate them expeditiously.
   d.   Investigate any accident wherein personal injury, loss of time, or
property damage in excess of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) has resulted and to
take such steps as are necessary to avoid recurrence of the same.
(Ord. No. 854, 4-22-81)
Sec. 2-271 Investigations By Police.
   It is the duty of the Town of Schererville Police Department to investigate
and make formal reports and findings of fact to the Town Council for any
accident involving personal injury, loss of time, or property damage in excess
of $65.00.
(Ord. No. 854, 4-22-81)
Sec. 2-272 Weekly Safety Departmental Meetings.
   The Safety Committee shall conduct and be responsible for weekly safety
departmental meetings with all Schererville Town employees at specified
locations to assure that safety tips and procedures are dispensed in a timely
and efficient manner.
(Ord. No. 854, 4-22-81)
Sec. 2-273 Five (5) Member Committee.
   The Town Council shall appoint a five (5) member Safety Committee for a
maximum period of One (1) year. The Safety Committee shall be comprised as
follows:
   a.   1 member - Utilities Department
   b.   1 member - Street and Sanitation Department
   c.   1 member - Vehicle Maintenance
   d.   1 member - Park and Recreation Board
   e.   1 member - Assistant Town Administrator or Public Works Director The
Town Administrator may serve in an advisory capacity.
Sec. 2-274 Incorporation By Reference of Safety Standards.
   a.   The Town of Schererville formally adopts and incorporates by reference
the most updated version of the Recognized Safety Standards For Municipalities
and State Agencies, which is established by the Indiana Occupational Safety and
Health Administration as an integral part of the Safety Policies and Procedures
for the Town of Schererville.
   b.   Two (2) copies of said standards are on file in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and open for inspection during regular business hours.  40
 
Notes
40    I.C., § 36-1-5-4, requires two (2) copies to be mandated for public
   inspection.
Sec. 2-275 through Sec. 2-279 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Plat Committee.
Sec. 2-280 Plat Committee Created.  41
   There is created a Plat Committee, which shall consist of five (5) members
appointed by the Plan Commission. One member shall be the Chief Building
Inspector; one member shall be the Planning and Zoning Administrator; one
member shall be the Secretary of the Plan Commission; two (2) members shall be
appointed from the membership of the Town Council and not of the same political
party. In the event that the composition of the Town Council does not permit
the appointment of individuals from differing political parties, then, and in
that event, an individual from the community must be selected who is of a
differing political party than that of the member of the Town Council, and
further, must be able to demonstrate that he or she voted in the primary of the
opposing political party in the last three (3) primary elections prior to the
appointment. All members of the Plat Committee shall serve a one (1) year term,
and be subject to removal in accordance with appropriate Indiana State
Statutes.
(Ord. No. 1206, § 1[a], 5-13-92)
 
Notes
41    I.C., § 36-7-4-703, authorizes the establishment of a Plat Committee to aid and
   assist the Plan Commission.
Sec. 2-281 Authority of the Plat Committee.
   The Plat Committee shall have the authority to review and approve
applications for platting of minor subdivisions, subject to the following:
   Subdivision of land for single-family residential purposes which:
   a.   Involves no more than two (2) lots;
   b.   Does not involve opening a new public street or road;
   c.   Complies with the Subdivision Control Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance in
all other respects.
(Ord. No. 1206, § 1 [b], 5-13-92)
Sec. 2-282 Primary Approval.
   Proposed applications for subdivisions pursuant to the procedure set forth
in this Ordinance shall be referred to the Plat Committee for primary approval
without public hearing.
(Ord. No. 1206, § 1[c], 5-13-92)
Sec. 2-283 Rules and Procedures.
   The Plat Committee shall establish rules and procedures for examining and
granting primary approval to minor subdivisions. If primary approval is
granted, the plat shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for secondary
approval. If the Plat Committee denies primary approval, the applicant may
appeal to the Plan Commission in accordance with the provisions of Indiana Code
36-7-4-708 or any successor provisions.
(Ord. No. 1206, § 1[d], 5-13-92)
Sec. 2-284 through 2-288 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Contractor's Licenses Board.
Sec. 2-289 Seven (7) Member Board.
   Ordinance No. 552 set forth in
Chapter 7 of this Code established the Contractor's Licensing Board and
providing for its duties and functions, and the licensing of contractors and
builders in the Town of Schererville, Indiana, is amended after the date of the
passage and adoption of this Ordinance by the Town Council of the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, by requiring that the Contractor's Licensing Board shall
consist of seven (7) members. The Town Electrical Inspector, the Town Building
Inspector, the Town Plumbing Inspector, and the Town Engineer shall be members
of said Board by virtue of the offices described during the time such persons
hold such offices. The additional three (3) members of said Board shall be
appointed by the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, from among
the citizens and residents of the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 665, 8-11-76)
Sec. 2-290 Regulations.
   Regulations of the Contractor's Licensing Board are set forth in
Chapter 7 of this Code.
Sec. 2-291 through 2-292 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Board of Safety.
Sec. 2-293 Created; Intent.
   a.   That subject to the provisions set forth herein, there is hereby
established a Board of Safety for the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana.
   b.   That all provisions now or hereafter provided by applicable state law,
as amended from time to time for the appointment, term, oath and bond of a
Commissioner of the Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners of the Town of
Schererville, shall apply to the appointment, term, oath and bond of a
Commissioner of the Board of Safety of the Town of Schererville (hereinafter
referred to as the “Board of Safety”). Hereafter, the Board of Metropolitan
Police Commissioners shall act as the Board of Safety for the Town.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-294 Powers; Duties and Responsibilities.
   a.   The Commissioners of the Board of Safety shall have every power and
shall comply with every responsibility in the policymaking and management
oversight of the operation, management and control of the Schererville
Departments of Police, Fire, and Emergency Medical Service Departments, as is
now or may hereafter be provided under applicable state law, as amended from
time to time.
   b.   Each Commissioner of the Board of Safety, in appointing, disciplining
or dismissing a member of any department under its control shall do so without
regard to the political affiliation of the person and without regard to any
other cause or reason other than the fitness or unfitness of the person, under
the applicable rules, regulations, policies and procedures of each Department.
   c.   1.   The Board of Safety shall consist of five (5) Commissioners. Each
shall be appointed in accordance with applicable state law, as amended from
time to time. The Town Council shall appoint each Commissioner. Provided that
state law, as amended from time to time, is not in any way violated, one (1) of
the Commissioners may be the Town Manager of the Town of Schererville. In the
event that the Town Manager is not appointed to the Board of Safety, said Town
Manager shall receive notice of and have the right to attend all meetings,
regular, special and executive, and shall be allowed to participate in
discussions at all such meetings, and shall be allowed to submit reports and
writings to the Commissioners; but in no event shall the Town Manager, in the
liaison capacity, have any right to vote or have any other right, power or duty
reserved to a Commissioner.
      2.   Two (2) Commissioners shall be initially appointed for one (1) year
terms. Two (2) Commissioners shall be initially appointed for two (2) year
terms. One Commissioner shall be initially appointed for a three (3) year term.
Each term thereafter shall be for three (3) years. The term of each
Commissioner expires on January 1st of the third year after the appointment of
the Commissioner. The appointments of the current members of the Town Board of
Metropolitan Police Commissioners are ratified as to said appointments and term
of appointment for each.
   b.   Each Commissioner of the Board of Safety is subject to removal for any
cause deemed sufficient by the Town Council.
   c.   A majority of the appointed and acting Board of Safety shall constitute
a quorum. The Board of Safety shall adopt rules concerning the time of holding
regular and special meetings and of giving notices of them in accordance with
applicable state law, as amended from time to time. The Board of Safety shall
elect one (1) of its commissioners as Chairperson, one (1) as Vice Chairperson,
and one (1) as Secretary, and each member shall hold the position as long as
prescribed by the rules of the Board of Safety. The Board shall) record its
proceedings in accordance with applicable state law, as amended from time to
time, and same shall be considered public records to be filed and maintained in
the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   d.   The Commissioners of the Board of Safety may act only as a Board. No
individual member may bind the Board of Safety or the town except through a
resolution entered in the records of the Board of Safety authorizing such
Commissioner to act in its behalf as its authorized agent for the purpose set
forth therein, and no individual member can otherwise act unilaterally.
   e.   The Commissioners of the Board of Safety may appoint subject to
qualifications for employment determined by the Safety Board, and approved by
the Town Council, the following:
      1.   The members and other employees of the Town Metropolitan Police
Department; and
      2.   The members and other employees of the Town Metropolitan Fire
Department.
   f.   The annual compensation of all members and employees of the police and
fire departments and other appointees shall be fixed by the town’s Annual
Salary Ordinance.
   g.   1.   The Board of Safety shall have control overall matters and
property relating to the following:
         (a)   Police Department; and
         (b)   Fire Department, including emergency medical services.
      2.   Subject to the budget and appropriation of the Town Council, the
Board of Safety may recommend salaries and wages to the Town Council, and may
purchase the equipment and supplies and make the repairs needed for each of the
departments therein.
   h.   The Board of Safety shall adopt rules for the governance and discipline
of the Police Department, the Fire Department, and any Emergency Medical
Service Department, subject to conformance with applicable state law.
   i.   The Board of Safety may adopt general and special orders to the Police
Department and the Fire Department which orders shall be carried out through
the Chief or head of said Departments.
   j.   The Police Chief shall have exclusive control of the Police Department,
and the Fire Chief shall have exclusive control of the Fire Department, subject
to the rules and orders of the Board of Safety, as amended from time to time.
In time of the operation of a disaster plan of the Town of Schererville, the
Police Chief and the Fire Chief, for the time of said disaster, are subordinate
to the President of the Town Council, or the person or persons designated by
the Town Council, and said Chiefs shall obey the Orders and directions given by
the President of the Town Council, or said person or persons, consistent with
said current Disaster Plan of the Town.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-295 Term of Employment; Police Department.
   a.   Except as provided in subsection l below, a member of the Metropolitan
Police Department holds office or grade until he or she is dismissed by the
Board of Safety. Except as provided in subsection m, a member may be
disciplined by demotion, dismissal, reprimand, forfeiture, or suspension upon
either:
      1.   Conviction in any court of any crime; or
      2.   A finding and decision of the Board of Safety that the member has
been or is guilty of:
         (a)   Neglect of duty;
         (b)   A violation of rules;
         (c)   Neglect or disobedience of an order;
         (d)   Incapacity;
         (e)   Absence without leave;
         (f)   Immoral conduct;
         (g)   Conduct injurious to the public peace or welfare;
         (h)   Conduct unbecoming an officer; or
         (i)   Another breach of discipline.
      The Board of Safety may not consider the political affiliation of the
member in making a decision under this section. If a member is suspended or
placed on administrative leave under this subsection, the member is entitled to
the member's allowances for insurance benefits to which the member was entitled
before being suspended or placed on administrative leave. In addition, the Town
may provide the member's allowances for any other fringe benefits to which the
member was entitled before being suspended or placed on administrative leave.
   b.   Before a member of the Metropolitan Police Department may be suspended
in excess of five (5) days without pay, demoted, or dismissed, the Board of
Safety shall offer the member an opportunity for a hearing. If a member seeks a
hearing, the member must request the hearing not more than five (5) days after
receiving the notice of the suspension, demotion, or dismissal. Written notice
shall be given either by service upon the member in person or by a copy left at
the member's last and usual place of residence at least fourteen (14) days
before the date set for the hearing. The hearing conducted under this
Subsection shall be held not more than thirty (30) days after the hearing is
requested by the member, unless a later date is mutually agreed upon by the
parties. The notice must state:
      1.   The date, time and place of the hearing;
      2.   The charges against the member;
      3.   The specific conduct that comprises the charges;
      4.   That the member is entitled to be represented by counsel;
      5.   That the member is entitled to call and cross-examine witnesses;
      6.   That the member is entitled to require the production of evidence;
and
      7.   That the member is entitled to have subpoenas issued, served, and
executed in Lake County, Indiana.
      A disciplinary hearing concerning a member of the Metropolitan Police
Department shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the rules adopted by
the Board of Safety, which rules shall provide for an appropriate appeal
procedure.
   c.   Upon an investigation into the conduct of a member of the Metropolitan
Police Department, or upon the trial of a charge preferred against a member of
the Metropolitan Police Department, the Board of Safety may compel the
attendance of witnesses, examine them under oath, and require the production of
books, papers, and other evidence at a meeting of the Board. For this purpose,
the Board of Safety may issue subpoenas and have them served and executed in
any part of Lake County, Indiana. If a witness refuses to testify or to produce
books or papers in his or her possession or under his or her control, the
provisions of I.C. 36-4-6-21, as amended from time to time, control to the
extent applicable. The proper court may compel compliance with the order by
attachment, commitment, or other punishment.
   d.   The reasons for the suspension, demotion, or dismissal of a member of
the Metropolitan Police Department shall be entered as specific findings of
fact upon the records of the Board of Safety. A member who is suspended for a
period exceeding five (5) days, demoted, or dismissed may appeal the decision
to the Circuit or Superior Courts of Lake County, Indiana. However, a member
may not appeal any other decision.
   e.   An appeal under this section must be taken by filing in court, within
thirty (30) days after the date the decision is rendered, a verified complaint
stating in concise manner the general nature of the charges against the member,
the decision of the Board of Safety, and a demand for the relief asserted by
the member. A bond must also be filed that guarantees the appeal will be
prosecuted to a final determination and that the plaintiff will pay all costs
adjudged against the plaintiff. The bond must be approved as bonds for costs
are approved in other cases. The Town must be named as the sole defendant, and
the plaintiff shall have a summons issued as in other cases against the Town.
Neither the Board of Safety, nor the Commissioners of it, may be made parties
defendant to the complaint, but all are obligated by service upon the Town and
any judgment rendered by the court.
   f.   In an appeal under subsection e, no pleading is required by the Town to
the complaint, but the allegations are considered denied. The Town may file a
motion to dismiss the appeal for failure to perfect it within the time and in
the manner required by this Section. If more than one (1) person was included
in the same charges and in the same decision of dismissal by the Board of
Safety, then one (1) or more of the persons may join as plaintiffs in the same
complaint, but only the persons that appeal from the decision are affected by
it. The decision of the Board of Safety is final and conclusive upon all
persons not appealing. The decision appealed from is not stayed or affected
pending the final determination of the appeal, but remains in effect unless
modified or reversed by the final judgment of the court.
   g.   A decision of the Board of Safety is considered prima facie correct,
and the burden of proof is on the party appealing. All appeals shall be tried
by the court. The appeal shall be heard de novo only upon any new issues
related to the charges upon which the decision of the Board of Safety was made.
The charges are considered to be denied by the accused person. Within ten (10)
days after service of summons, the Board of Safety shall file in court a
complete transcript of all papers, entries, and other parts of the record
relating to the particular case. Inspection of these documents by the person
affected, or by the person's agent, must be permitted by the Board of Safety
before the appeal is filed, if requested. Each party may produce evidence
relevant to the issues that it desires, and the court shall review the record
and decision of the Board of Safety upon appeal.
   h.   The court shall make specific findings and state the conclusions of law
upon which its decision is made. If the court finds that the decision of the
Board of Safety appealed from should in all things be affirmed, its judgment
should state that, and judgment for costs shall be rendered against the party
appealing. If the court finds that the decision of the Board of Safety appealed
from should not be affirmed in all things, then the court shall make a general
finding, setting out sufficient facts to show the nature of the proceeding and
the court's decision on it. The court shall either:
      1.   Reverse the decision of the Board of Safety; or
      2.   Order the decision of the Board of Safety to be modified.
   i.   The final judgment of the court may be appealed by either party. Upon
the final disposition of the appeal by the courts, the Clerk shall certify and
file a copy of the final judgment of the court to the Board of Safety, which
shall conform its decisions and records to the order and judgment of the court.
If the decision is reversed or modified, then the Board of Safety-shall pay to
the party entitled to it any salary or wages withheld from the party pending
the appeal and to which the party is entitled under the judgment of the court.
   j.   Either party shall be allowed a change of venue from the court or a
change of judge in the same manner as such changes are allowed in civil cases.
The Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure govern in all matters of procedure upon
the appeal that are not otherwise provided for by this section.
   k.   An appeal takes precedence over other pending litigation and shall be
tried and determined by the court as soon as practical.
   l.   Except as provided in I.C. 36-5-2-13, the Town executive may reduce in
grade any member of the Metropolitan Police Department who holds an upper level
policy making position. The reduction in grade may be made without adhering to
the requirements of subsections a through k above. However, a member may not be
reduced in grade to a rank below that which the member held before the member's
appointment to the upper level policy making position.
   m.   If the member is subject to criminal charges, the Safety Board may
place the member on administrative leave until the disposition of the criminal
charges in the trial court. Any other action by the Safety Board is stayed
until the disposition of the criminal charges in the trial court. An
administrative leave under this subsection may be with or without pay, as
determined by the Safety Board. If the member is placed on leave without pay,
the Safety Board, in its discretion, may award back pay if the member is
exonerated in the criminal matter.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-296 Term of Employment; Fire Department.
   a.   Except as provided in subsection l of Section
2-295, herein, a member of the Metropolitan Fire Department holds office or
grade until he or she is dismissed or demoted by the Board of Safety. A member
may be disciplined by demotion, dismissal, reprimand, forfeiture, or suspension
for causes set forth in rules adopted by the Board of Safety, which rules are
served upon the members of the Metropolitan Fire Department. Until such rules
are made and served, the causes and procedures shall be the same as those
provided for members of the Metropolitan Police Department.
   b.   Before a member of the Metropolitan Fire Department is suspended in
excess of five (5) days without pay, demoted or dismissed, the Board of Safety
shall offer the member an opportunity for a hearing. For purposes of this
section and these disciplinary provisions, the Board of Safety is the Town
Council, as Town Legislative Body, which is the appropriate appointing
authority of the Town. If a member desires a hearing, the member must request
the hearing not more than five (5) days after the notice of the suspension,
demotion, or dismissal. Written notice shall be given either by service upon
the member in person or by a copy left at the member's last and usual place of
residence at least fourteen (14) days before the date set for the hearing. The
hearing conducted, under this Section shall be held not more than thirty (30)
days after the hearing is requested by the member, unless a later date is
mutually agreed upon by the parties. The notice must state:
      1.   The date, time and place of the hearing;
      2.   The charges against the member;
      3.   The specific conduct that comprises the charges;
      4.   That the member is entitled to be represented by counsel;
      5.   That the member is entitled to call and cross-examine witnesses;
      6.   That the member is entitled to require the production of evidence;
and
      7.   That the member is entitled to have subpoenas issued, served, and
executed in Lake County, Indiana.
      In a disciplinary hearing concerning a member of the Metropolitan Fire
Department, such hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the
rules adopted by the Board of Safety, which rules shall provide for an
appropriate appeal procedure.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-296A Disciplinary Actions.
   In addition to the disciplinary powers of the Board of Safety, the Chief of
the Metropolitan Police Department or Metropolitan Fire Department may, without
a hearing, reprimand or suspend without pay a member, for a maximum of five (5)
working days. For the purposes of this Section, eight (8) hours of paid time
constitutes one (1) working day. If a Chief reprimands a member in writing or
suspends a member, the Chief shall, within forty-eight (48) hours, notify the
board in writing of the action and the reasons for the action. A member who is
reprimanded in writing or suspended under this Section may, within forty-eight
(48) hours after receiving notice of the reprimand or suspension, request in
writing that the board review the reprimand or suspension and either uphold or
reverse the Chiefs’ decision. At its discretion, the board may hold a hearing
during this review. If the board holds a hearing, written notice must be given
either by service upon the member in person or by a copy left at the member's
last and usual place of residence at least fourteen (14) days before the date
set for the hearing. The notice must contain the information listed under
Section
2-296 of this Ordinance. If the decision is reversed, the member who was
suspended is entitled to any wages withheld as a result of the suspension.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-296B State Law.
   Sections of this Ordinance shall not apply to the extent that they are
different from or inconsistent with the provisions established by State law, as
amended from time to time, for the appointment, promotion, demotion and
dismissal of members of a Metropolitan Police Department. Sections of this
Ordinance shall apply to the extent that they are not different from or
inconsistent with the provisions established by State law, as amended from time
to time, for the appointment, promotion, demotion and dismissal of members of
the Metropolitan Fire Department, or members of a volunteer fire company.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-296C Extent of Services; Salary.
   a.   The Board of Safety may detail members from the Police Department or
Fire Department for the use of any other department of Town government of the
Town of Schererville.
   b.   The Board of Safety may employ civilian, technical or clerical
personnel to work with the Police Department or with the Fire Department as
civilian radio operators, radio technicians, chemical technicians, and
laboratory technicians and other civilian technical personnel and clerical
personnel that are required. The salaries to be paid to the civilian, technical
and clerical personnel shall be fixed by the annual Town Salary Ordinance, and
subject to the budget and appropriation approved by the Town Council. The
civilian, technical and clerical personnel are not eligible to be members of
any police or fire pension fund.
   c.   The salary of the Commissioners shall be fixed from time to time by the
Town Council and payable out of the General Fund of the Town under the
provisions of the annual Town Salary Ordinance, provided, however that in the
event that a Commissioner holds another appointed or elected position in the
government of the Town of Schererville during their tenure as a Commissioner,
said commissioner shall have no right to any salary or any other compensation
for services performed as such Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-296D Oath.
   The Board of Safety, Police Chief and Fire Chief may administer oaths to a
person summoned in a proceeding authorized by this Ordinance or by State law,
as amended from time to time, and may take depositions under the rules and
orders of the Board of Safety.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-296E Legal Authority.
   The provisions of this Ordinance shall be amendatory of and supplementary to
Town Ordinance No. 378, adopted on January 1, 1964, pertaining to the Board of
Metropolitan Police Commissioners, acting as the Board of Safety, and those
Ordinances amendatory and supplemental thereto, provided, however, that no
provisions herein shall be considered, interpreted or construed to limit or
restrict any power or duty of the Commissioners of the Town Board of
Metropolitan Police Commissioners as now or hereafter granted by the applicable
laws of the State of Indiana, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-296F Repeal of Conflicting Laws.
   That all existing Town Code Sections and Ordinances, or parts thereof, in
conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby deemed null, void,
and of no legal effect, and are specifically repealed.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Sec. 2-296G Severability.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance shall be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect any other section, clause, provision or portion of
this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1804, 2-8-12)
Division IX. Reserved.
Sec. 2-297 through Sec. 2-299 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 8. Miscellaneous Administrative Regulations.
Division I. Miscellaneous Regulations.
Sec. 2-300 Defense and Indemnity of Elected Public Officials.
   a.   This ordinance shall apply to and inure to the benefit of elected
public officials of the Town of Schererville, hereafter "Town".
(Ord. No. 1216, § 1, 9-9-92)
   b.   This Ordinance shall be supplemental and additional to all present and
future laws of the State of Indiana and ordinances of the Town which deal with
the liability of elected Town public officials, and the defense of said elected
persons.
(Ord. No. 1216, § 2, 9-9-92)
   c.   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, and upon his or her request, the
Town shall defend an elected Town public official, both present and former, who
is, or could be, subject to personal civil liability for a loss occurring
because of a non-criminal act or omission committed within the scope of his or
her official acts of authority, including any alleged violation of civil rights
of the United States and the State of Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1216, § 3, 9-9-92)
   d.   The Town Attorney shall defend a present or former elected Town public
official against a claim or suit described in this ordinance. In the event the
Town Attorney would or might have a conflict of interest in doing so, the Town
Attorney, with the advice and direction of the Town Council, shall designate
other counsel for the defense of said elected Town public official.
(Ord. No. 1216, § 4, 9-9-92)
   e.   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, or unless the Town determines that
the elected Town public official acted in bad faith, the Town shall pay the
judgement, compromise or settlement arising out of the case of a claim or suit
against such an elected Town public official.
(Ord. No. 1216, § 5, 9-9-92)
   f.   The right to compromise or settle the case of a claim or suit against
an elected Town public official is retained and reserved exclusively by the
Town. In the event that the elected Town public official will not join in a
compromise or settlement which would hold the elected Town public official
harmless from any liability arising out of said claim or suit, the Town shall
be entitled to withdraw its defense for the elected Town public official and
shall not be obligated to pay any subsequent judgement, compromise or
settlement on behalf of said elected Town public official. The elected Town
public official for whom the Town has undertaken a defense shall be required to
cooperate in all respects with the actions of the Town to defend and indemnify
that elected Town public official. In the event that an elected Town public
official for whom the Town has undertaken a defense and provided
indemnification fails or refuses to cooperate in any respect with the defense
and indemnification activities of the Town, then the Town shall be entitled to
withdraw its defense for the elected Town public official, and shall not be
obligated to pay any subsequent judgement, compromise or settlement on behalf
of said elected Town public official.
(Ord. No. 1216, § 6, 9-9-92)
   g.   Nothing herein shall constitute or be construed as a waiver of any
right or defense of the Town or its elected public officials, nor shall it
constitute a consent to be sued.
(Ord. No. 1216, § 7, 9-9-92)
Sec. 2-301 Exemption of the Municipal Corporation From Land Use Regulations.
   a.   The Town of Schererville, a municipal corporation, on behalf of itself
and its boards, commissions, public corporations and other such governmental
subdivisions created by the Town Council, shall be exempt from any and all
restrictions, rules and regulations concerning land uses while in the
performance of its governmental function.
   b.   Only the Town of Schererville through its Town Council shall be
empowered to authorize its consent to the exemptions on behalf of any of its
governmental subdivisions concerning land uses that are in the performance of
its governmental function.
(Ord. No. 90-1151, 6-13-90)
Sec. 2-302 “Cafeteria Plan” for Employee Participation.
   There is established for the benefit of its employees participation in a
qualified Section 125 Cafeteria Plan, pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code,
and further, that Key Benefit Administrators is directed to take appropriate
action pursuant to this Resolution.
(Res. No. 93-1, 2-10-93)
Sec. 2-303 Self-Funded Employee Benefit Plan.
   a.   The Town established a self funded plan which may pay for and provide
coverages for those eligible employees of the Town for payment for medical,
pharmaceutical, optical, dental, or other medical related expenses or any one
or more of the aforementioned coverages, as well as payment for loss of life to
designated beneficiaries. The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized and empowered to
administer this self funded plan.
(Ord. No. 1093, § 2, 12-4-88)
   b.   In addition, the Clerk-Treasurer is authorized and empowered to employ
a management consultant or qualified company to assist in administering
payments from the fund to health providers or others. In addition to the self
funded plan, the Clerk-Treasurer may purchase coinsurance or catastrophic
coverage to augment or supplement the self funded plan in his discretion as to
which plan, plans, or combination thereof will provide the best coverages for
the least amount of cost to the Town.
   c.   This plan may be amended as necessary by the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 1093, § 5, 12-4-88)
Sec. 2-304 through Sec. 2-334 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Purchase Order Procedure.
Sec. 2-335 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Division is to place into effect a system by which
purchases for any and all equipment, materials, goods and services for and on
behalf of the Town of Schererville can be controlled or regulated.
(Ord. No. 843A, § 1, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 843B, § 1, 1-1-97; Ord. No. 843C, § 1,
1-12-00)
Sec. 2-336 Purchase Order Procedure.
   The purchase order procedure shall be established and governed as follows:
   a.   Any department head or superintendent may make any purchase for
necessary goods or services in an amount up to, but not to exceed $5,000.00
without requiring additional authorization or endorsements from superiors.
   b.   A department head purchaser shall sign for or endorse any purchase made
under these provisions.
   c.   Any purchase order for goods or services which exceed $5,000.00 shall
have the written authorization and endorsement of the Town Manager.
   d.   Any purchase order in an amount in excess of $5,000.00 shall have the
written authorization and endorsement of a minimum of three (3) Town
Councilmembers.
   e.   In regard to purchases for the utility board, any purchase in excess of
$5,000.00 shall have the written authorization and endorsement of a minimum of
three (3) members of the utility board.
   f.   Prior to submission to the council or utility board for approval, any
purchase order in excess of $5,000.00 shall be accompanied by a minimum of
three (3) quotes for said item or service from separate merchants or
contractors in the business of providing the necessary item or service. Bids
purchase orders will be awarded to the lowest, most responsive and responsible
bidder.
   g.   All purchases must be made on an authorized purchase order form. (Ord.
No. 843B, § 2, 1-1-97; Ord. No. 843C, § 2, 1-12-00; Ord. No. 2000, § 1, 12-12-
23)
Sec. 2-337 Applicability.  43
   This purchase order procedure pertains to and is applicable to all Town of
Schererville Councilmen, managers, administrators, departments, department
heads, employees, chiefs, superintendents, commissions, boards, councils,
committees or any agency acting for and on behalf of the Town of Schererville;
the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer, and its employees shall also be governed by
this Division.
(Ord. No. 843B, § 3, 1-1-97; Ord. No. 843C, § 3, 1-12-00)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: At the request of the Town during the recodification process §
43 2-336 included "$500.00", of "Councilman and Administrators" were added to §
   2-338.
Sec. 2-338 Emergency Situations.
   a.   The Town Council for the Town of Schererville, Indiana, recognizes that
from time to time emergency situations will arise which necessitate the
immediate purchase of goods and/or services without prior approval as stated
herein. The Town Manager for the Town of Schererville, Indiana, shall keep on
file a list of approved merchants and contractors with whom he is authorized to
deal in an emergency situation and if such situation arises he may make the
necessary purchase without prior approval.
   b.   The list of approved merchants and contractors shall set forth their
hourly rates for labor and if possible, the cost of goods available.
   c.   The Town Manager shall state in writing his basis for emergency
purchases.
(Ord. No. 843B, § 4, 1-1-97; Ord. No. 843C, § 4, 1-12-00)
Sec. 2-339 through Sec. 2-343 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Claim Docket Procedure.
Sec. 2-344 Procedure Established.
   In order to insure the timely and prompt payment of any and all proper
claims received by the Town of Schererville, the following procedure shall be
followed:
   a.   Any and all claims receipted by the Clerk-Treasurer prior to ten (10)
days preceding the Town Council Public Meeting shall appear on the claim docket
which is to be presented to the Town Council no later than two (2) days prior
to the Town Council Public Meeting, and in all cases shall be provided to the
Town Council on the Monday preceding the Town Council Meeting at their
regularly scheduled Public Meeting.
   b.   The name of the claimant.
   c.   The amount claimed and for what.
   d.   The date the Clerk-Treasurer's Office was in receipt of said claim.
   e.   The appropriate fund the claim is drawn from or debited to.
(Ord. No. 848, 3-11-81).
Sec. 2-345 Forms Required.  43
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall only accept those claims that are in proper and
legal form at time of submission by the claimant, those claims that are in
accordance with Indiana Code, § 36-5-4-1, et seq., and adhere to the form
prescribed by the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. No. 848, 3-11-81)
 
Notes
43    Editor's Note: Ord. No. 848 referred to I.C., § 18-1-20-1, which has been
   replaced with I.C., § 36-5-4-1, et seq.
Sec. 2-346 Role of Clerk-Treasurer.
   It shall be the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer to notify the claimant upon
receipt of said claim that it does not adhere to the specifications herein
described.
(Ord. No. 848, 3-11-81)
Sec. 2-347 Compliance With Applicable Law.
   This Division is in compliance with Indiana Code, § 36-5-4-1, et seq., and
in further compliance with the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. No. 848, 3-11-81)
Sec. 2-348 through Sec. 2-359 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 9. BUDGET AND OTHER FISCAL POLICIES.
Division I. Departmental Budgets.
Sec. 2-360 Role of Department Heads.
   Each department head shall prepare for his department on or before July 1 of
each year, beginning July 1, 1983, an estimate of the amount of money required
for the ensuing budget year, stating in detail each category and item of
expenditure he anticipates.
(Ord. No. 930, § 1, 8-10-83)
Sec. 2-361 Role of Clerk-Treasurer.
   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall prepare an itemized
estimate of revenues available for the ensuing budget year, and shall prepare
an itemized estimate of expenditures for other purposes above the money
proposed to be used by the departments.
(Ord. No. 930, § 2, 8-10-83)
Sec. 2-362 Role of Town Council President.  44
   The President of the Town Council and/or Town Manager shall meet with the
department heads and the Clerk-Treasurer to review and revise their various
estimates.
(Ord. No. 930, § 3, 8-10-83)
 
Notes
44    Editor's Note: The Town requested that "and/or Town Manager" be added
   during the recodification process.
Sec. 2-363 Clerk-Treasurer to Prepare Documents.  45
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare for the Town Council President a report of
the estimated department budgets, miscellaneous expenses, and revenues
necessary or available to finance the estimates.
(Ord. No. 930, § 4, 8-10-83)
 
Notes
45    Editor's Note: During the recodification process the Town requested that
   "After the President's review and revision" be deleted.
Sec. 2-364 Town Council to Fix Rate of Taxation By Ordinance.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall present the report of budget estimates to the Town
Council under Indiana Code, § 6-1.1-17. After reviewing the report, the Town
Council shall prepare an ordinance fixing the rate of taxation for the ensuing
budget year and an ordinance making appropriations for the estimated department
budgets and other town purposes during the ensuing budget year. The Town
Council, in the appropriation ordinance, may change any estimated item from the
figure submitted in the report of the Clerk-Treasurer. The Town Council shall
promptly act on the appropriation ordinance.
(Ord. No. 930, § 5, 8-10-83)
Sec. 2-365 Appropriations.
   After the passage of the appropriation ordinance, the Town Council may make
further or additional appropriations by ordinance, unless their result is to
increase the tax levy set under Indiana Code, 6-1.1-17. The Town Council may,
by ordinance, decrease any appropriation set by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 930, § 6, 8-10-83)
Sec. 2-366 Monthly Reports.
   The Clerk-Treasurer prepare an itemized monthly report for each department
stating in detail each item of expenditure and these reports shall be
distributed to each department head and the members of the Council.
(Ord. No. 930, § 7, 8-10-83)
Sec. 2-367 Bad Debt/Uncollectible Accounts Receivable Policy.
   a.   In the event that accounts receivable under this ordinance, as amended
from time to time, are not paid within the time frame determined by the Town,
its agent or designee; the same shall be deemed delinquent. A penalty of the
total account receivable bill for Emergency Medical Services shall be attached
as delinquent.
   b.   As used in this ordinance, the term "bad debt" shall have the following
definition: "a delinquent account receivable, for which the Town, agent or
designee of the Town has reasonably and diligently attempted collection, but to
which such collection remains unsuccessful.
   c.   The Town, its agent or designee shall prepare a semi-annual schedule of
bad debts. The semi-annual schedule shall consist of the following information:
      (1)   All bad debts, which are at least one hundred twenty (120) days
delinquent; and
      (2)   Documentation to define why the Town, its agent or designee has
determined same to be uncollectible.
   d.   The Town, its agent or designee shall generate a formal report setting
forth any and all efforts made to collect bad debts, and that such efforts have
been unsuccessful;
   e.   The Town, its agent or designee in said formal report shall state the
reasons that the Town, its agent or designee believes it is economically not
feasible to pursue further collection measures on the accounts receivable
listed as the aforementioned bad debts.
   f.   The semi-annual schedule described in paragraph c. of this ordinance
and the formal report described in paragraphs d. and e., listing delinquent
accounts, may be declared uncollectible, and the Town by resolution may
authorize the Town, its agent or designee to cease further collection
procedures after deeming documented accounts as bad debts, and may cause any
and all bad debts to be written off.
   g.   This ordinance is intended to satisfy the provisions of the Social
Security Administration and Federal Rules and Regulations.
(Ord. No. 1610, § 1, 4-14-04)
Sec. 2-368 Credit Cards.
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to utilize and accept credit
cards for the payment of fines, fees, costs, charges and services to the Town
consistent with the terms and provisions set forth hereafter. For such
purposes, the Town Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to establish accounts at,
enter into agreements with, and pay fees to Sand Ridge Bank for the specific
purpose of enabling the Town to accept Visa and MasterCard credit cards in the
conduct of monetary transaction by residents and citizens for the payment by
such residents and citizens of fines, fees, costs, charges and services to the
Town. For the purposes of this section, and consistent with the provisions of
Indiana Code § 36-1-8-11, “credit card” means, and shall include a credit card,
debit card or charge card.
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby directed to comply with and conform to
all applicable rules, regulations and requirements of the applicable Indiana
Code provisions as well as the Indiana State Board of Accounts in the
utilization and acceptance of credit cards for the payment of fines, fees,
costs, charges and services to the Town.
(Ord. No. 1665, §§ 1-2, 6-14-06)
Sec. 2-369 Erroneous or Irregular Variances, Losses, Shortages, and Thefts.
   a.   Purpose. This policy is intended to comply with the provisions of I.C.
5-11-1-27, and State Examiner Directive 2015-6 issued November 18, 2015, each
as currently in effect, or amended hereafter from time to time.
   b.   Materiality Threshold.
      (1)   The materiality threshold for the Town shall be Four Thousand
($4,000.00) Dollars. If the irregular variance, loss or shortage is not cash or
a cash-equivalent, the value of the item at the time of the variance, loss or
shortage shall be used to determine whether the materiality threshold has been
met.
      (2)   All irregular variances, losses or shortages of Four Thousand
($4,000.00) Dollars or more, shall be reported upon completion of the Bank
Reconciliations or within Thirty (30) Days of the monthly accounting period
closing, whichever occurs first, to the State of Indiana Board of Accounts. In
addition, irregular variances, losses or shortages which occur more often than
four (4) times in a month and which in the aggregate total the amount of Four
Thousand ($4,000.00) Dollars or more shall be reported immediately to the State
of Indiana Board of Accounts.
      (3)   Any theft of public funds or assets of any value upon discovery,
shall be immediately reported to the State of Indiana Board of Accounts and the
Office of the Lake County Prosecuting Attorney.
   c.   Knowledge of Misappropriation. A Public Officer who has knowledge of or
reasonable cause to believe that there has been a misappropriation and/or theft
of public funds or assets of the public office shall immediately send written
notice of the misappropriation and/or theft to the State of Indiana Board of
Accounts and the Office of the Lake County Prosecuting Attorney.
   d.   Maintenance of Documentation. The Town shall maintain records and
documentation concerning irregular variances, losses, shortages and thefts in
accordance with generally-accepted accounting principles and the required
minimum internal control standards established as required by the State of
Indiana Board of Accounts.
   e.   Resolution of Incidents Not Meeting the Materiality Threshold. The Town
shall immediately, upon discovery, investigate all irregular variances, losses,
or shortages regardless of whether such meet the materiality threshold
established by this Town policy. Upon conclusion of each such investigation,
the Town shall:
      (1)   Implement procedures designed to prevent the recurrence of such
incidents; and
      (2)   Take appropriate disciplinary action against the employee(s)/Town
Official(s) responsible for the incident.
(Ord. No. 1882, § 1, 4-13-16)
Sec. 2-369.1 Policies and Procedures for Authorized Financial Instruments for
Payments.
   a.   The following policies and procedures are hereby established for
authorized financial instruments for payment by and to the Town and its
utilities, with these policies and procedures superseding all other existing
and contravening terms and provisions. Further, all contrary terms and
provisions in any Town Ordinances or Town Code Provisions, or portions thereof,
in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed and deleted from the Town Code.
   b.   Payments may be made by or to the Town or its utilities for any lawful
purpose by any of the following financial instruments that the Town Council or
Board of the municipally-owned utility does not prohibit for use, namely:
      1.   Cash;
      2.   Check;
      3.   Bank draft;
      4.   Money order;
      5.   Bank card or credit card;
      6.   Electronic funds transfer;
      7.   Wire funds or automated clearing house (ACH); and
      8.   Any other financial instrument authorized by the Town Council, as
Fiscal Body.
   c.   Payments made by cash, as authorized in subsection b. hereinabove,
shall be limited to payments made from a petty cash fund as authorized in the
Code of Schererville Ordinances, subject to applicable Indiana Law and
regulations of the Indiana State Board of Accounts. (Ord. No. 1965, §§ 1, 2, 4-
14-21)
Division II. Temporary Loan Procedure.
Sec. 2-370 Authorization.
   It is found and declared that the Town is authorized to prescribe a specific
manner and procedure for the making of temporary loans and the issuance and
sale of temporary loan warrants pursuant to the provisions of the Indiana Code,
§ 36-1-3-6, in order to enable the Town to exercise its general power to borrow
money pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-1-4-9.
(Ord. No. 1117, § 1, 6-14-89)
Sec. 2-371 Warrant Ordinance Required.
   The Town Council may, by subsequent ordinance (each "Warrant Ordinance"),
authorize temporary loans in anticipation of current revenues of the Town
levied and in the course of collection for the fiscal year in which such loans
are made. A Warrant Ordinance authorizing loans under Section
2-371 must appropriate and pledge to their payment a sufficient amount of the
revenues in anticipation of which such loans are issued and out of which they
are payable. The loans must be evidenced by time warrants of the Town in terms
designating the nature of the consideration, the time and place payable, and
the revenues in anticipation of which such warrants are issued and out of which
they are payable.
(Ord. No. 1117, § 2, 6-14-89)
Sec. 2-372 Contents of Warrant Ordinance.
   A Warrant Ordinance adopted pursuant to this Ordinance must include the
following:
   a.   The particular funds of the Town and revenues in anticipation of which
the warrants are issued and out of which they are payable;
   b.   The terms of the warrants to be issued in evidence of the temporary
loans;
   c.   The time and manner, if any, of giving notice of the sale of the
warrants;
   d.   The manner in which the warrants will be sold; and
   e.   The maximum amount of warrants authorized to be issued.
(Ord. No. 1117, § 3, 6-14-89)
Sec. 2-373 Seal and Signatures Required.
   Warrants issued by the Town shall be executed by the President of the Town
Council and attested by the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town (the "Clerk-
Treasurer"), who shall also affix, or cause to be imprinted thereon, the seal
of the Town to each warrant.
(Ord. No. 1117, § 4, 6-14-89)
Sec. 2-374 Registration.
   Warrants issued and sold by the Town pursuant to this Ordinance are
negotiable with or without registration, as may be provided by the Warrant
Ordinance authorizing the issue of such warrants.
(Ord. No. 1117, § 5, 6-14-89)
Sec. 2-375 Interest.
   The warrants may bear interest at any rate and shall be sold for not less
than par value.
(Ord. No. 1117, § 6, 6-14-89)
Sec. 2-376 Sale of Warrants.
   The warrants may be sold:
   a.   at public sale in accordance with the provisions of Indiana Code, § 5-
1-11;
   b.   at negotiated sale to the Indiana Bond Bank pursuant to Indiana Code, §
5-1.5 or to The Hammond Local Public Improvement Bond Bank pursuant to Indiana
Code, § 5-1.4; or
   c.   in any other manner permitted by Indiana law.
   In any event, the Clerk-Treasurer shall manage and supervise the
preparation, advertisement, if any, negotiations and sale of the warrants
pursuant to this Ordinance and subject to the specific terms of the Warrant
Ordinance authorizing the issue of such warrants. The Clerk-Treasurer shall
also certify the amount that the purchaser is to pay, together with the name
and address of the purchaser; receive the amount of payment certified; deliver
the warrants to the purchaser; take a receipt for the warrants delivered; pay
the purchaser's payment into the treasury of the Town; and report the results
of the sale to the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 1117, § 7, 6-14-89)
Sec. 2-377 through Sec. 2-389 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 10. FUNDS.
Division I. Specific Funds.
Sec. 2-390 Property Seizure Fund.
   a.   A non-reverting fund known as the Town of Schererville Property Seizure
Fund is established.
(Ord. No. 1188, § 1, 7-9-91)
   b.   Money and property seized pursuant to Indiana Code, § 34-4-30.1-1, et
seq., shall be deposited in said Property Seizure Fund; subject to
appropriation by the Town Council pursuant to law.
(Ord. No. 1188, § 2, 7-9-91)
   c.   The Police Department of the Town of Schererville, by and through its
Police Chief, shall be charged with the responsibility of keeping an accurate
accounting of time and expense involved in seizing money and property defined
in the foregoing Indiana statutory sections, and further, shall provide such
accounting to the members of the Town Council as is requested and deemed
appropriate.
(Ord. No. 1188, § 3, 7-9-91)
Sec. 2-391 Equipment Fund for the Police Department.
   a.   There is established an Equipment Fund for the Police Department of the
Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 5-13-92)
   b.   Seventy five percent (75%) of all fees and monies collected pursuant to
Ord. No. 1084 (Fees to register electronic or video games set forth in
Chapter 4 of this Code), as amended from time to time, shall be deposited into
said Equipment Fund for the Police Department of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1208, § 2, 5-13-92)
   c.   The Police Equipment Fund can be utilized for the following purposes:
      1.   The purchase of equipment related to the operation of the
Schererville Police Department.
      2.   In the case of monies collected from application fees, which are
placed into the equipment fund, the Chief of Police is authorized to utilize
said funds for the payment of fees or costs which are generated through the
application process for the Schererville Police Department. These fees and
costs would include the cost of paperwork, testing, and any other costs
associated with the initial hiring process.
(Ord. No. 1208A, § 1, 3-12-97)
      3.   In addition to the purposes set forward by ordinance, the Police
Equipment Fund may be utilized for payment of expenses associated with the gun
range in Griffith, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1208B, § 1, 4-14-99)
      4.   The Police Equipment Fund may also be utilized for payment of any
capital improvements to the Police facility.
(Ord. No. 1208B, § 2, 4-14-99)
Sec. 2-392 Confidential Fund.
   a.   Policy. It is the policy of the Police Department to maintain stringent
control, via established accounting practices, over all confidential fund
moneys used by this agency and to ensure that the funds are used for authorized
purposes.
   b.   Definitions.
      1.   Confidential Fund. The agency accounting and banking system that
provides officers with investigative expense moneys.
      2.   Confidential Fund Custodian. The Evidence Manager will be
responsible for dispensing and monitoring the use of investigative funds by
officers.
   c.   Procedures.
      1.   Responsibilities.
         (a)   The Confidential Fund Custodian shall have the following
responsibilities with respect to the agency's confidential fund:
            (1)   Maintenance of the fund in accordance with all appropriate
laws and procedures;
            (2)   Proper disbursements and deposits;
            (3)   Bookkeeping and banking procedures;
            (4)   Maintenance of a file containing copies of all relevant fund
transaction documents; and
            (5)   Purging of the Confidential Fund Records in accordance with
State records retention provisions.
         (b)   An annual audit of the Confidential Fund shall be performed by
the State Board of Accounts in order to evaluate the continued integrity of the
fund and the need for any additional controls.
         (c)   The Confidential Fund Custodian shall make disbursements for the
Confidential Fund only to authorized personnel for the following purposes:
            (1)   Investigative funds for the purpose of illegal drugs,
contraband and other criminal evidence.
            (2)   Expenditures for authorized undercover operations.
            (3)   "Flash money" buy-bust.
         (d)   The Confidential Fund Custodian shall not be permitted to make
disbursements from the Confidential Fund to himself.
         (e)   Confidential Fund transaction records shall be stored in a
secured safe and access shall be restricted in accordance with applicable laws,
ordinances and agency procedures.
      2.   Withdrawals and expenditures from the Confidential Fund:
         (a)   Prior to the issuance of any money from the Confidential Fund,
an officer shall complete and submit to the Fund Custodian a written and
approved request for funds on a Confidential Fund Request Form (Addendum I).
         (b)   The Confidential Fund Custodian will have the requesting officer
sign the confidential fund ledger confirming funds were received by the
officer.
         (c)   A Division Commander or HIDTA Initiative Manager needing front
money for an operation may request use of confidential funds.
            (1)   The request must be for an active investigation.
            (2)   Shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
Schererville Police use.
            (3)   Shall not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for
Lake County HIDTA use, and must be reconciled within twenty-one (21) days with
the HIDTA fiscal officer.
         (d)   Confidential funds used as a "flash roll" or in "buy-bust"
situations shall be photocopied before being used. The photocopies must clearly
show:
            (1)   Denomination;
            (2)   U.S. Mint;
            (3)   Date of issue;
            (4)   Serial numbers.
         (e)   Confidential funds will not be given to any person that has not
signed a cooperating individual agreement (Addendum II).
         (f)   Suspects involved in buy-bust may be allowed to leave the
immediate area with the funds, only to allow for safety of informants, innocent
by-standers and other officers.
         (g)   The suspect must be apprehended and the confidential funds
received as soon as all threats to personal safety are gone. Flash rolls are
not to be given to a suspect at any time.
         (h)   Photocopy all U.S. currency taken from the suspect at the time
of apprehension for documentation in later court proceedings.
      3.   Accounting for expended funds:
         (a)   A ledger book shall be maintained by the Fund Custodian and
shall include:
            (1)   Date and case number;
            (2)   Copies of receipts;
            (3)   Type of investigation.
         (b)   The confidential ledger and all other documents are subject to
audit by the Chief of Police, the Schererville Metropolitan Police Commission
and/or the Clerk-Treasurer during normal business hours without prior notice.
         (c)   For all funds expended, the officer issuing payment shall ensure
that an appropriate receipt is obtained, unless such an action would jeopardize
a transaction or operation.
         (d)   All unexpended funds shall be returned to the Confidential Fund
Custodian by the officer within twenty-four (24) hours. The Fund Custodian
shall issue the officer a receipt acknowledging that such funds were unexpended
and a log entry shall be made into the Confidential Fund ledger as to their
redeposit in the fund.
         (e)   Each officer may maintain a personal file containing a record of
all Confidential Fund transactions and copies of all relevant receipts and
agency fund forms.
         (f)   Money drawn from the Confidential Fund shall not be spent for
any purpose other than for which it was requested unless granted by prior,
written approval from the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
      4.   Loss of confidential funds:
         (a)   The Confidential Funds Custodian shall immediately notify the
Chief of Police in writing of any confidential funds lost and/or unaccounted
for during a criminal investigation.
         (b)   The investigative report will detail the reason(s) for the loss.
         (c)   The Chief of Police may request an internal investigation to
determine neglect or wrong doing.
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1, 1-17-08)
Sec. 2-393 Firearms Training Fund.
   a.   The “Firearms Training Fund” established as a separate category in the
General Fund of the Town.
(Ord. No. 868, 8-26-81)
   b.   Funds may be expended by the Schererville Metropolitan Police
Department for the purpose of training law enforcement officers in the proper
use of firearms for other law enforcement duties and that said expenditures
shall be in accordance and compliance with established rules for accounting and
expenditure of funds as established by the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. No. 868, 8-26-81)
Sec. 2-394 Petty Cash Fund for the Police Department.
   a.   A Petty Cash Fund is established within the Police Department of the
Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana. In establishing the Petty Cash
Fund, the Police Department shall establish and maintain all statutory and
proper procedures for the transfer, use and expenditures of monies from said
Petty Cash Fund. (Ord. No. 989, § 1, 10-9-85)
      1.   Further, the established Town Metropolitan Police Department Petty
Cash Fund shall be drawn on an appropriate fund of the Town as determined by
the Town Council. The Town Police Department Petty Cash Fund shall be
maintained and administered in conformance with requirements of Indiana Code §
36-1-8-2, as well as the rules, regulation and requirements of the Indiana
State Board of Accounts, as each are amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 1967,
§ 1, 5-12-21)
      2.   The Chief of the Town Metropolitan Police Department shall designate
a Custodian of the Town Police Department Petty Cash Fund, which Custodian
shall use the Town Police Department Petty Cash Fund to pay for small and/or
emergency items of operating expense. Further, the Custodian of the Town Police
Department Petty Cash Fund shall create and/or supply receipt for each
expenditure made therefrom, and shall account for it in the same manner as is
required for other funds of the Town. (Ord. No. 1967, § 2, 5-12-21)
      3.   The Town Police Department Petty Cash Fund established and updated
by this section shall be maintained with a balance of one hundred dollars
($100.00). The designated Custodian of the Town Police Department Petty Cash
Fund shall file a voucher each month, with all original receipts totaling the
cash claimed expended being attached to said voucher, so that the Town Police
Department Petty Cash Fund can be reimbursed for expenditures made from it.
Reimbursement must be approved and made in the same manner as is required for
other expenditures of the Town. (Ord. No. 1967, § 3, 5-12-21)
   b.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and required to transfer
the necessary funds to said Petty Cash Fund of the Police Department of the
Town to effectuate the purposes required for said Petty Cash Fund, pursuant to
statutory requirements. (Ord. No. 989, § 2, 10-9-85)
Sec. 2-395 Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund.  49
   a.   There is established a fund known as the “Law Enforcement Continuing
Education Fund” for the purpose of purchases made by the Schererville Police
Department for equipment, supplies, continuing education, and law enforcement
training for the Police Department.
   b.   This fund shall be comprised of fees collected by the Schererville
Police Department from the following activities:
      1.   Vehicle Inspections.
      2.   Accident Reports.
      3.   Hand gun licenses and transfers.
      4.   Proceeds from the sale of confiscated weapons.
   c.   Before any money from this fund is spent, same must be first
appropriated according to State Statute.
   d.   The funds accumulated in the Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education
Fund established shall be used for the purpose of continuing education and
training of law enforcement officers employed by the Town of Schererville. All
expenditures must comply with the terms and provisions of the Statute by the
authority of which the Fund is created, and must be approved by the Chief of
Police.
   e.   The funds placed in the Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund
may not be withdrawn except for the purposed set forth herein, so long as this
ordinance remains in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 1371, 2-12-97)
 
Notes
49    I.C., §§ 9-29-4-2, 9-29-11-1, 35-47-2-3, 33-19-8-4 and 33-6-3-4, address
   deposits into a Continuing Education Fund Effective July 1, 1993.
Sec. 2-396 Ambulance Fund.
   a.   The Town Council of the Town of Schererville directs the Clerk-
Treasurer to create a separate fund for the ambulance service.
   b.   A levy of two cents (.02¢) per hundred dollar ($100.00) valuation be
assessed on real property within the Town of Schererville which will generate
sufficient revenue to fund the anticipated expenses of the ambulance service.
   c.   The Clerk-Treasurer advertised said levy along with that of the regular
proposed budget according to law.
   d.   This levy and proposed assessment may be amended hereafter from time to
time by the Town Council either by ordinance or by their annual budget
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 82-900, §§ 1-4, 8-11-82; Schererville Town Code, § 3-7-1)
Sec. 2-397 Clerk-Treasurer's Separate Fund.
   a.   There is established a separate fund for the Clerk-Treasurer of the
Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1209, § 1, 5-13-92)
   b.   Twenty-five percent (25%) of all fees and monies collected pursuant to
Ordinance No. 1084 (fees charged to register electronic or video games set
forth in
Chapter 4 of this Code) as amended from time to time, shall be deposited into
said separate fund for the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1209, § 2, 5-13-92)
Sec. 2-398 Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund for Park Purposes.
   a.   Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-10-3-22, there is established a special
non-reverting operating fund for park purposes.
(Ord. No. 1075, § 1, 7-13-88; Ord. No. 1075A, § 1, 6-13-01)
   b.   The money procured from fees at any park facilities and from any
donations designated for park purposes is to be deposited on a weekly basis in
the special non-reverting operating fund as directed by the Town of
Schererville Park Board.
(Ord. No. 1075, § 2, 7-13-88; Ord. No. 1075A, § 2, 6-13-01)
   c.   Any expenditures from the special non-reverting operating fund may be
made by appropriation; the money from the fund can be disbursed on claims
approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 1075, § 3, 7-13-88; Ord. No. 1075A, § 3, 6-13-01)
   d.   The money deposited in said fund shall be used for the following park
purposes:
      Advertising   Tickets
      Adult Education   Special Events
      Adult Fitness   Seasonal Activity
      Adult Recreation Leagues   Field Trips
      Youth Education   Senior Citizens Activities
      Youth Fitness   Summer Recreation
      Youth Recreation Leagues   Salaries Related to Park Programs
(Ord. No. 1075, § 4, 7-13-88; Schererville Town Code, § 3-11; Ord. No. 1075A, §
4, 6-13-01)
Sec. 2-399 Civic Expense Budget Account.
   a.   A civic expense budget account is established within the general budget
of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, to appropriate funds from
the General Fund of the Town to pay the expenses of a civic or governmental
nature incurred in promoting the best interest of the Town.
(Ord. No. 991, § 1, 11-14-85; Schererville Town Code, § 3-10-1)
   b.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and required to transfer
the necessary funds to said civic expense budget account to effectuate the
purposes required for said budget and the appropriations therefrom.
(Ord. No. 991, § 2, 11-14-85; Schererville Town Code, § 3-10-1)
   c.   The appropriations from said civic expense budget account established
to pay the expenses of a civic or governmental nature incurred in promoting the
best interest of the Town shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00)
for any calendar year.
(Ord. No. 991, § 3, 11-14-85; Schererville Town Code, § 3-10-1)
   d.   Appropriations from said civic expense budget account established to
pay the expenses of a civic or governmental nature incurred in promoting the
best interest of the Town shall not be made without prior authorization of the
Town Council.
(Ord. No. 991, § 4, 11-14-85; Schererville Town Code, § 3-10-1)
Sec. 2-400 Municipal Cumulative Development Fund.
   a.   There is hereby re-established and continued a Cumulative Capital
Development Fund (CCDF) for the Town of Schererville.
   b.   An ad valorem property tax levy is to be imposed upon all taxable real
and personal property within the taxing district of the Town of Schererville,
with the property tax revenues collected from said levy to be retained and
deposited into the Cumulative Capital Development Fund (CCDF) in conformance
with applicable law.
   c.   That the maximum rates of levy for the Town of Schererville Cumulative
Capital Development Fund (CCDF) will not exceed the following property tax rate
as follows:
      1.   Five cents ($.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of taxable real
and personal property within the Town of Schererville assessed valuation,
payable in 2022, and thereafter, continuing until reduced or rescinded.
      2.   Fifty (50) or more taxpayers in the taxing unit who will be affected
by the tax rate and corresponding levy may file a Petition with the Lake County
Auditor not later than noon, thirty (30) days after the publication of this
notice, setting forth their objections to the proposed Cumulative Fund. Upon
the filing of the petition, the County Auditor shall immediately certify the
same to the Department of Local Government Finance, at which time, the
Department will fix a date for and conduct a public hearing on the proposed
Cumulative Fund before issuing its approval, disapproval, or modification
thereof.
   d.   The Cumulative Capital Development Fund (CCDF) shall remain in full
force and effect until said fund is rescinded, repealed or abolished in
conformance with lawful procedures.
   e.   Funds collected and deposited into the Cumulative Capital Development
Fund (CCDF) will be specifically used as permitted by the provisions of I.C. §
6-1.1-41 to provide money for any purposes for which property taxes may be
imposed within the Town as authorized by I.C. § 36-9-15.5 for the following
purposes, namely:
      1.   To construct such streets, alleys, sidewalks, or thoroughfares as
required, and to maintain the same, and further, to fund any and all related
purposes consistent thereto.
      2.   To purchase, lease or pay all or part of the purchase price of motor
vehicles for the use of the Police and Fire Departments, or both, including
ambulance and fire-fighting vehicles, with all necessary equipment.
      3.   Any and all other purposes allowed by I.C. § 36-9-15.5-2, as the
same may be amended from time to time hereafter.
   f.   Notwithstanding the purposes set forth hereinabove for the use of the
Town of Schererville Cumulative Capital Development Fund (CCDF) in this
section, the property tax funds collected, deposited and accumulated in the
Cumulative Capital Development Fund (CCDF) may be expended for purposes other
than those specifically set forth herein if the purpose is to protect the
public health, welfare or safety in an emergency situation which demands and
requires immediate action. The Cumulative Capital Development Funds (CCDFs) of
the Town may be utilized under the authority of this subsection only after the
Town Council, as Legislative Body, and the Town Council President declare that
the public health, welfare or safety is in immediate danger which requires the
expenditure of Cumulative Capital Development Funds collected and accumulated
for such emergency purposes.
(Ord. No. 1215, § 1, § 2, 9-9-92; Ord. No. 1734, §§ 1-6, 7-9-08; Ord. No. 1813,
3-28-12; Ord. No. 1837, §§ 1-6, 7-10-13; Ord. No. 1885, §§ 1-6, 7-13-16; Ord.
No. 1936, § 3, 3-20-19; Ord. No. 1964, §§ 1-6, 3-10-21)
Sec. 2-401 Employee Benefit Fund.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall create a non-reverting fund to be known as "The
Town of Schererville Employee Benefit Fund" in a financial institution of the
Clerk-Treasurer's choice in which to deposit funds which will be employed to
provide and pay for benefits under this (self-funded employee benefit) plan
further addressed in Section 2-203 of this Code. This fund shall be an interest
bearing account at the highest possible interest available under the terms of
this plan. All such earned interest shall belong to said fund in its entirety.
Monies which may be paid into this fund include monies assessed from Town
Departments and monies collected from employees under a plan whereby employees
may be required to contribute to the fund in order to belong to the plan and
benefit from it. Monies may only be expended from this fund for the payment of
claims arising from retained risk, premiums for life insurance, and any stop
loss coverages deemed necessary, and all incidental costs associated with
health, life, or other insurance policies are in force for the Town of
Schererville and its employees.
(Ord. No. 1093, § 4, 12-14-88)
Sec. 2-402 Special Vehicle Inspection Fund.
   a.   The revenue from the inspection fees addressed in
Chapter 4 of this Code, shall be deposited in a special vehicle inspection
fund.
   b.   The fiscal body (Town Council) must appropriate the money collected
from the inspections only for law enforcement purposes.
(Ord. No. 1069, § 1 [a] [b], 6-8-88)
Sec. 2-403 Other Funds Recognized and Continued.
   a.   The Local Road and Street Fund (LRS) is recognized and continued for
the purpose of receiving applicable state funds and for expenditures permitted
by statute.
(I.C., § 8-14-2-1, et seq.)
   b.   The Police Pension Fund is recognized and continued for purposes
permitted in Indiana Code, § 36-8-6-1, et seq., as to the 1925 fund, and
Indiana Code, § 36-8-8-1, et seq., as to the 1977 fund.
   c.   The Motor Vehicle Highway Fund (MVH) is recognized and continued for
purposes of receiving applicable state funds and for the expenditures permitted
by statute (I.C., § 8-14-1-1, et seq.).
   d.   The Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund (CCIF) is recognized and
continued for the purposes of receiving and expending cigarette taxes pursuant
to Indiana Code, § 36-9-16-1, et seq.
   e.   The following other funds are recognized and continued:
      1.   General Fund.
      2.   Park General Fund (see also §
5-48).
      3.   Sewer Operation.
      4.   Sewer Depreciation.
      5.   Sewer Building and Sinking Fund.
      6.   Water Operation.
      7.   Water Depreciation.
      8.   Water Deposits.
Sec. 2-404 Equipment Fund for Fire Department.  47
   a.   There is established an Equipment Fund for the Fire Department of the
Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 4-14-93)
   b.   All fees and monies collected pursuant to the Schedule of Service
Charges (which is on file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer and open for
public inspection during regular business hours) and collected pursuant to this
Ordinance, as amended from time to time, shall be deposited into said Equipment
Fund for the various purposes of the Fire Department of the Town of
Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1231A, § 2, 6-9-93)
   c.   Monies transferred from the Fire Department and Ambulance Department of
the General Fund may be deposited from time to time, into the Fire Department
Equipment Fund and commingled with other sources of revenue as heretofore
provided in Ordinance No. 1231.
(Ord. No. 123IB, § 1, 12-29-93)
   d.   The purpose for which expenditures can be made from said Fire
Department Equipment Fund shall be for the acquisition of Fire Department
related equipment, specifically including the acquisition of Fire Firefighters'
Protective Clothing Suits a/k/a "Turn-Out Gear".
(Ord. No. 1231B, § 2, 12-29-93)
   e.   The existence of said Fund is perpetual until terminated by subsequent
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 123IB, § 3, 12-29-93)
 
Notes
47    I.C., §§ 36-1-32 and 36-1-3-6, confer powers to local government needed for
   effective operation of government.
Sec. 2-405 Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund for the Police Department
D.A.R.E. Program.
   a.   There is created and established a special non-reverting operating fund
for monies received for the benefit of the D.A.R.E. Program.
   b.   Any expenditures from the special non-reverting operating fund may be
made without appropriation; subject, however, to the appropriate and requisite
claim forms approved and used by the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of
Schererville.
   c.   The money deposited in said fund shall be used for the following
D.A.R.E. related programs:
      A.   Adult Education
      B.   Youth Education
      C.   Tickets
      D.   Special Events
      E.   Seasonal Activity
      F.   Field Trips
      G.   Summer Recreation
(Ord. No. 1336, §§ 1-3, 5-8-96)
Sec. 2-406 Schererville E.M.S. Fees Deposited Into Ambulance Fund.
   a.   Seventy-five Dollars ($75.00) shall be paid from each and every
ambulance run made by the Schererville Fire Department and shall be utilized
for the following purposes:
      1.   Training of E.M.S. personnel;
      2.   Hiring of additional E.M.S. personnel;
      3.   Land acquisition;
      4.   Building of necessary structures for the purpose of housing;
      5.   E.M.S. Personnel;
      6.   Equipment for E.M.S.
(Ord. No. 1374, §§ 1-2, 3-12-97)
   b.   The cost of ambulance runs collected by the Town of Schererville,
Indiana shall be deposited in the Ambulance Fund which is addressed in Sec. 2-
396 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1450, § 2, 1999)  51
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1450 did not contain adateof passage. Ord. No. 1450
51 rescinded the EMS Fund addressed in Ord. No. 1374 and 1374A; however, the
   codifiers retained the ambulance changes and purposes of utilizing such funds.
Sec. 2-407 Building Fund.
   a.   There is established a special fund which shall be known as the
"Building Fund."
   b.   "Capital Improvements" are defined as structures constructed for the
benefit of the Town of Schererville which have a value in excess of two hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), exclusive of land.
   c.   Funds shall be paid into aforesaid "Building Fund" as determined
available by the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
   d.   The funds deposited shall be used for the following purposes:
      1.   Payment for preliminary engineering and plans related to the
construction of buildings and facilities on behalf of the Town of Schererville,
Indian, the projected cost of aforesaid buildings and facilities being in
excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).
      2.   For the construction costs associated with any and all capital
improvements as defined in this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1391, § § 1-4, 9-10-97)
Sec. 2-408 77th Avenue Road Improvement Fund.
   a.   There is established the special fund which shall be known as the "77th
Avenue Road Improvement Fund."
   b.   Said fund shall be financed or funded through the collection of one-
half (1/2) of all fines paid into the Schererville Town Court regarding
violations of the overweight vehicle ordinance on 77th Avenue.
   c.   The "77th Avenue Road Improvement Fund" shall be utilized for the
specific purpose of maintenance and improvements to 77th Avenue as deemed
necessary by the Town.
(Ord. No. 1393, § § 1-3, 9-10-97)
   d.   Fifty percent (50%) of any and all fines collected by the Schererville
Town Court for violation of the weight restriction on 77th Avenue shall be paid
into the "77th Avenue Road Improvement Fund."
   e.   The remaining fifty percent (50%) of any and all fines collected for
violation of aforesaid ordinance shall be paid into the "Police Equipment
Fund."
   f.   The court shall collect and disburse court costs as previously
established by statute.
(Ord. No. 1394, §§ 1-3, 9-10-97)
Sec. 2-409 Police Training Fund.
   a.   There is established the special fund which shall be known as the
"Schererville Police Department Training Fund."
   b.   This fund shall receive the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) from
each and every deferred prosecution fee collected by the Schererville Town
Court regarding ordinance violations; and furthermore, any monies that were
previously collected for aforesaid pre-trial diversion program and paid into
the L.E.C.E.F. Fund shall be transferred to this find instanter.
   c.   The funds collected shall be utilized for the training of police
department personnel.
(Ord. No. 1395, § § 1-3, 9-10-97)
Sec. 2-410 Downtown Revitalization Fund.
   a.   There is established a special fund which shall be known as the
Schererville Downtown Revitalization Fund.
   b.   The funds collected by the Schererville Downtown Revitalization
Committee shall be deposited in aforesaid fund and shall be utilized for the
purpose of redevelopment of the Schererville downtown area.
(Ord. No. 1397, § § 1-2, 10-8-97)
Sec. 2-411 Asset Seizure Fund.
   a.   The money in question shall be placed into the "Asset Seizure" fund of
the Police Department budget.
   b.   The Schererville Police Department shall then be authorized to deposit
the seized funds into an interest-bearing account with an approved financial
institution.
   c.   The Chief of Police shall have the discretion not to deposit funds into
an interest-bearing account if there exists a valid reason for them to remain
in the evidentiary room, such as a chain of custody situation.
   d.   The funds shall remain in the interest-bearing account until an order
is received from a court with jurisdiction over the funds as to what party
holds an ownership interest in the monies.
(Ord. No. 1419, §§ 1-4, 5-13-98)
Sec. 2-412 Petty Cash Fund for Town Court.
   a.   A Petty Cash Fund is established within the Town Court of the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana. In establishing the Petty Cash Fund, the
Town Court shall establish and maintain all statutory and proper procedures for
the transfer, use and expenditures of monies from said Petty Cash Fund.
   b.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and required to transfer
the necessary funds to said Petty Cash Fund of the Town Court to effectuate the
purposes required for said Petty Cash Fund, pursuant to statutory requirements.
(Ord. No. 1442, §§ 1-2, 10-14-98)
   c.   The Schererville Town Court Petty Cash Fund shall be established in the
amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   d.   The Schererville Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and required
to transfer the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to said Petty Cash Fund
of the Town Court to effectuate the purposes required for said Petty Cash Fund,
pursuant to statutory requirements.
(Ord. No. 1442A, §§ 1-2, 4-14-99)
Sec. 2-413 Petty Cash Fund for Park Department.
   a.   A Petty Cash Fund is established within the Park Department of the Town
of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana. In establishing the Petty Cash Fund, the
Park Department shall establish and maintain all statutory and proper
procedures for the transfer, use and expenditures of monies from said Petty
Cash Fund.
   b.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and required to transfer
five hundred dollars ($500.00) to said Petty Cash Fund of the Park Department
to effectuate the purposes required for said Petty Cash Fund, pursuant to
statutory requirements.
(Ord. No. 1456, §§ 1-2, 4-14-99)
Sec. 2-414 Petty Cash Fund for Clerk-Treasurer's Office.
   a.   A Petty Cash Fund is established within the Clerk-Treasurer's Office of
the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana. In establishing the Petty Cash
Fund, the Clerk-Treasurer's Office shall establish and maintain all statutory
and proper procedures for the transfer, use and expenditures of monies from
said Petty Cash Fund.
   b.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and required to transfer
three hundred dollars ($300.00) to said Petty Cash Fund of the Clerk-
Treasurer's Office to effectuate the purposes required for said Petty Cash
Fund, pursuant to statutory requirements.
(Ord. No. 1457, §§ 1-2, 4-14-99)
Sec. 2-415 Clerk's Record Perpetuation Fund.
   a.   There is established a fund, designated specifically as the Clerk's
Record Perpetuation Fund.
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-8-00)
   b.   The established Clerk's Record Perpetuation Fund will be utilized when
a defendant fails to notify the Schererville Town Court of the intention to
either pay or deny the charge against said defendant, or when a defendant fails
to pay a charge, fine or penalty levied against said defendant, resulting in
the citation issued by the Schererville Town Court being transmitted to the
Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles for suspension of driver's license privileges.
When the citation is paid by a defendant thereafter, it is necessary for the
Schererville Town Court to transmit a prescribed form to the Indiana Bureau of
Motor Vehicles by either first class mail or facsimile transmission for
reinstatement of the driver's license privileges of any suspended person. A fee
is hereby assessed in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each
transmission to the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles regarding suspensions or
reinstatements of driver's license privileges. The fee charged for such
purposes shall be collected by the Clerking Staff of the Schererville Town
Court, and said monies collected shall be deposited in the established Clerk's
Record Perpetuation Fund under the control and authority of the Clerk-Treasurer
of the Town of Schererville. All said fees shall be remitted to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer on a regular basis as the same are collected by the Schererville Town
Court.
(Ord. No. 1483, § 2, 3-8-00)
   c.   The funds deposited into the Clerk's Record Perpetuation Fund
established hereby may only be expended after appropriation for Court record
keeping improvements and equipment. All expenditures from the Clerk's Record
Perpetuation Fund shall be processed, appropriated, claimed and/or allowed in
the same manner as all other claims of the Town of Schererville, in conformance
with applicable law.
(Ord. No. 1483, § 3, 3-8-00)
Sec. 2-416 Supplemental Public Defender Fund.
   a.   There is established a Supplemental Public Defender Fund for the
Schererville Town Court. This Supplemental Public Defender Fund may be used to
supplement the provision for court-appointed legal services, and may not be
used to replace other funding of court-appointed legal services.
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 7-12-00)
   b.   The monies deposited in the established Supplemental Public Defender
Fund at the end of each year shall not revert to any other fund, but shall
continue to remain in the Supplemental Public Defender Fund for the purposes
contemplated by law, namely, Public Defender Services, fees, costs, and the
like.
(Ord. 1497, § 2, 7-12-00)
   c.   Monies deposited into the Supplemental Public Defender Fund are those
monies which are required to be paid by a defendant at any time during
prosecution for a misdemeanor criminal offense once the Town Court makes a
finding that such defendant has the ability to pay the costs of representation,
and in the manner prescribed by Indiana Code, § 33-9-11.5-6 and § 33-9-11.5-7,
as each are amended from time to time. The costs collected may include
reasonable attorney's fees in the event a public defender was appointed by the
Court. All fees collected hereby shall be deposited into the Supplemental
Public Defender Fund established herein.
(Ord. 1497, § 3, 7-12-00)
Sec. 2-417 Supplemental Adult Probation Services Fund.
   a.   There is established a Supplemental Adult Probation Services Fund for
the Schererville Town Court. This Supplemental Adult Probation Services Fund
may be used to supplement probation services and to provide the salaries for
probation officers within the Probation Department of the Town of Schererville,
and may not be used to replace other funding of probation services.
(Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 7-12-00)
   b.   The monies deposited in the Supplemental Adult Probation Services Fund
shall not revert to any other fund at the end of a fiscal year, but shall
continue to remain in the Supplemental Adult Probation Services Fund for the
purposes contemplated by law, namely, supplemental probation services and
salaries for probation officers.
(Ord. No. 1499, § 2, 7-12-00)
   c.   Monies deposited into the Supplemental Adult Probation Services Fund
are those monies which the Town Court shall order a person convicted of a
proper level of crime to pay to the Town Probation Department as a Probation
User's Fee and/or a Probation Monitoring Fee, as provided by applicable law, as
amended from time to time. The fees assessed and collected may include an
initial Probation User's Fee and subsequent monthly Probation User's Fees, and/
or a Probation Monitoring Fee, as provided by applicable law, as amended from
time to time. All Probation User's Fees and Probation Monitoring Fees collected
hereby under Orders of the Judge of the Schererville Town Court shall be
deposited into the Supplemental Adult Probation Services Fund established
herein.
(Ord. No. 1499, § 3, 7-12-00; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 4-11-01)
Sec. 2-418 Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is established for the Town Court of the Town of Schererville, a
Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund pursuant to the provisions of
Indiana Code, §§ 36-1-3-1, et seq., as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1505, § 1, 12-9-00)
   b.   The newly established Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund
for the Town Court shall be funded with the monitoring fees paid to the Town
Court by the Prosecuting Attorney for the 31st Judicial District of Indiana for
the services rendered and provided to the Town Court to the Prosecuting
Attorney for monitoring each participant in the deferral program.
(Ord. No. 1505, § 2, 12-9-00)
   c.   The Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund established hereby
shall be reviewed annually by the Town Council. The funds directed to be
deposited into the Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund established
hereby shall include fees paid by participants of the Deferral Program, as
determined by the Town Court, as well as interest accrued and earned on the
account in which said funds are deposited. The funds directed to be deposited
into the Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund established hereby
shall be utilized for the use of the Town Court for educational seminars for
Town Court personnel, for payment of expenses incurred in relationship to the
administration of the monitoring of participants in the Deferral Program of the
Prosecuting Attorney, or for any related purpose.
(Ord. No. 1505, § 3, 12-9-00; Ord. No. 1531, § 1, 6-13-01)
   d.   The Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund established hereby
shall continue as a non-reverting fund until or unless amended or repealed by
subsequent ordinance. The fund balance maintained in the Special Deferral
Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund established hereby shall be non-reverting at the
end of each calendar year. In the event that the Special Deferral Program Fee
Non-Reverting Fund is repealed, it is no longer utilized or needed for such
purposes, the funds within the Special Deferral Program Fee Non-Reverting Fund
shall, at that time, be deposited into the General Fund of the Town.
(Ord. No. 1505, § 4, 12-9-00)
Sec. 2-419 Safe Kids Chapter Fund.
   a.   There is established a special fund which shall be known as the
Schererville Safe Kids Chapter Fund.
   b.   All monies collected by way of grants or donations and deposited in the
Schererville Safe Kids Chapter Fund shall be utilized for the purposes of
benefitting or enhancing the Child Safety Seat Program of the Town of
Schererville and for the purpose of helping to reduce unintentional injuries
and deaths to children under the age of 14.
(Ord. No. 1532, 6-13-01)
Sec. 2-419.1 Police Department Special Grants Fund.
   a.   There is established a Schererville Police Department Special Grants
Non-Reverting Fund pursuant to the provisions of Indiana Code, §§ 36-1-3-1, et
seq., as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1534, § 1, 8-8-01)
   b.   The newly established Schererville Police Department Special Grants
Fund shall be funded with special grants received by the Schererville Police
Department.
(Ord. No. 1534, § 2, 8-8-01)
   c.   The Schererville Police Department Special Grants Fund established
hereby shall be reviewed annually by the Town Council. The funds directed to be
deposited into the Schererville Police Department Special Grants Fund
established hereby shall be utilized solely for the purposes set out in each
special grant received by the Schererville Police Department.
(Ord. No. 1534, § 3, 8-8-01)
Sec. 2-419.2 Deposits Non-Reverting Escrow Fund.
   a.   There is established a Deposits Non-Reverting Escrow Fund for the Town
which shall be commonly known as the Deposits Escrow Fund. The established
Deposits Escrow Fund shall be used as a holding fund for all miscellaneous
short-term deposits made to the Town including, but not limited to, park
program deposits, refundable park reservation deposits, special use temporary
water meter deposits, and any and all other similar such deposits made to the
town as determined by the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be deposited into said
fund.
   b.   All funds deposited into the Deposits Escrow Fund shall be retained and
held in said fund until such time as said temporary deposits are to be returned
in full or in part to the depositor, or to a specific Town department to which
payment is to be made for programs provided to the depositor, or as payment of
damages and/or clean up of town property following the use of town property by
said depositor. The release of any temporary deposits held and maintained in
the Deposits Escrow Fund shall be released and/or paid upon written
verification from the department head of the town department affected and
involved in the deposit made. The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall determine the
appropriate form of written documentation required for distribution of said
funds.
   c.   The Deposits Escrow Fund shall further be required to be held,
maintained and managed in conformance with the applicable requirements of the
Indiana State Board of Accounts, and all regulations and requirements of said
entity as the same may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1580 §§ 1-3, 4-9-03)
Sec. 2-419.3 U.S. Postage Stamp Fund.
   a.   Pursuant to the provision of the Indiana Code §§ 36-1-3, et seq. (“The
Indiana Home Rule Act”) there is established a special non-reverting U.S.
Postage Stamp Fund for the Town, which special non-reverting fund shall be
known as the U.S. Postage Stamp Fund.
   b.   The U.S. Postage Fund established hereby will be initially funded by
and from the General Fund of the Town, which funds shall be utilized to
purchase U.S. postage stamps from the United States Postal Service at the
prevailing first class postage rate. That the U.S. postage stamps purchased
through the U.S. Postage Stamp Fund established hereby shall be available for
sale and purchase by residents of the Town, who shall be permitted to
repurchase same at cost and with no income or profit to the Town. It is
recognized specifically that this is a courtesy and benefit to the residents of
the Town who utilize the Town administrative offices, including that of the
Clerk-Treasurer, for business purposes, and that said postage stamp
availability is a substantial convenience and benefit to said residents.
   c.   All purchase activities by the Town of postage stamps from the United
States Postal Service shall be consistent with the rules, regulations and
requirements of the United States Postal Service. That all monies collected
from the sale and purchase of postage of the town offices shall be deposited
into the U.S. Postage Stamp Fund established hereby for the purpose of
purchasing additional postage stamp books from the United States Postal Service
on an on-going basis.
   d.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible and administer the sale
of postage stamps to residents of the Town through the officers of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer, and shall be responsible for all receipts, accounting, and
procedures required by the Indiana State Board of Accounts, for the same, as
such procedures are amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1584 § 1-4, 5-14-03)
Sec. 2-419.4 Special Newspaper Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Special Newspaper Non-Reverting Fund,
which shall be a non-reverting fund under the rules and regulations and
requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the Indiana Code, as amended
from time to time as well as the administrative rules and requirements of the
Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   Any monies collected from the sale of advertisement in the Town's
quarterly newspaper shall be deposited into the Newspaper Non-Reverting Fund,
as well as any and all other monies that are specifically identified to be used
in connection with said quarterly newspaper.
   c.   The monies deposited into the Newspaper Non-Reverting Fund shall be
utilized and spent only to supplement the costs incurred in connection with
publication of the Town's quarterly newspaper, and all activities related
thereto, as approved and authorized by the Town Council.
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish said special Newspaper Non-
Reverting Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as
amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1622, §§ 1-4, 7-14-04)
Sec. 2-419.5 Special Town Ambulance Equipment Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established a Special Town Ambulance Equipment Non-
Reverting Fund for purposes of establishing a maintenance and capital
improvement funding source for Town ambulance equipment, pursuant to the
provisions of Indiana Code 36-1-3-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   b.   The established Special Town Ambulance Equipment Non-Reverting Fund
shall be funded from ambulance service rate fees paid to the Town for the
provision of ambulance services, as specified in the ambulance user fee/rate
ordinance, as amended from time to time.
   c.   The funds deposited into the Special Town Ambulance Equipment Non-
Reverting Fund established hereby shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the
Town Council. Funds collected and deposited into the Special Ambulance
Equipment Non-Reverting Fund established hereby shall be utilized solely for
maintenance and/or capital improvements for Town ambulance equipment. Said
funds are to be used as indicated, and as authorized and approved by the Town
Council.
   d.   The established Special Town Ambulance Equipment Non-Reverting Fund
established hereby shall continue as a Non-Reverting Fund until or unless
amended or repealed by subsequent Ordinance of the Town. The fund balance in
the Special Town Ambulance Equipment Non-Reverting Fund established hereby
shall be non-reverting at each calendar year end. In the event that the Special
Non-Reverting Fund is terminated by repeal or amendatory ordinance, the funds
contained therein at the time of termination of the Non-Reverting Fund by
repeal or ordinance shall be deposited into the General Fund of the Town.
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1, 4-13-05)
Sec. 2-419.6 Major Moves Construction Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Town of Schererville Major Moves
Construction Fund, which shall be a special revenue fund under the rules,
regulations, and requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the Indiana
Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   All monies and funds received by the Town from the Major Moves
Construction Fund distribution from the Auditor of Lake County, Indiana, shall
be deposited into the Town of Schererville Major Moves Construction Fund.
   c.   The monies deposited into the Town of Schererville Major Moves
Construction Fund shall be utilized and expended only for the purposes set
forth in Indiana Code § 8-14-16-5, as the same exists presently, or as amended
from time to time hereafter.
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish said Town of Schererville Major
Moves Construction Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable law,
as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1681, §§ 1-4, 9-27-06)
Sec. 2-419.7 Special Town Pennsy Greenway Bike Trail Project Non-Reverting
Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established for the Town a Special Town Pennsy Greenway
Bike Trail Non-Reverting Fund for purposes of establishing a purchase,
operation, maintenance and capital improvement funding source for the Pennsy
Greenway Bike Trail being developed in Town, pursuant to the provisions of
Indiana Code § 36-1-3-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   b.   The established Special Town Pennsy Greenway Bike Trail Project Non-
Reverting Fund shall be funded from the lease rental payments to the Town by
Lamar Sign Co., Inc., for lease rental obligations for use in the purchase,
operation, maintenance, and capital improvement of said Pennsy Greenway Bike
Trail Project, as well as for all other bike trails and pedestrian facilities
in the Town purchased, operated, maintained and utilized by the residents of
the Town of Schererville under the jurisdictional authority of the Town
Department of Parks and Recreation, all as determined by the Town Council.
   c.   The funds deposited into the Special Town Pennsy Greenway Bike Trail
Non-Reverting Fund established hereby shall be reviewed on an annual basis by
the Town Council. Funds collected and deposited into the Special Pennsy
Greenway Bike Trail Project Non-Reverting Fund established hereby shall be
utilized solely for purchase, operation, maintenance and/or capital
improvements for the Pennsy Greenway Bike Trail, or any other bike trail or
pedestrian facilities in the Town of Schererville under the jurisdictional
authority of the Town Department of Parks and Recreation. Said funds are to be
used as indicated, and as authorized and approved by the Town Council.
   d.   The established Special Town Pennsy Greenway Bike Trail Non-Reverting
Fund established hereby shall continue as a Non-Reverting Fund until or unless
amended or repealed by subsequent ordinance of the Town. The fund balance in
the Special Town Pennsy Greenway Bike Trail Non-Reverting Fund established
hereby shall be non-reverting at each calendar year end. In the event that the
Special Non- Reverting Fund is terminated by repealer or amendatory ordinance,
the funds contained therein at the time of termination of the Non-Reverting
Fund by repealer or amendatory ordinance shall be deposited into the General
Fund of the Town.
(Ord. No. 1683, §§ 1-4, 9-27-06; Ord. No. 1683A, §§ 2, 3, 5-11-11)
Sec. 2-419.8 Special Non-Reverting Stormwater Permit Fee Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Town Special Non-Reverting Stormwater
Permit Fee Fund, which shall be a special revenue fund under the rules,
regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana Law, including the Indiana
Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   All stormwater permit fees collected under the Storm Drainage
Regulations Control Ordinance of the Town, as amended from time to time, shall
be deposited into the Special Non-Reverting Stormwater Permit Fee Fund. The
stormwater permit fees collected under the provisions of the Town Storm
Drainage Regulations Control Ordinance and deposited into the Special Non-
Reverting Stormwater Permit Fee Fund shall be utilized and expended for the
administrative review, inspection and documentation reporting purposes set
forth in the Storm Drainage Regulations Control Ordinance, as amended from time
to time, and no other.
   c.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish the Special Non-Reverting
Stormwater Permit Fee Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable
law, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1710, §§ 1-3, 7-11-07)
Sec. 2-419.9 High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Program Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Town HIDTA Program Special Revenue Non-
Reverting Fund, which shall be a special revenue fund under the rules,
regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana Law, including the Indiana
Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   All grant monies issued to the Town, as the fiduciary agent and
sponsoring agency for the Lake County, Indiana High Intensity Drug Trafficking
Area (HIDTA) Program, shall be deposited into the HIDTA Program Special Revenue
Non-Reverting Fund.
   c.   The monies from the ONDCP meant for the Lake County, Indiana HIDTA
Program shall be deposited into the HIDTA Program Special Revenue Non-Reverting
Fund, and said funds shall be utilized and expended only as permitted and
authorized by the rules and regulations of the ONDCP for the Lake County,
Indiana HIDTA Program, consistent with the applicable rules, regulations and
requirements of applicable Indiana Law, including the Indiana Code, as amended
from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and requirements of the
Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish the HIDTA Program Special Revenue
Non-Reverting Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as
amended from time to time.
   e.   The HIDTA Program Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund shall be
established and shall exist as long as the Town continues to act as the
fiduciary agent and sponsoring agency for the Lake County, Indiana, High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Program. In the event that the Lake
County, Indiana HIDTA Program is terminated, or the Town does not continue to
act as the fiduciary agent and sponsoring agency for the Lake County, Indiana
HIDTA Program, then upon payment of all valid and proper expenses required to
be paid and made from the special non-reverting fund, the special non-reverting
fund shall be closed, and all funds remaining, if any, shall be transferred to
the appropriate agency or authority under the then-applicable rules,
regulations or policies of the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP).
(Ord. No. 1717, §§ 1-5, 10-10-07)
Sec. 2-419.10 Improvement Inspection Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Town Improvement Inspection Fee Special
Non-Reverting Fund, which shall be a special non-reverting revenue fund under
the rules, regulations, and requirements of applicable Indiana Law, including
the Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the Administrative
Rules and Requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   All improvement inspection fees paid pursuant to the provisions of the
Town Subdivision Control Ordinance, as amended from time to time, in an amount
equal to two percent (2%) of the cost of such improvements, as estimated by the
Town Engineer, used to defray a portion of the costs incurred by the Town in
the administration, planning, legal, engineering, inspection, review, and all
other direct or indirect expenses incurred by the Town in connection with
review and inspection of the installation of all improvements required by the
Town Subdivision Control Ordinance, as amended from time to time, shall be
deposited into the Improvement Inspection Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund, and
said funds shall be utilized and expended only as permitted and authorized by
the provisions of the Town Subdivision Control Ordinance, as amended from time
to time, including, Section
10-274. Such funds deposited pursuant to the provisions set forth herein into
the Improvement Inspection Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund shall be utilized and
expended only as permitted by the specific provisions of Town Subdivision
Control Ordinance, as amended from time to time, to pay the costs incurred by
the Town in the administration, planning, legal, engineering, inspection,
review, and all other direction or indirection expenses incurred by the Town in
connection with review and inspection of the installation of all improvements
required by the Town Subdivision Control Ordinance. Further, such funds shall
be utilized and expended only as permitted and authorized consistent with the
applicable rules, regulations, and requirements of applicable Indiana Law,
including the Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the
Administrative Rules and Requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   c.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish the Improvement Inspection Fee
Special Non-Reverting Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable
law, as amended from time to time, as set forth herein above, and in the Town
Subdivision Control Ordinance regarding such fund, as amended from time to
time.
(Ord. No. 1718, §§ 1-3, 11-20-07)
Sec. 2-419.11 High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Administrative
Revenue Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Town HIDTA Administrative Revenue Fee
Special Non-Reverting Fund, which shall be a special non-reverting fund under
the rules, regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana Law, including
the Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative
rules and requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   The administration fee paid and distributed to the Town, as the
fiduciary agent and sponsoring agency for the Lake County, Indiana High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Program, as the same is paid and
received by the Town, shall be deposited into the HIDTA Administrative Revenue
Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund.
   c.   The administrative fee paid by the ONDCP to the Town pursuant to the
Town's Fiduciary Agreement with the Lake County, Indiana HIDTA Executive Board
shall be deposited into the HIDTA Administrative Revenue Fee Special Non-
Reverting Fund, and said administrative fee shall be utilized and expended as
determined appropriate and authorized by the Town Council, consistent with the
applicable rules, regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana Law,
including the Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the
administrative rules and requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish the HIDTA Administrative Revenue
Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund in conformance and compliance with all
applicable law, as amended from time to time, as set forth.
   e.   The HIDTA Administrative Revenue Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund shall
be established and shall exist as long as the Town continues to act as the
fiduciary agent and sponsoring agency for the Lake County, Indiana, High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Program pursuant to its approved
Fiduciary Agreement. In the event that the Lake County, Indiana HIDTA Program
is terminated, or the Town does not continue to act as the fiduciary agent and
sponsoring agency for the Lake County, Indiana HIDTA Program, then upon payment
of all valid and proper expenses required and authorized by the Town Council to
be paid and made from the HIDTA Administrative Revenue Fee Special Non-
Reverting Fund, the special non-reverting fund shall be closed, and all funds
remaining, if any, shall be transferred to the fund or funds authorized and
approved by the Town Council for transfer of same.
(Ord. No. 1721, §§ 1-5, 12-12-07)
Sec. 2-419.12 Farmers’ Market Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Town Farmers’ Market Special Revenue
Non-Reverting Fund, which shall be a special revenue fund under the rules,
regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana Law, including the Indiana
Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   Any monies collected as donations, from event participation and/or
registrations fees, as well as appropriations from other Town funds, shall be
deposited into the Farmers’ Market Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund, as well
as any and all of the monies that are specifically identified to be used in
connection with said designated community event and activities. The Farmers’
Market Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund shall be initially funded by the Town
Cable TV Promotion Fund in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for
the purpose of initial setup costs, advertising, and related.
   c.   The monies deposited into the Farmers’ Market Special Revenue Non-
Reverting Fund shall be utilized and expended only to supplement and pay the
costs incurred in connection with the planning, coordination and carrying out
of the seasonal Farmers’ Market Community Event, and all activities related
thereto, as approved and authorized by the Town Council.
   d.   The following schedule of fees per space shall be charged for
participation in the Schererville Farmers’ Market, to-wit:
      1.   For participation in a minimum of three (3) individual Thursday
events, a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per event shall be charged to
each vendor and collected;
      2.   For participation in five (5) weeks of events, a fee of one hundred
twenty dollars ($120.00) per vendor shall be charged to and collected from each
vendor as a participation rate in lieu of the minimum session rate referenced
herein. This shall include either five (5) Thursdays or four (4) Thursdays and
one (1) Sunday;
      3.   For participation in nine (9) weeks of events, a fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per vendor shall be charged to and collected from each vendor
as a participation rate in lieu of the minimum session rate referenced herein.
This shall include either nine (9) Thursdays or seven (7) Thursdays and two (2)
Sundays.
      4.   For participation in a full season schedule of events, a fee of two
hundred thirty eight dollars ($238.00) per vendor shall be charged to and
collected from each vendor as a seasonal participation rate in lieu of the
individual session rate referenced herein.
      5.   For participation in only one (1) Sunday event, a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per vendor shall be charged to and collected from each vendor
as participation rate in lieu of the minimum session rate referenced herein.
      6.   For participation in four (4) Sunday events only, a fee of one
hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00) per vendor shall be charged to and
collected from each vendor as a participation rate in lieu of the minimum
session rate referenced herein.
      7.   A produce vendor shall be able to participate in the event at no
cost. If the produce vendor attends every event (18 total events), an incentive
check for $180.00 shall be issued to that vendor once confirmation of
attendance has been received by the Clerk-Treasurer.
         (a)   “Produce Vendor” shall exclusively sell farm products such as
fresh fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, herbs, nuts, eggs, honey, livestock food
products (including meat, milk, cheese and dairy products), and seafood.
      8.   Any and all fees include applicable Indiana State sales tax.
   e.   For participation in the Schererville Farmers’ Market event or events,
each participating vendor shall provide satisfactory proof of insurance,
Federal Tax Identification or Social Security Number, and State Tax
Identification Number with the payment of the event or seasonal participation
fee. Upon collection of any fees herein, the same shall be deposited into the
Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund created hereby, and processed in conformance
with applicable law.
   f.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish the Farmers’ Market Special Revenue
Non-Reverting Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as
amended from time to time.
   g.   The Farmers’ Market Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund shall be
established and shall exist as long as the community event or events with which
it is associated occurs on at least an annual basis; however, in the event that
said designated community event, or substantially similar community event, does
not reoccur within one calendar year, the balance of any monies remaining in
the Farmers’ Market Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund for the Schererville
Farmers’ Market Community Event activity shall be transferred and receipted to
the Town General Fund.
(Ord. No. 1692, §§ 1-6, 3-14-07; Ord. No. 1692A, § 1, 4-8-09; Ord. No. 1692B, §
1, 3-10-10; Ord. No. 1692C, 3- 28-12; Ord No. 1692D, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 2-419.13 Park and Recreation Grants Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established for the Town of Schererville a Park &
Recreation Grants Non-Reverting Fund pursuant to the provisions of I.C. §§ 36-
1-3-1, et seq., as amended from time to time.
   b.   The newly established Fund shall be funded with special grants received
by the Schererville Park & Recreation Department.
   c.   The Fund established hereby shall be reviewed annually by the Town
Council. The funds directed to be deposited into the Fund shall be utilized
solely for the purposes set out in each special grant received by the Park &
Recreation Department.
(Ord. No. 1729, §§ 1-3, 3-12-08)
Sec. 2-419.14 Planning and Building Department Subdivision Review Professional
Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Planning and Building Department
Subdivision Review Professional Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund, which shall be
a special non-reverting fund under the rules, regulations and requirements of
applicable Indiana Law, including the Indiana Code, as amended from time to
time, as well as the Administrative Rules and Requirements of the Indiana State
Board of Accounts.
   b.   All engineering and legal professional service fees charged to the Town
of Schererville for engineering and legal services provided for the review of
petitions submitted for subdivision approval shall be charged to the
petitioner, and collected as other fees in connection with such petition in
conformance with the requirements of Town Subdivision Control Amendatory
Ordinance No. 1238A. Such engineering and legal professional service fees
collected shall be utilized and expended only as permitted and authorized
consistent with said Town Subdivision Control Amendatory Ordinance No. 1238A,
as the same is amended from time to time, and consistent with the applicable
rules, regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana Law, including the
Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules
and requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   c.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish the Fund, in conformance and
compliance with all applicable law, as amended from time to time, as set forth
in this section, and in the Town Subdivision Control Ordinance regarding such
fund as set forth in Ordinance No. 1238A, as the same is amended from time to
time.
(Ord. No. 1731, §§ 1-3, 5-14-08)
Sec. 2-419.15   Town Promotion Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established a fund entitled “Town Promotion Fund”
pursuant to the applicable provisions of I.C. 36-7-2-7 to be used to promote
economic development, Town promotions, and tourism, as well as all other
permitted uses under said Indiana Code section, as same may be amended from
time to time.
   b.   The Town Promotion Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund is hereby
established for the purpose of funding economic development, Town promotions,
and tourism, including the payment of expenses of, or reimbursement of Town
Officials, as the case may be, for expenses incurred in promoting the best
interests of the Town, including, but not limited to, such expenditures as are
identified and permitted set forth in division c. of this section. Funds for
the purposes and uses permitted and as set forth hereafter in division c. of
this section shall be budgeted, appropriated and/or transferred from the Cable
TV Fund, and provided for in the Town Code, as amended, and in conformance with
the requirements of applicable law, as amended from time to time.
   c.   Permitted expenditures from the Town Promotion Special Revenue Non-
Reverting Fund established hereby may include, are but are not necessarily
limited to, any of the following type expenses, namely:
      1.   The rental of meeting places, meals, decorations, memorabilia,
awards, expenses incurred in interviewing job applicants, expenses incurred in
promoting industrial, commercial and residential development, expenses incurred
in developing relations with other units of government, in the promotion of
tourism and goodwill of the Town’s employees, and any other expenses of a
specific or governmental nature deemed by the Town Council to be in the best
interests of the Town.
      2.   Illustrative of the expenditures approved by this section may
include, but are not necessarily limited to the following: commemorative
plaques, certificates, or objects such as commemorative keys; employee
appreciation dinners; and expenses incurred due to participation or membership
in local, regional, state and national association of a social, educational or
governmental nature which expense(s) shall have as its purpose the betterment
of the Town or the Town’s operations.
   d.   The establishment of the Town Promotion Special Revenue Non-Reverting
Fund by the provisions of the within enabling establishment ordinance shall
have no limiting effect or otherwise upon any other fund of the Town of
Schererville, including printing and advertising, meeting room rental,
subscriptions and dues, traveling expenses, and other similar fund, line item
or account of the Town.
   e.   The Town Promotion Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund established
hereby shall be a special revenue non-reverting fund under the rules,
regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the Indiana
Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts. The Town Clerk-Treasurer
is hereby directed to follow and comply with all rules, regulations and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts as well as the applicable
provisions of the Indiana Code for establishment of the Town Promotion Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund, processing of expenditures therefrom, budgeting and
appropriation of funds therefrom, and all other legal requirements, as the same
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1788, §§ 1-5, 6-8-11; Ord. No. 1974, §§ 1-5, 9-14-11)
Sec. 2-419.16 Police Department Law Enforcement Processing Service Charge and
Release Fee Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the “Schererville Police Department Law
Enforcement Processing Service Charge and Release Fee Special Revenue Non-
Reverting Fund”, which shall be a Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund under the
rules, regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the
Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules
and requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts and the Indiana
Department of Local Government Finance (IDLGF), also as amended from time to
time.
   b.   That any funds or monies collected as an authorized “Schererville
Police Department Law Enforcement Processing Service Charge and Release Fee”
shall be deposited into the “Schererville Police Department Law Enforcement
Processing Service Charge and Release Fee Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund”in
conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as amended from time to
time.
   c.   That the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take
all appropriate and required steps to establish said “Schererville Police
Department Law Enforcement Processing Service Charge and Release Fee Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund” in conformance and compliance with all applicable
law, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1822, 10-10-12)
Sec. 2-419.17 Perry Ferrini Dog Park Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fee Fund.
   a.   The fee schedule for use of the Town Perry Ferrini Dog Park attached
hereto, incorporated herein and marked as Exhibit “A” is hereby approved and
adopted as the Participant/User Fee Schedule for use by residents and citizens
of the Perry Ferrini Dog Park facility under the management and oversight of
the Town Department of Parks and Recreation.
   b.   There is hereby established the “Town of Schererville Perry Ferrini Dog
Park Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fee Fund”, which shall be a Special revenue
Non-Reverting Fund under the rules, regulations and requirements of applicable
Indiana Law, including the Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well
as the Administrative Rules and Requires of the Indiana State Board of
Accounts, as also amended form time to time.
   c.   That all participant/user fees collected by the Town Department of
Parks and Recreation from residents and citizens for use of the Town of
Schererville Perry Ferrini Dog Park Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fee Fund”.
The participant/user fees for us of the Perry Ferrini Dog Park collected under
the provisions of this Section and deposited into the “Town of Schererville
Perry Ferrini Dog Park Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fee Fund” shall be
utilized and expended for the maintenance, operation, and upkeep of the Perry
Ferrini Dog Park Facility, as well as all related administrative costs and
expenses related thereto, and no other.
   d.   That the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take
all appropriate required actions to establish said “Town of Schererville Perry
Ferrini Dog Park Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fee Fund” in conformance and
compliance with all applicable law, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1816, 7-11-12)
Sec. 2-419.18 Parks Community Center Special Construction Account Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the “Schererville Parks Community Center
Special Construction Account Fund”, which shall be a Special Fund under the
rules, regulations and requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the
Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the Administrative Rules
and Requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   That temporary loan funds from the Town Redevelopment Commission
properly authorized and permitted to be transferred, as well as grant funds
and/or authorized appropriations from any other town funds by proper and lawful
action shall be deposited into the “Schererville Parks Community Center Special
Construction Account Fund”, which funds, upon deposit, shall be used for
purposes of payment of contract amounts for the design-build construction
contract amounts owed Berglund Construction Company for the Schererville Parks
Community Center facility project.
   c.   That the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and directed to take
all appropriate required actions to establish said “Schererville Parks
Community Center Special Construction Account Fund”, as well as to deposit
temporary loan funds from the Town Redevelopment Commission and/or Federal
Grant funding, as the case may be, in conformance and compliance with all
applicable law, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1817, 7-18-12)
Sec. 2-419.19 County Economic Development Income Tax (CEDIT) Special Revenue
Non- Reverting Fund.
   a.   The Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
hereby establishes the Town County Economic Development Income Tax (CEDIT)
Special Revenue Non- Reverting Fund (hereinafter the “Fund”), for the deposit,
distribution and utilization of the County Economic Development Income Tax
imposed, collected and distributed to the Town of Schererville by the Auditor
of Lake County, Indiana, pursuant to the provisions of Indiana Code § 6-3.5-7-
1 et seq., as amended, which fund shall be a Special Revenue Non-Reverting
Fund.
   b.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer, upon receipt of distribution of said County
Public Economic Development Income Tax (CEDIT) Fund distributed to the Town of
Schererville pursuant to the applicable provisions of Indiana Code § 6-3.5-7-
1 et seq., shall deposit said funds into the Town County Economic Development
(CEDIT) Income Tax Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund established hereby for
use for economic development in the Town pursuant to the provisions of Indiana
Code § 6-3.5-7-1 et seq., as amended. Further, the funds deposited into said
Town County Economic Development Income Tax (CEDIT) Special Revenue Non-
Reverting Fund shall be appropriated and utilized for the economic development
purposes permitted, as set forth in Indiana Code § 6-3.5-7-13.1(b), as amended
from time to time.
   c.   Deposits and funds in the Town County Economic Development Income Tax
(CEDIT) Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund shall not revert to the General Fund
at the end of each calendar year, but shall remain in the Town County Economic
Development Income Tax (CEDIT) Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund, as permitted
by applicable law.
   d.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is directed and authorized to take all
necessary and appropriate actions to establish and account for the funds
collected from the County Economic Development Income Tax (CEDIT) distributed
to the Town by the Lake County Auditor for the purposes and uses of economic
development in the Town pursuant to the provisions of Indiana Code § 6-3.5-7-
13.1(b), all in conformance with applicable law. (Ord. No. 1847, §§ 1-4, 1-30-
14)
Sec. 2-419.20 Adjusted Gross Income Tax Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   The Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
hereby establishes the Town Adjusted Gross Income Tax Special Revenue Non-
Reverting Fund (hereinafter the “Fund”), for the deposit, distribution and
utilization of the Public Safety County Adjusted Gross Income Tax imposed,
collected and distributed to the Town of Schererville pursuant to the
provisions of Indiana Code § 6-3.5-1.1-25, which fund shall be a Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   b.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer, upon receipt of distribution of said Lake
County Public Safety County Adjusted Gross Income Tax Funds distributed to the
Town of Schererville pursuant to the applicable provisions of Indiana Code § 6-
3.5-1.1-25, shall deposit said funds into the Town Adjusted Gross Income Tax
Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund established hereby for the purpose of
continuing to carry out or provide at least one public safety purpose pursuant
to the provisions of Indiana Code § 6-3.5-1.1-25(a). Further, the funds
deposited into said Town Adjusted Gross Income Tax Special Revenue Non-
Reverting Fund shall be appropriated and utilized for the public safety
purposes permitted, as set forth in Indiana Code § 6-3.5-1.1-25(a), as amended
from time to time.
   c.   Deposits and funds in the Town Adjusted Gross Income Tax Fund Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund shall not revert to the General Fund at the end of
each calendar year, but shall remain in the Town Adjusted Gross Income Tax
Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund, as permitted by applicable law.
   d.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is directed and authorized to take all
necessary and appropriate actions to establish and account for the funds
collected from the Public Safety County Adjusted Gross Income Tax distributed
to the Town by the Lake County Auditor for the purposes and uses of carrying
out or providing at least one public safety purpose pursuant to the provisions
of Indiana Code § 6-3.5-1.1-25(a), all in conformance with applicable law.
(Ord. No. 1848, §§ 1-4, 1-30- 14)
Sec. 2-419.21 Culvert Repair Project Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the Town of Schererville Briar Ridge
Culvert Repair Project Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund, which shall be a
special revenue non-reverting fund under the rules, regulations and
requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the Indiana Code, as amended
from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and requirements of the
Indiana State Board of Accounts, as amended from time to time.
   b.   Any monies collected from each participating party for payment of
claims filed by the contractor and related vendors, under the agreement terms
of the Joint Interlocal Cooperation Agreement for the Briar Ridge Storm Sewer
System Repair/Improvement Project, shall be deposited into the Town of
Schererville Briar Ridge Culvert Repair Project Special Revenue Non-Reverting
Fund. The Town of Schererville Briar Ridge Culvert Repair Project Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund shall be initially funded by the Little Calumet
River basin Development commission contribution of up to the sum of $697,000,
and each of Schererville, Dyer, and Munster contributing one-third of the
remaining total costs to fully fund said project costs and payment
responsibilities.
   c.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville, upon notice and
request from the Joint Board established by the aforementioned Joint Interlocal
Cooperation Agreement, shall be responsible to request payment, first from the
Little Calumet River Basin Development Commission, and thereafter from each of
the participating towns in equal shares. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of
Schererville shall place the receipts from each of the participating units,
upon such receipt, into the Town of Schererville Briar Ridge Culvert Repair
Project Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund, which funds shall then be used
exclusively for payment of costs of the project following processing consistent
with applicable law.
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall account to the
Little Calumet River Basin development commission and the joint Board for
claims submitted, payments made, and the balance remaining in the Town of
Schererville Briar Ridge Culvert Repair Project Special Revenue Non-Reverting
Fund, on a monthly basis.
   e.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall obtain a partial
or full waiver of lien, and other documents required by the Public Works
Construction Contract, in exchange for each payment to a contractor or vendor
made from the Town of Schererville Briar Ridge Culvert Repair Project Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   f.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville is authorized and
directed to take all appropriate and required steps to establish the Town of
Schererville Briar Ridge Culvert Repair Project Special Revenue Non-Reverting
Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as amended from
time to time.
   g.   The Town of Schererville Briar Ridge Culvert Repair Project Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund shall be established and shall exist until
termination or completion of the project.
(Ord. No. 1868, §§ 1-7, 5-13-15)
Sec. 2-419.22 Local Option Income Tax (LOIT) Y2016 Special Distribution Fund.
   a.   The Town Council hereby establishes a Local Option Income Tax (LOIT)
Y2016 Special Distribution Fund, as a special revenue non-reverting fund
pursuant to the applicable rules and regulations of the State of Indiana Board
of Accounts, if necessary and applicable, for deposit of a one-time Y2016 LOIT
Special Distribution amount received, or to be received, by the Town of
Schererville, consistent with recently promulgated SEA 67 in the last session
just concluded of the Indiana General Assembly. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is
hereby authorized and directed to establish the account required to be
established as set forth herein, consistent with the requirements for such
established by the Indiana State Board of Accounts, including the establishment
of a Y2016 LOIT Special Distribution Fund for deposit of the aforesaid LOIT
Y2016 Special Distribution.
   b.   The one-time LOIT Y2016 Special Distribution received by the Town shall
be deposited into said established Fund, with at least seventy-five percent
(75%) of said receipted Special Distribution funds to be deposited in the newly
established LOIT Y2016 Special Distribution Fund, with the balance of said one-
time LOIT Y2016 Special Distribution, if any, to be available for use by the
Town for any purpose deemed appropriate. The seventy-five percent (75%) or
greater portion of said one-time LOIT Y2016 Special Distribution received shall
be used exclusively for infrastructure as specified by the provisions of I.C. §
6-3.6-9-17(h)(l)(a), as amended from time to time, and the balance, if any, may
be used for any purpose deemed appropriate by the Town. (Ord. No. 1884, §§ 1,
2, 5-11-16)
Sec. 2-419.23 Community Events Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   There is hereby established the “Town of Schererville Community Events
Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund”, which shall be a special revenue fund
under the rules, regulations, and requirements of applicable Indiana law,
including the Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the
administrative rules and requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   Any monies or funds collected as donations from event participation
and/or registration fees, as well as appropriations from designated Town Funds,
shall be deposited into the “Town of Schererville Community Events Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund”, as well as any and all of the monies that are
specifically identified to be used in connection with said designated community
event and activities. The “Town of Schererville Community Events Special
Revenue Non-Reverting Fund” shall be funded initially by the Town of
Schererville CEDIT/NR Fund in the amount of $50,000.00 for the purpose of
initial costs, advertising, and related expenses for a qualified community
event which shall utilize said funds.
   c.   The monies and funds deposited into the “Town of Schererville Community
Events Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund” shall be utilized and expended only
to supplement and pay costs incurred in connection with planning, coordination
and conduct/carrying out of the designated Town of Schererville community event
for which the funds herein may be utilized, and all activities related thereto,
and only as approved and authorized by the Town Council. The Town Council shall
have the exclusive authority for the approved use of the funds in the “Town of
Schererville Community Events Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund”, as well as
for the designation of a community event qualifying for use of same.
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is hereby authorized and directed to
take all appropriate and required legal actions to establish said “Town of
Schererville Community Events Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund”, in
conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as amended from time to
time.
   e.   The “Town of Schererville Community Events Special Revenue Non-
Reverting Fund” shall be established and shall exist as long as community
events exist for which funds in said “Town of Schererville Community Events
Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund” are utilized. It is contemplated that
specific and designated community events will be identified and approved
annually by the Town Council whereby funds in the “Town of Schererville
Community Events Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund” will be available to be
utilized, and will, with approval of the Town Council, be utilized.
(Ord. No. 1886, §§ 1-5, 7-13-16)
Sec. 2-419.24 Rainy Day Fund.
   a.   Establishment of Rainy Day Fund. There is hereby established a “Rainy
Day Fund” for the Town of Schererville pursuant to the applicable provisions of
I.C. 36-1-8-5.1 et seq., as amended hereafter from time to time. The
established Town Rainy Day Fund may be used to receive transfers of unused and
unencumbered funds raised by a general or special tax levy on taxable property
within the Town whenever the purpose of such tax levy has been fulfilled and an
unused and unencumbered balance remains, as well as for all other funds/
transfers and uses as permitted by the applicable provisions of I.C. 36-1-8-5.1
et seq., and any and all other applicable statutory authority, as amended
hereafter from time to time. The Clerk-Treasurer shall establish the Town Rainy
Day Fund consistent with the enabling authority of I.C. 36-1-8-5.1, and the
rules, regulations, and requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts,
each as amended hereafter from time to time.
   b.   The Rainy Day Fund established hereby is a Non-Reverting Fund, as
recognized by applicable law and the rules, regulations, and requirements of
the Indiana State Board of Accounts, as each are amended hereafter from time to
time. The Rainy Day Fund Account funds shall be used only as permitted by the
provisions of I.C. 36-1-8-5.1, and as approved and agreed upon by the Town
Council.
(Ord. No. 1889, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-16)
Sec. 2-419.25 Law Enforcement Aid or Confidential Petty Cash Fund.
   A Police Department Law Enforcement Aid Fund (also known as Confidential
Petty Cash Fund) is established to be governed by procedures set forth in I.C.
§ 36-1-8-3, and the Fund shall maintain a balance of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). (Ord. No. 1966, § 2, 5-12-21)
Sec. 2-419.26 Parks and Recreation Department Petty Cash Fund for Park
Concessions.
   a.   A Petty Cash Fund is hereby established for the Town Parks and
Recreation Department, and specifically for Park Concessions. The established
Town Parks and Recreation Petty Cash Fund shall follow and comply with all
statutory and proper procedures for the transfer and use and expenditures of
monies from Parks and Recreation, and specifically the procedures and
requirements of I.C. § 36-1-8-3, as amended. It is further hereby specified
that said Parks and Recreation Department Concession Petty Cash Fund shall
maintain a reportable balance of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in a monthly
accounting and reporting balance by designated Parks and Recreation Department
administrative staff, governed by procedures set forth in I.C. § 36-1-8-3, and
that the fund shall maintain a balance of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   b.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is authorized and required to transfer
the necessary funds to the Parks and Recreation Petty Cash Fund to the Park
Concessions of the Town to effectuate the purposes required for the Parks and
Recreation Petty Cash Fund, pursuant to all statutory requirements as described
herein, and all as amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 1968, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-21)
Sec. 2-419.27 ARP Local Fiscal Recovery Grant Fund.
   a.   The Town Council hereby acknowledges receipt of notification that the
Town will be allocated Grant Funds from the ARP; that as a consequence of same,
the Town Council hereby establishes the Town of Schererville ARP Local Fiscal
Recovery Grant Fund in conformance with the provisions of applicable law.
   b.   The Town Council hereby directs that all funds allocated to the Town of
Schererville from the ARP, upon receipt, shall be deposited into the newly
established Town of Schererville ARP Local Fiscal Recovery Grant Fund for
receipt of same, and use thereafter, consistent with the express and verified
purposes of the ARP. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby directed and authorized
to so establish the ARP Local Fiscal Recovery Grant Fund in conformance with
applicable state and federal law. The Clerk-Treasurer shall further deposit any
grant funds received from the ARP into the newly established Town ARP Local
Fiscal Grant Fund for eligible and permitted uses consistent with the ARP
requirement.
   c.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer, upon receipt of ARP grant funds, shall
process additional appropriation proceedings as appropriate and required. Funds
deposited into the ARP Local Fiscal Recovery Grant Fund shall be used for any
lawful purpose, but only upon the Town Clerk-Treasurer and Town Council
concurring in the eligibility of proposed use of such funds as presented for
compliance with the Town of Schererville ARP Disbursement Plan. The Town
Council and Town Clerk-Treasurer acknowledge and concur that the types of uses
of the ARP Local Fiscal Recovery Grant Funds shall be as permitted and
authorized by the ARP Section 603(c), and other forthcoming substantive and
specific fund usage guidance, as amended from time to time. The Town Council
contemplates use for necessary investments in water, sewer and related
infrastructure and as otherwise permitted under Section 603(c) of the ARP. The
Town Council will further develop and establish a Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana, ARP Disbursement Plan for usage purposes and monitor same for
amendment and update from time to time thereafter as appropriate. The Town
Clerk-Treasurer is further directed to maintain the requisite and legally
required detail of fund usage and expenditures in conformance with applicable
law, and to segregate said fund for purposes of audit hereafter by the State
Board of Accounts, or any other legal audit agency or entity.
(Ord. No. 1969, § 1-3, 5-12-21)
Sec. 2-419.28 Riverfront Development District Non-Reverting Fund.
   a.   A Municipal Riverfront Development District Non-Reverting Fund for the
Town Municipal Riverfront Development District is hereby established for the
deposit of funds received by the Town from applicants and Riverfront District
liquor license holders, to be used for purposes consistent with the promotion
and development of the Municipal Riverfront Development District.
   b.   That the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall account for, maintain records of
deposits and expenditures, and comply with all rules, regulations, and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts for Fund Management in the
State of Indiana, including reporting of same, all consistent with the rules,
regulations, and requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts, as same
are amended from time to time.
   c.   That at the end of each budget/calendar year, monies remaining in the
Town Municipal Riverfront Development District Non-Reverting Fund shall remain
in said fund, and no funds therein shall revert to the Town General Fund, for
usage consistent with the purposes established for the fund's usage in
beautification, events, and promotions within the district.
(Ord. No. 2006, § 3-5, passed 4-10-24)
Article 11. Miscellaneous Administrative Regulations.
Sec. 2-420 South Shore Clean Cities Program Adopted.
   a.   The Town of Schererville adopts the South Shore Clean Cities program,
whose principal mission is to facilitate the creation of a sustained
alternative transportation fueled industry in northwest Indiana through the
introduction of alternatively fueled vehicles in the region's fleet and a
refueling and service infrastructure to support their use.
   b.   In adopting the South Shore Clean Cities program:
      1.   The Town of Schererville will appoint an official of this local
government entity with responsibilities for vehicle procurement to represent it
on the South Shore Clean Cities public/private partnership who along with other
members will carry out the partnership's mission and goals; and
      2.   In furtherance of South Shore Clean Cities mission and goals, the
Town of Schererville will:
         a.   give consideration to purchasing alternatively fueled vehicles
for its fleet that meet performance specifications, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency emissions requirements, and are competitively priced; and
         b.   give consideration to joining other local governments in
alternatively fueled vehicle purchase program, thereby benefitting from the
savings realized from such high volume purchases.
      3.   The Town of Schererville will urge private sector fleet owners, who
do business with this local government entity and who are based and/or conduct
business within the Town of Schererville area of jurisdiction, to become a
member in the South Shore Clean Cities public/private partnership.
(Res. No. 96-9, 4-10-96)
Sec. 2-421 Standards for Capitalization of Assets.
   a.   Any individual item which costs five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or
more shall be considered a capital asset.
   b.   Any related items which cost more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in the aggregate shall be considered capital assets.
(Ord. No. 1441, §§ 1-2, 10-14-98; Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 5-9-01)
Sec. 2-422 Fixed Asset/Capital Asset Policy.
   The Fixed Asset/Capital Asset Policy of the Town of Schererville is adopted
and established, and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. No. 1944, § 1, 12-
11-19)
Sec. 2-423 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Regulations.
   a.   The Town hereby acknowledges, recognizes and implements the provisions
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (hereinafter
referred to as the "HIPAA Regulations") as the same apply to the Town, its
Departments and those persons and/or entities who conduct business with the
Town pertaining to these matters, under the designation of a "hybrid covered
entity."
   b.   The HIPAA Regulations shall be followed by the Town's Departments and
personnel, and those persons and/or entities who conduct business with the Town
(hereinafter referred to as "business associates"), pertaining to these
matters, to insure the protection of individuals' Protected Health Information.
   c.   The following definitions shall apply pursuant to the Town's HIPAA
Policy:
      1.   "Business Associate" shall mean a person and/or entity who, on
behalf of the Town or any of its Departments, performs, or assists in the
performance of:
         (a)   a function or activity involving the use or disclosure of
individually identifiable health information, including, but not limited to,
claims processing or administration, data analysis, processing or
administration, utilization review, quality assurance, billing, benefit
management, practice management, and repricing; or
         (b)   provides legal, actuarial, accounting, consulting, data
aggregation, management, administrative, accreditation or financial services to
or for such covered entity, or to or for an organized health care arrangement
in which the covered entity participates, where the provision of the service
involves the disclosure of individually identifiable health information from
such covered entity or arrangement, or from another business associate of such
covered entity or arrangement, to the person; or
         (c)   any other function or activity regulated by HIPAA Regulations or
this Ordinance.
         (d)   This definition does not apply to persons who are members of the
workforce of the Town or its Departments.
      2.   "Covered Entity" shall mean a health care provider who transmits any
health information in electronic form in connection with a transaction covered
by the HIPAA Regulations or this Ordinance.
      3.   "Health Care" shall include, but is not limited to:
         (a)   preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative,
maintenance, or palliative care and counseling, service, assessment, or
procedure with respect to the physical or mental condition, or functional
status, of an individual or that affects the structure or function of the body;
or
         (b)   sale or dispensing of a drug, device, equipment, or other item
in accordance with a prescription.
      4.   "Health Care Provider" shall mean a provider of medical or health
services, and any other person or entity who furnishes, bills, or is paid for
health care in the normal course of business.
      5.   "Health Information" shall mean any information, whether oral or
recorded in any form or medium, that
         (a)   is created or received by a health care provider; and
         (b)   that relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental
health or condition of an individual, the provision of health care to an
individual, or the past, present, or future payment for the provision of health
care to an individual.
      6.   "Individually Identifiable Health Information" shall mean
information that is a subset of health information, including demographic
information collected from an individual and:
         (a)   that is created or received by a Town Department or Town
Business Associate; and
         (b)   relates to the past, present or future physical or mental health
or condition of an individual, the provision of health care to an individual,
or the past, present or future payment for the provision of health care to an
individual; and
            (1)   that identifies the individual; or
            (2)   with respect to which there is a reasonable basis to believe
the information could be used to identify the individual.
      7.   "Permitted Disclosure" shall mean a patient-authorized or legally
permitted disclosure of individually identifiable health information by a
covered entity.
      8.   "Protected Health Information" shall mean individually identifiable
health information that is transmitted and/or maintained in any form or medium
by the Town's Departments and/or its business associates.
      9.   "Required Disclosure" shall mean a disclosure of individually
identifiable health information that is required by applicable law, namely, the
HIPAA Regulations.
      10.   "Transaction" shall mean the transmission of information between
two (2) parties to carry out financial or administrative activities related to
health care. It shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of
information transmissions:
         (a)   health care claims or equivalent encounter information;
         (b)   health care payment and remittance advice;
         (c)   coordination of benefits;
         (d)   health care claim status;
         (e)   enrollment and disenrollment in a health plan;
         (f)   eligibility for a health plan;
         (g)   health plan premium payments;
         (h)   referral certification and authorization;
         (i)   first report of injury;
         (j)   health claims attachment; and
         (k)   other transactions that the Secretary of Health and Human
Services, or his/her duly authorized designee, may prescribe by regulation.
      11.   "Unpermitted Disclosure" shall mean an unauthorized or legally
prohibited disclosure of individually identifiable health information by a
covered entity.
      12.   "Workforce" shall mean employees, volunteers, trainees, and other
persons whose conduct, in the performance of work for a covered entity, is
under the direct control of such entity, whether or not such persons are paid
by the covered entity.
   d.   1.   The following shall constitute "Permitted Disclosures" pursuant to
the HIPAA Regulations and the provisions of this Ordinance:
         (a)   to the individual patient;
         (b)   for treatment, payment, or health care operations;
         (c)   incident to a use or disclosure permitted or required by HIPAA
Regulations with respect to an otherwise permitted or required use or
disclosure;
         (d)   when authorization has been obtained from the individual
patient.
      2.   When making a permitted disclosure, or when requesting the permitted
disclosure of individually identifiable health information from another covered
entity, reasonable efforts shall be made to limit the disclosure of protected
health information to the minimum necessary to satisfy the use, disclosure, or
request. However, this does not apply in the following circumstances:
         (a)   disclosures to or requests by a health care provider for
treatment;
         (b)   uses or disclosures made to the individual;
         (c)   uses or disclosures made pursuant to a patient authorization;
         (d)   disclosures made to the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
or his/her duly authorized designee;
         (e)   uses or disclosures that are required by law;
         (f)   uses or disclosures that are required for compliance with
applicable HIPAA Regulation requirements.
   e.   1.   The following shall constitute "Required Disclosures" pursuant to
the HIPAA Regulations and the provisions of this Ordinance:
         (a)   to an individual pursuant to 164.524 or 164.528;
         (b)   when required by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or
his/her duly authorized designee, to investigate and determine a covered
entity's compliance with HIPAA Regulations.
      2.   When making a required disclosure, or when requesting the required
disclosure of individually identifiable health information from another covered
entity, reasonable efforts shall be made to limit the disclosure of protected
health information to the minimum necessary to satisfy the use, disclosure, or
request. However, this does not apply in the following circumstances:
         (a)   disclosures to or requests by a health care provider for
treatment;
         (b)   uses or disclosures made to the individual;
         (c)   uses or disclosures made pursuant to a patient authorization;
         (d)   disclosures made to the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
or his/her duly authorized designee,
         (e)   uses or disclosures that are required by law;
         (f)   uses or disclosures that are required for compliance with
applicable HIPAA Regulation requirements.
   f.   Any use or disclosure that is not permitted or required constitute an
"Unpermitted Disclosure" pursuant to the HIPAA Regulations and the provisions
of this Ordinance.
   g.   A "Notice of Privacy Rights" shall be issued to all persons to whom the
Town's various Departments provide emergency, and other, medical services, for
whom the Town's various Departments and personnel create and store medical
records pertaining to those services, and for whom the Town's Departments and/
or personnel create billing pertaining to those services.
   h.   The Notice of Privacy Rights to be issued shall contain an advisement
that individuals can execute an Authorization for Release of Medical
Information/ Protected Health Information to a covered or non-covered entity.
Said Authorization shall explain all patient rights regarding the same and
shall include an advisement that the Authorization is valid for one (1) year
from the date of its execution and that it is able to be revoked by the
patient, in writing, at any time.
   i.   Any person and/or entity who contracts with, or otherwise does business
with the Town, pertaining to the provision of emergency, or other, medical
services, creation and storage of records related to the same and creation of
billing related to the same, shall comply with the provisions of the HIPAA
regulations and shall be required to execute Business Associate Agreements, as
defined by applicable HIPAA regulations and containing all required provisions.
   j.   The HIPAA Regulations and the provisions of this Ordinance, passed and
adopted in accordance therewith, shall preempt any State law, rule, regulation
or Ordinance to the contrary; however, in addition, any State law, rule,
regulation or Ordinance that is more stringent than the HIPAA Regulations or
provisions of this Ordinance shall be controlling.
(Ord. No. 1609, §§ 1-10, 3-10-04)
Sec. 2-424 through Sec. 2-429 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 12. Purchasing Regulations.
Division I. Municipal Purchasing Agency.
Sec. 2-430 Purchasing Agency.
   The Schererville Town Council (the "Purchasing Agency") is established as a
Purchasing Agency for the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1428, § 1, 7-8-98)
Sec. 2-431 Powers and Duties.
   The Purchasing Agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized and
permitted under the provisions of Indiana Code, § 5-22, as the same may be
amended from time to time by Ordinance adopted by the Town Council, policies
adopted by the Purchasing Agency, or in amendatory statutory provisions.
Further, the following specific provisions are applicable under such Purchasing
Policy and Procedure of the Town for determining suspension and/or debarment
status of any vendor doing business with the Town Council, namely:
   a.   Suspension and debarment.
      1.   Prior to any purchase for which federal funds and/or federal
assistance is being utilized by the Town, the purchasing agency, or its
delegees, shall examine and verify the status of any vendor participating in or
to be contracted for business with the Town utilizing federal funds and/or
federal assistance for debarment and suspension status to determine whether
such vendor is qualified to participate. The check or verification for
debarment and suspension shall be performed using the EPLS System, or any
similar such system as then currently approved for such purposes. The Town
Department responsible for facilitating, coordinating, and utilizing federal
funds and/or federal assistance will be required to conduct and complete the
EPLS System search, or its approved equivalent, as such procedures and methods
are amended, on all vendors with whom the Town of Schererville intends to
conduct business utilizing such federal funds. Further, the Town Department or
entity responsible shall provide a hard copy proof and verification of each
EPLS, or its approved equivalent search, which will be required to be provided
to the Clerk-Treasurer for maintenance and record keeping in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer. It is specifically directed and required that the Town of
Schererville will not conduct any business with any firm, individual, or entity
which has been identified and verified as having been debarred or suspended for
such purposes, in conformance with applicable law, as the same may be amended
from time to time. Further, these policy requirements for determination of
suspension and/or debarment status of any vendor doing business with the Town
of Schererville in which federal funds and/or federal assistance is utilized
shall pertain to "Covered Transactions", which include those government
contracts for goods and services awarded under a non-procurement transaction
(e.g., Grant or Cooperative Agreement) that are expected to equal or exceed
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), or meet certain other specified
criteria.
(Ord. No. 1428, § 2, 7-8-98; Ord. No. 1810, 5-9-12)
Sec. 2-432 Purchasing Agent.
   a.   The Purchasing Agency is authorized to designate in writing one (1) or
more individuals to act as a Purchasing Agent for the Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
   b.   The Purchasing Agent shall assume the duties, powers and
responsibilities assigned to a Purchasing Agent and to a Disposing Agent as set
out in Indiana Code, § 36-1-9 and § 36-1-11.
(Ord. No. 1428, §§ 3-4, 7-8-98)
Sec. 2-433 U.S.A. Manufactured Supplies.
   The Town of Schererville, Indiana, shall specify and purchase supplies
manufactured in the United States unless it is determined as follows:
   a.   These supplies are not manufactured in the United States in reasonably
available quantities; or
   b.   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States exceeds by
an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable supplies
manufactured outside the United States; or
   c.   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States are
substantially less than the quality of comparably-priced available supplies
manufactured outside the United States; or
   d.   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not in
the public interest.
(Ord. No. 1428, §§ 1-5, 7-8-98)
Sec. 2-434 Central Purchasing Fund.
   a.   There is established for the town, a special fund which shall be known
as the Central Purchasing Fund, established pursuant to the revisions of
Indiana Code §§ 36-1-3-1, et seq., as amended from time to time.
   b.   The newly established Schererville Central Purchasing Department
Central Purchasing Fund shall be funded in conformance with applicable law, as
well as the rules and regulations of the Indiana State Board of Accounts for
such funding. The Central Purchasing Fund of the Town shall be reimbursed by
each Town department when such departments receive officer supplies and other
miscellaneous items purchased by the Central Purchasing Department. Said funds
reimbursed by each department shall be deposited into the Central Purchasing
Fund upon such reimbursement.
   c.   The Town’s Central Purchasing Fund shall be managed and overseen by the
office of the town Clerk-Treasurer and shall be for the specific purpose of
purchasing office supplies and other miscellaneous items as is determined to be
needed by the various departments of the town for future re-purchase by said
individual Town departments.
   d.   The funding for the Central Purchasing Fund shall be from the Town
General Fund in an amount determined annually each year in the budget process
for the purposes for which said Central Purchasing Fund is established.
(Ord. No. 1576 §§ 1-4, 3-12-03)
Sec. 2-435 through Sec. 2-439 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Reserved.
Sec. 2-440 through Sec. 2-449 Reserved for Future Use.
Chapter 3
Town Legislative And Judicial Branches
Article 1. Town Council.
Division I. Background Information.
   
Sec. 3-1   Five (5) Member Council.
   
Sec. 3-2   Five (5) Legislative Districts (Wards).
   
Sec. 3-3   Terms of Office.
   
Sec. 3-4   through Sec. 3-7 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Governing Regulations of the Council.
   
Sec. 3-8   Selection of Council President and Vice-President.
   
Sec. 3-9   Selection of Vice-President.
   
Sec. 3-10   Quorum.
   
Sec. 3-11   When Majority Vote Required.
   
Sec. 3-12   When Two-Thirds ( 2/3 ) Vote Required.
   
Sec. 3-13   Town Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Break Ties.
   
Sec. 3-14   When Ordinances Take Effect.
   
Sec. 3-15   Regular and Special Meetings of the Town Council.
   
Sec. 3-16   Powers of the Town Council.
   
Sec. 3-17   Order of Business at Town Council Meetings.
   
Sec. 3-18   Rules of Order.
   
Sec. 3-19   Taping and Recording of Meetings.
   
Sec. 3-20   Town Recording Secretary.
   
Sec. 3-21   Tax Anticipation Warrant Procedure.
   
Sec. 3-22   Claim Docket Procedures.
   
Sec. 3-23   Compensation of Town Council.
   
Sec. 3-24   Life Insurance Benefits and Coverage for Council Members
   
Sec. 3-25   Ordinances which Amend the Town Code.
   
Sec. 3-26   Electronic Participation in Town Council Meetings.
   
Sec. 3-27   through Sec. 3-29 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Procedures Governing Deliberations and Actions of the Governing
Bodies of the Town.
   
Sec. 3-30   Definitions.
   
Sec. 3-31   Open Meetings; Secret Ballot Votes.
   
Sec. 3-32   Posting of Agenda; Memoranda of Meetings; Public Inspection of
Minutes.
   
Sec. 3-33   Public Notice of Meetings.
   
Sec. 3-34   Executive Sessions.
   
Sec. 3-35   Collective Bargaining Meetings; Applicable Requirements.
   
Sec. 3-36   Violations; Remedies; Limitations; Costs and Fees.
   
Sec. 3-37   through Sec. 3-49 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Miscellaneous Regulations.
   
Sec. 3-50   Town Membership Authorized.
   
Sec. 3-51   Interlocal Governmental Agreements.
   
Sec. 3-52   Method to Vacate Alleys and Public Ways.
   
Sec. 3-53   Purchasing Equipment, Supplies and Services with Other Communities.
   
Sec. 3-54   through Sec. 3-69 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Town Court.
Division I. Municipal Judge.
   
Sec. 3-70   Town Court Established.
   
Sec. 3-71   Duration of Town Court.
   
Sec. 3-72   Election of Town Court Judge.
   
Sec. 3-73   Qualifications of Town Court Judge.
   
Sec. 3-74   Town Judge's Oath and Bond.
   
Sec. 3-75   Court Sessions.
   
Sec. 3-76   Compensation of Town Court Judge.
   
Sec. 3-77   Style of Court.
   
Sec. 3-78   Notice to State Court Administration.
   
Sec. 3-79   Court Procedures.
   
Sec. 3-80   through Sec. 3-94 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Code Violations.
   
Sec. 3-95   Court Costs.
   
Sec. 3-96   Disbursements.
   
Sec. 3-97   Town Attorney to Enforce.
   
Sec. 3-98   Ordinance Violation Citation.
   
Sec. 3-99   Fines.
   
Sec. 3-100   Non-Payable Violations.
   
Sec. 3-101   through Sec. 3-109 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Prepayment of Ordinance Violations.
   
Sec. 3-110   Procedure to Acknowledge Liability - Fines and Court Costs.
   
Sec. 3-111   Date When Payments Due.
   
Sec. 3-112   Exceptions to Procedure.
   
Sec. 3-113   through Sec. 3-119 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Community Service Option.
   
Sec. 3-120   Role of Town Judge.
   
Sec. 3-121   Role of Town Court.
   
Sec. 3-122   Accounting of Community Service Hours.
   
Sec. 3-123   through Sec. 3-129 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 1. Town Council.  1
 
Notes
1 1   I.C., §§ 36-5-2-1 through 36-5-2-11, address Town legislative body and
  executive.
Division I. Background Information.
Sec. 3-1 Five (5)Member Council.
   a.   The Town Council is the Town legislative body.  2
   b.   The Town Council consists of five (5) members.  3
   c.   The members of the Town Council shall be elected at large by the
voters.
   d.   The members of the Town Council shall be residents of the district
(ward) to which they are elected to represent.
(Ord. No. 1398, § 2, 10-29-97; Ord. No. 1563, §§ 1-2, 12-12-02)
 
Notes
2 2   I.C., § 36-5-2-2, addresses the Town Council.
3 3   I.C., § 36-5-2-3, addresses the term of office of Council Members.
Sec. 3-2 Five (5) Legislative Districts (Wards)  4 ,  5
   a.   The Town of Schererville is divided into five (5) legislative districts
(wards) to be numbered District 1, District 2, District 3, District 4, and
District 5.
(Ord. No. 1398, § 1, 10-29-97)
   b.   Geographic boundaries.  6
   The geographical boundaries of the five (5) districts (wards) for the
purpose of conducting elections and determining residency of the Town Council
Members along with the population of each such district, shall be modified as
set forth on the map attached hereto as Exhibit "A," incorporated herein by
reference and specifically made part of this ordinance.
   The District (Ward) Boundaries shall be as set forth hereafter, namely:
   1.   District "Ward One".
   Beginning at the northeast corner of Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 9
West of the Second Principle Meridian; thence southerly along the east line of
said Section 13, a distance of 5,317 feet to the southeast corner of said
Section 13, being the northeast corner of Section 24 of said Township and
Range; thence southerly along the east line of said Section 24, a distance of
1,987 feet to the centerline of U.S. 30; thence westerly along the centerline
of U.S. 30, a distance of 11,059 feet to the intersection of U.S. 30 and Cline
Avenue, point being on the west line of Section 14 of said Township and Range;
thence northerly along said west line of said Section 14, a distance of 3,887
feet to the centerline of Joliet Street; thence easterly along the centerline
of Joliet Street, a distance of 4,013 feet to the east line of the west half of
the northeast quarter of said Section 14; thence southerly along said east line
of the west half of the northeast quarter of said Section 14, a distance of
2,548 feet to the southeast corner of said west half of the northeast quarter
of said Section 14, point being the northwest corner of the northeast quarter
of the southeast quarter of said Section 14; thence easterly along the north
line of said northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said Section 14, a
distance of 1,345 feet to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of said
Section 14, also being the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of said
Section 13; thence easterly along the north line of said northwest quarter of
the southwest quarter of said Section 13, a distance of 1,324 feet to the
northeast corner of said northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said
Section 13, also being the southwest corner of the east half of the northwest
quarter of said Section 13; thence northerly along the west line of said east
half of the northwest quarter of said Section 13, a distance of 2,647 to the
northwest corner of the east half of the northwest quarter of said Section 13,
also being the southeast corner of the west half of the southwest quarter of
Section 12 of said Township and Range; thence northerly along the east line of
said west half of the southwest quarter of said Section 12, a distance of 17
feet to the western right-of-way line of NI Fuel Company Right-of-Way; thence
northwesterly along said western right-of-way line, a distance of 3,356 feet to
the centerline of the Turkey Creek Ditch; thence easterly along the centerline
of the Turkey Creek Ditch, a distance of 3,410 feet to a point on the west line
of the east half of said Section 12; thence southerly along said west line of
the east half of said Section 12, a distance of 319 feet to the northwest
corner of the southeast quarter of said Section 12; thence easterly along the
north line of said southeast quarter of said Section 12, a distance of 165 feet
to the to the centerline of the Turkey Creek Ditch; thence southeasterly along
the centerline of the Turkey Creek Ditch, a distance of 2,948 to the east line
of said Section 12; thence southerly along the east line of said Section 12, a
distance of 1,319 feet to the southeast corner of said Section 12, being the
northeast corner of said Section 13 being the point of beginning.
   Excluding the following: Beginning at the southwest corner of the northeast
quarter of Section 13. Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle
Meridian; thence northerly along the west line of said northeast quarter of
said Section 13, a distance of 196 feet to a corner of Fox Chase subdivision
recorded in Plat Book 89 Page 72 in said Lake County Recorder's Office; thence
northwesterly along the boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 735
feet to a corner of said subdivision; thence northeasterly along the boundary
line of said subdivision, a distance of 20 feet to a corner of said subdivision
being on the western right-of-way line of NI Fuel Company Right-of-Way; thence
northwesterly along said western right-of-way line, a distance of 206 feet to
the centerline of Joliet Street; thence southeasterly along said centerline of
Joliet Street, a distance of 251 feet to the eastern right-of-way line of said
NI Fuel Company Right-of-Way; thence northwesterly along said eastern right-of-
way line of NI Fuel Company Right-of-Way, a distance of 88 feet; thence
northeasterly a distance of 326 feet to the west line of the northeast quarter
of said Section 13; thence southerly along the west line of the northeast
quarter of said Section 13, a distance of 111 feet to the north boundary line
of Phillips' 1st Addition subdivision recorded in Plat Book 33 Page 78 in said
Lake County Recorder's Office; thence southeasterly along said north boundary
line and the extension of said subdivision, a distance of 1,461 feet to the
east line of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 13;
thence south along said east line, a distance of 315 feet to the centerline of
Joliet Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Joliet Street, a
distance of 1,703 feet to the eastern right-of-way line of NI Fuel Company
Right-of-Way; thence southeasterly along said eastern right-of-way line, a
distance of 1,048 feet to the south line of said northeast quarter of said
Section 13; thence westerly along said south line a distance of 298 feet to the
southwest corner of said northeast quarter of said Section 13 being the point
of beginning.
   2.   District "Ward Two".
   Beginning at the northeast corner of Section 4, Township 35 North, Range 9
West of the Second Principle Meridian; thence southerly along the east line of
said Section 4, a distance of 5,511 feet to the centerline of Division Street
also being the southeast corner of said Section 4, being the northwest corner
of Section 10 of said Township and Range; thence easterly along the centerline
of Division Street also being the north line of said Section 10, a distance of
5,280 feet to the northeast corner of said Section 10; thence southerly along
the east line of said Section 10, a distance of 4,958 feet to the northwest
corner of Baker Estates Subdivision recorded in Plat Book 51 Page 56A in the
Lake County Recorder's Office, Lake County Government Center, Crown Point,
Indiana 46307; thence easterly along the north boundary line of said
subdivision, a distance of 1,064 feet to the northeast corner of said
subdivision; thence southerly along the east boundary line of said subdivision,
a distance of 238 feet to a corner of said subdivision; thence westerly along
the boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 116 feet to a corner of
said subdivision; thence southerly along the boundary line of said subdivision,
a distance of 92 feet to a corner of said subdivision point being on the north
line of said Section 14; thence easterly along said north line of said Section
14, a distance of 378 feet to the centerline of Broad Street, point being the
northeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said
Section 14; thence southerly along the east line of said northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said Section 14 also being the centerline of Broad
Street, a distance of 218 feet to the intersection of Broad Street and Joliet
Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Joliet Street, a distance of
3,407 feet to the intersection of Joliet Street and Hartley Drive; thence
southerly along the centerline of Hartley Drive, a distance of 866 feet; thence
westerly along the centerline Gregory Street, a distance of 744 feet to the
intersection of Gregory Street and Schafer Drive; thence southerly along the
centerline of Schafer Drive, a distance of 647 feet; thence westerly along the
centerline of Lake Street, a distance of 485 feet to the centerline of South
Park Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of South Park Avenue, a
distance of 145 feet to the centerline of Park Street; thence northwesterly
along the centerline of Park Street, a distance of 875 feet to the centerline
of Austin Avenue point being on the east line of the west half of the northwest
quarter of Section 15 of said Township and Range; thence south along said east
line of being the center line of Austin Avenue, a distance of 71 feet to the
centerline of the former Conrail Right-of-Way; thence northwesterly along the
centerline of said right-of-way, a distance of 1,310 feet to the centerline of
Joliet Street; thence westerly along the center line of Joliet Street, a
distance of 3,698 feet to the centerline of U.S. 30; thence westerly along the
centerline of U.S. 30, a distance of 871 feet to the centerline of the Norfolk
Southern Railway right-of-way; Thence northerly along the centerline of said
right-of-way, a distance of 5,057 feet to the centerline of the P.C.C. & St.
Louis Railroad right-of-way; thence northwesterly along said right-of-way a
distance of 1,836 feet to the centerline of U.S. 41 point being of the east
line of Section 5 of said Township and Range; thence southerly along said east
line of said Section 5, a distance of 83 feet to the southeast corner of said
Section 5 being the northeast corner of Section 8 of said Township and Range;
thence southerly along the east line of said Section 8, a distance of 2,664
feet to the centerline of Deer Creek Drive; thence westerly along the
centerline of Deer Creek Drive, a distance of 4,550 feet to the centerline of
Estate Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Estate Drive, a distance
of 189 feet to the centerline of Golden Leaf Lane; thence easterly along the
centerline of Golden Leaf Lane, a distance of 358 feet to the centerline of
Wildflower Way; thence southerly along the centerline of Wildflower Way, a
distance of 1,173 feet to the centerline of Ridge Field Run; thence easterly
along the centerline of Ridge Field Run, a distance of 1,425 feet to the
centerline of Janice Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Janice
Drive, a distance of 1,854 feet to the centerline of U.S. 30; thence westerly
along the centerline of U.S. 30, a distance of 2,406 feet to a point on the
west line of Section 17 of said Township and Range; thence northerly along said
west line of said Section 17, a distance of 822 feet to the northwest corner of
said Section 17 being the southwest corner of Section 8 of said Township and
Range; thence northerly along the west line of said Section 8, a distance of
5,296 feet to the centerline of 213th Street also being the northwest corner of
Said Section 8; thence easterly along the centerline of 213th Street also being
the north line of said Section 8, a distance of 972 feet to the extended
intersection of the west boundary line of Briar Ridge Country Club Addition,
Unit 4 Block 1 subdivision recorded in Plat Book 62 Page 55 in said Lake County
Recorder's Office; thence northerly along said extended west boundary line, a
distance of 109 feet to the southwest corner of said subdivision; thence
northerly along the west boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 460
feet to the northwest corner of said subdivision; thence northerly a distance
of 576 feet to the boundary line of Briar Ridge Country Club Addition Unit One
subdivision recorded in Plat Book 53 Page 79 in said Lake County Recorder's
Office; thence northwesterly along the boundary line of said subdivision, a
distance of 1,218 feet to a corner; thence northwesterly along the boundary
line of said subdivision, a distance of 136 feet to a corner; thence
northwesterly along the boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 306
feet to a corner; thence northerly along the boundary line of said subdivision,
a distance of 193 feet to a corner; thence northeasterly along the boundary
line of said subdivision, a distance of 288 feet to a corner; thence
northeasterly along the boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 680
feet to the western right-of-way of St. Andrews Drive East; thence northerly
along said right-of-way, a distance of 126 feet to the southeast corner of
Briar Ridge Countiy Club Addition Unit 1A subdivision recorded in Plat Book 63
Page 38 in said Lake County Recorder's Office; thence westerly along the south
boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 219 feet to the southwest
corner of said subdivision; thence northerly along the west boundary line of
said subdivision, a distance of 610 feet to the boundary line of Briar Ridge
Country Club Addition Unit 5, Springwood Condominiums Phase 1 subdivision
recorded in Plat Book 53 Page 78 in said Lake County Recorder's Office; thence
westerly along the boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 170 feet to
a corner; thence northwesterly along the boundary line of said subdivision, a
distance of 670 feet to a corner; thence northwesterly along the boundary line
of said subdivision, a distance of 215 feet to a corner; thence northerly along
the boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 829 feet to the north
right-of-way line of St. Andrews Drive; thence southeasterly along said north
right-of-way line of St. Andrews Drive, a distance of 52 feet to a corner of
Briar Ridge Country Club Addition Unit 7 Block 2 subdivision recorded in Plat
Book 56, Page 41 in said Lake County Recorder's Office; thence northerly along
the boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 61 feet to a corner;
thence northwesterly along the boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of
90 feet to a corner; thence northerly along the boundary line of said
subdivision, a distance of 144 feet to a corner; thence northeasterly along the
boundary line of said subdivision line, a distance of 48 feet to the corner of
Briar Ridge Country Club Addition, Unit 7 Block 1 subdivision recorded in Plat
Book 55 Page 11 in said Lake County Recorder's Office; thence northeasterly
along the boundary line of said subdivision line, a distance of 180 feet to the
corner of Briar Ridge Country Club Addition. Unit 7 Block 3 subdivision
recorded in Plat Book 58 Page 13 in said Lake County Recorder's Office; thence
northeasterly along the boundary and an extension of a distance of 87 feet;
thence easterly along an extension of and the boundary of said subdivision, a
distance of 357 feet to the west line of Section 5 of said Township and Range;
thence northerly along said west line of said Section 5, a distance of 200 feet
to the northwest corner of said Section 5 also being the centerline of Main
Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Main Street being the north
line of said Section 5, a distance of 83 feet to the southwest corner of
Section 32, Township 36 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle Meridian;
thence easterly along the centerline of Main Street being the north line of
said Section 5, a distance of 5,216 feet to the northeast corner of said
Section 5 being the northwest corner of said Section 4; thence easterly along
the centerline of Main Street being the north line of said Section 4, a
distance of 66 feet to the southeast corner of said Section 32; thence easterly
along the centerline of Main Street being the north line of said Section 4, a
distance of 5,211 feet to the northeast corner of Section 4 being the point of
beginning.
   3.   District "Ward Three".
   Beginning at the intersection of U.S. 30 and Cline Avenue; thence westerly
along the centerline of U.S. 30, a distance of 750 feet to the centerline of
Turkey Creek Ditch; thence southwesterly along the centerline of said Turkey
Creek Ditch, a distance of 1,846 feet to a point on the north line of Section
22, Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle Meridian, also
being the centerline of 77th Avenue; thence westerly along the north line of
said Section 22, a distance of 954 feet to northwest corner of the east half of
said Section 22; thence southerly along the west line of the east half of said
Section 22, a distance of 650 feet; thence westerly a distance of 1,355 feet to
east centerline of Austin Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of
Austin Avenue, a distance of 665 feet to the intersection of Austin Avenue and
77th Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of 77th Avenue, a distance of
333 feet; thence southerly, a distance of 660 feet; thence westerly a distance
of 333 feet; thence northerly, a distance of 660 feet to the centerline of 77th
Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of 77th Avenue, a distance of 666
feet to the northwest corner of Section 21, Township 35 North, Range 9 West of
the Second Principle Meridian; thence southerly along the east line of said
Section 21, a distance of 2,804 feet; thence easterly, a distance of 600 feet;
thence southerly a distance of 165 feet; thence westerly, a distance of 270
feet; thence southerly, a distance of 165 feet; thence westerly, a distance of
328 feet to the east line of said Section 21; thence southerly along the east
line of said Section 21, a distance of 997 feet; thence easterly, a distance of
560 feet; thence southerly a distance of 165 feet; thence easterly, a distance
of 749 feet to the west right-of-way line of Austin Avenue; thence southerly
along the west right-of-way line of Austin Avenue, a distance of 330 feet;
thence westerly, a distance of 1310 feet to the east line of said Section 21;
thence southerly along the east line of said Section 21, a distance of 653 feet
to the southeast corner of said Section 21, also being the centerline of 85th
Avenue; thence westerly along the south line of said Section 21, a distance
1,728 feet to the centerline of 85th Avenue and Manchester Lane; thence
northerly along the centerline of Manchester Lane, a distance of 1,275 feet to
the intersection of Manchester Lane and Buckingham Lane; thence westerly along
the centerline of Buckingham Lane, a distance of 275 feet to the intersection
of Buckingham Lane and Balkan Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of
Balkan Drive, a distance of 351 feet to the centerline of Balkan Drive and
Scotch Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Scotch Street, a
distance of 340 feet to the intersection of Scotch Street and Bristlecone
Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Bristlecone Drive, a distance
of 980 feet to the intersection of Bristlecone Drive and Lacebark Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of Lacebark Street, a distance of 350 feet
to the intersection of Lacebark Street and Hugel Hill Street; thence northerly
along the centerline of Hugel Hill Street, a distance of 986 feet to the
intersection of Hugel Hill Street and Turin Drive; thence northerly along the
centerline of Hugel Hill Street, a distance of 323 feet to the centerline of
Bach Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Bach Drive, a distance of
1,005 feet to the centerline of Springhill Drive; thence northerly along the
centerline of Springhill Drive, a distance of 1,411 feet to the centerline of
77th Avenue being on the south line of Section 16 of said Township and Range;
thence westerly along the centerline of 77th Avenue being said south line of
said Section 16, a distance of 1,250 feet to the centerline of Lincolnwood
Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Lincolnwood Avenue and an
extension thereof, a distance of 3,803 feet to the south boundary line of
Sherwood Creek Plaza subdivision recorded in Plat Book 69 Page 07 in said Lake
County Recorder's Office; thence westerly along the south boundary line of said
subdivision, a distance of 30 feet to the southwest corner of said subdivision;
thence northerly along the west boundary line of said subdivision, a distance
of 114 feet to the west end of a line dividing Lot 1 of said subdivision;
thence easterly along a lot dividing line, a distance of 39 feet; thence
northeasterly along a lot dividing line, a distance of 201 feet, thence
easterly along a lot dividing line, a distance of 169 feet: thence northerly
along a lot dividing line and extension of, a distance of 232 feet to the
centerline of U.S. 30; thence easterly along the centerline of U.S. 30, a
distance of 423 feet to the centerline of Joliet Street; thence easterly along
the centerline of Joliet Sheet, a distance of 3,698 feet to the centerline of
the former Conrail Right-of-Way; thence southeasterly along the centerline of
said right-of-way, a distance of 1,310 feet to the centerline of Austin Avenue
point being on the east line of the west half of the northwest quarter of
Section 15 of said Township and Range; thence north along said east line of
being the centerline of Austin Avenue, a distance of 71 feet to the centerline
of Park Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Park Street, a
distance of 875 feet to the centerline of South Park Avenue; thence northerly
along the centerline of South Park Avenue, a distance of 145 feet to the
centerline of Lake Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Lake Street,
a distance of 485 feet; thence northerly along the centerline of Schafer Drive,
a distance of 670 feet to the centerline of Gregory Street; thence easterly
along the centerline of Gregory Street, a distance of 782 feet to the
centerline of Hartley Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Hartley
Drive, a distance of 800 feet to the centerline of Joliet Street; thence
easterly along the centerline of Joliet Street, a distance of 2,075 feet to the
intersection of Joliet Street and Cline Avenue, being the east line of Section
15, Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle Meridian; thence
southerly along the centerline of Cline Avenue, being the east line of said
Section 15, a distance of 3,887 feet to the intersection of U.S. 30 and Cline
Avenue, being the point of beginning.
   4.   District "Ward Four".
   Beginning at the intersection of U.S. 30 and the west line of Section 17,
Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle Meridian; thence
southerly along said west line of said Section 17, a distance of 4,454 feet to
the southwest corner of said Section 17 being the northeast corner of Section
19 of said Township and Range being the centerline of 77th Avenue; thence
westerly along the north line of said Section 19 being the centerline of 77th
Avenue, a distance of 871 feet; thence southerly, a distance of 1,452 to the
eastern right-of-way line of a railroad right-of-way; thence southeasterly
along said eastern right-of-way line, a distance of 1,239 feet to the west line
of Section 20 of said Township and Range; thence northerly along said west line
of said Section 20, a distance of 992 feet to the northwest corner of the south
half of the north half or said Section 20; thence easterly along said north
line a distance of 4,370 feet; thence southerly a distance of 178 feet to the
northern right-of-way line of 78th Place; thence easterly along said northern
right-of-way line of 78th Place a distance of 350 feet; Thence Northerly a
distance of 178 feet; Thence Easterly along said North line of the South Half
of the North Half or said Section 20 a distance of 250 feet; Thence
Southwesterly, a distance of 270 feet to the eastern right-of-way line of
Ontario Place; thence southerly along said eastern right-of-way line, a
distance of 222 feet; thence easterly, a distance of 125 feet; thence
southerly, a distance of 206 feet to the centerline of Scenic Drive; thence
westerly along the centerline of Scenic Drive, a distance of 55 feet; thence
southerly, a distance of 205 feet; thence easterly, a distance of 58 feet;
thence southerly, a distance of 498 feet to the south line of the north half of
said Section 20; thence easterly along said south line, a distance of 375 feet
to the southeast corner of the north half of said Section 20 being the
centerline of U.S. 41; thence southerly along the east line of said Section 20,
a distance of 222 feet; thence easterly, a distance of 1,036 feet to the
western right-of-way line of Norfolk Southern Railway Company Right-of-Way;
thence northerly along said western right-of-way line, a distance of 214 feet
to the south line of the north half of Section 21; thence easterly along said
south line, a distance of 119 feet to the western right-of-way line of Norfolk
Southern Railway Company Right-of-Way; thence northerly along said western
right-of-way line, a distance of 2,626 feet to the south right-of-way line of
77th Avenue; thence easterly along said south right-of-way line, a distance of
130 feet to the west right-of-way line of Alexander Street; thence southerly
along said west right-of-way line of Alexander Street, a distance of 3,953
feet; thence easterly, a distance of 560 feet; thence southerly, a distance of
1325 feet to the south line of said Section 21 being the centerline of 85th
Avenue; thence easterly along said south line being the centerline of 85th
Avenue, a distance of 975 feet; thence northerly, a distance of 1,320 feet to
the north line of the south half of the south half of said Section 21; thence
easterly along said north line, a distance of 571 feet; thence southerly, a
distance of 1320 feet to said south line of said Section 21 being the
centerline of 85th Avenue; thence easterly along said south line being the
centerline of 85th Avenue, a distance of 170 feet to the centerline of 85th
Avenue and Manchester Lane; thence northerly along the centerline of Manchester
Lane, a distance of 1,275 feet to the intersection of Manchester Lane and
Buckingham Lane; thence westerly along the centerline of Buckingham Lane, a
distance of 275 feet to the intersection of Buckingham Lane and Balkan Drive;
thence northerly along the centerline of Balkan Drive, a distance of 351 feet
to the centerline of Balkan Drive and Scotch Street; thence westerly along the
centerline of Scotch Street, a distance of 340 feet to the intersection of
Scotch Street and Bristlecone Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of
Bristlecone Drive, a distance of 980 feet to the intersection of Bristlecone
Drive and Lacebark Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Lacebark
Street, a distance of 350 feet to the intersection of Lacebark Street and Hugel
Hill Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Hugel Hill Street, a
distance of 986 feet to the intersection of Hugel Hill Street and Turin Drive;
thence northerly along the centerline of Hugel Hill Street, a distance of 323
feet to the centerline of Bach Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of
Bach Drive, a distance of 1,005 feet to the centerline of Springhill Drive;
thence northerly along the centerline of Springhill Drive, a distance of 1,411
feet to the centerline of 77th Avenue being on the south line of Section 16 of
said Township and Range; thence westerly along the centerline of 77th Avenue
being said south line of said Section 16. a distance of 1,250 feet to the
centerline of Lincolnwood Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of
Lincolnwood Avenue and an extension thereof, a distance of 3,803 feet to the
south boundary line of Sherwood Creek Plaza subdivision recorded in Plat Book
69 Page 07 in said Lake County Recorder's Office; thence westerly along the
south boundary line of said subdivision, a distance of 30 feet to the southwest
corner of said subdivision; thence northerly along the west boundary line of
said subdivision, a distance of 114 feet to the west end of a line dividing Lot
J of said subdivision; thence easterly along a lot dividing line, a distance of
39 feet; thence northeasterly along a lot dividing line, a distance of 201
feet, thence easterly along a lot dividing line, a distance of 169 feet; thence
northerly along a lot dividing line and extension of, a distance of 232 feet to
the centerline of U.S. 30; thence westerly along the centerline of U.S. 30, a
distance of 448 feet to the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railway Right-
Of-Way; thence northerly along the centerline of said right-of-way, a distance
of 5,057 feet to the centerline of the P.C.C. & St. Louis Railroad Right-of-
Way; thence northwesterly along said right-of-way a distance of 1,836 feet to
the centerline of U.S. 41 point being of the east line of Section 5 of said
Township and Range; thence southerly along said east line of said Section 5, a
distance of 83 feet to the southeast corner of said Section 5 being the
northeast corner of Section 8 of said Township and Range; thence southerly
along the east line of said Section 8, a distance of 2,664 feet to the
centerline of Deer Creek Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Deer
Creek Drive, a distance of 4,550 feet to the centerline of Estate Drive; thence
southerly along the centerline of Estate Drive, a distance of 189 feet to the
centerline of Golden Leaf Lane; thence easterly along the centerline of Golden
Leaf Lane, a distance of 358 feet to the centerline of Wildflower Way; thence
southerly along the centerline of Wildflower Way, a distance of 1,173 feet to
the centerline of Ridge Field Run; thence easterly along the centerline of
Ridge Field Run, a distance of 1,425 feet to the centerline of Janice Drive;
thence southerly along the centerline of Janice Drive, a distance of 1,854 feet
to the centerline of U.S. 30; thence westerly along the centerline of U.S. 30,
a distance of 2,406 feet to a point on the west line of said Section 17 being
the point of beginning.
   5.   District "Ward Five".
   Beginning at the southeast corner of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 9
West of the Second Principle Meridian, thence northerly along the east line of
said Section 25 and the east line of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 9
West of the Second Principle Meridian, a distance of 8,644 feet to the
centerline of U.S. 30; thence westerly along the centerline of U.S. 30, a
distance of 11,809 feet to the centerline of Turkey Creek Ditch; thence
southwesterly, along the centerline of said Turkey Creek Ditch, a distance of
1,846 feet to a point on the north line of Section 22, Township 35 North, Range
9 West of the Second Principle Meridian, also being the centerline of 77th
Avenue; thence westerly along the north line of said Section 22, a distance of
954 feet to northwest corner of the east half of said Section 22; thence
southerly along the west line of the east half of said Section 22, a distance
of 3,963 feet to the southwest corner of the north half of the southeast
quarter of said Section 22; thence easterly along the south line of the north
half of the southeast quarter of said Section 22, a distance of 2,668 feet to
the southeast corner of said north half of the southeast quarter of said
Section 22; thence northerly along the east line of Section 22, a distance of
315 feet; thence easterly along north boundary line of Schererville Heights
Unit 3 Section 3, as well as Section 2 and 4, Plat Book 40 Page 130A and
Section 1, Plat Book 40 Page 86, both recorded in said Lake County Recorder's
Office, and the extension of, a distance of 3551 feet to the centerline of
Rohrman Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Rohrman Road, a
distance of 1,312 feet; thence easterly, a distance of 840 feet; thence
southerly a distance of 713 feet to the centerline of 85th ave, also being the
northwest corner of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second
Principle Meridian; thence easterly along the centerline of 85th Ave. a
distance of 928 feet; thence northerly a distance of 1,801 feet; thence
easterly, a distance of 396 feet; thence northerly, a distance of 849 feet;
thence easterly, a distance of 1,332 feet to the center of Section 24, Township
35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle Meridian, being the centerline
of Burr St.; thence southerly, along the west line of the east half of Section
25 Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle Meridian, a distance
of 3,372 feet; thence westerly a distance of 150 feet; thence northerly a
distance of 75 feet; thence westerly a distance of 2,036 feet; thence southerly
a distance of 47 feet to the east line of the former P.C.C. & St. Louis
Railroad Right-of-Way; thence southeasterly along said east line of the former
P.C.C. & St. Louis Railroad Right-of-Way, a distance of 2,217 feet; thence
northeasterly a distance of 599 feet; thence easterly a distance of 213 feet to
the west line of the east half of said Section 25; thence southerly along said
west line a distance of 2,436 feet; thence northeasterly, a distance of 154
feet; thence northerly, a distance of 260 feet to the centerline of 91st Ave.;
thence easterly, along the centerline 91st Ave., a distance of 300 feet; thence
southerly, a distance of 1,314 feet; thence easterly, a distance of 1,612 feet;
thence southerly a distance of 665 feet; thence easterly, a distance of 581
feet, to the centerline of Clark St., also being the east line of Section 36,
Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle Meridian; thence
northerly, along the east line of said Section 36, a distance of 666 feet, to
the point of beginning.
   Also including Town of Schererville Ordinance 1663A, Adopted October 11,
2006 (a.k.a. The Preserve Community), and to also include into Ward 5, the
Northern Indiana Public Service Company exceptions as noted in Ordinance 1663A.
Also including Town of Schererville Ordinance 1825, Adopted December 12, 2012.
   Also, the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter and the east one-half
of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 2, Township 34
North, Range 9 West, of the 2nd Principal Meridian; Excepting therefrom that
part of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 2, Township
34 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principal Meridian, in Lake County,
Indiana, more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the northeast
corner of said Section 2; thence north 89°23'55" West along the north line of
said Section 2, a distance of 140 feet to the point of beginning; thence south
00°21'51" west parallel with the east line of said Section 2, a distance of 360
feet; thence north 89°23'45" west parallel with the north line of said Section
2, a distance of 295 feet; thence north 00°21'51" east a distance of 360 feet
to the north line of said Section 2; thence south 89°23'55" east along said
north line a distance of 295 feet to the point of beginning, containing
approximately 57.562, acres more or less, in Lake county, Indiana.
   Also, the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter and the west one-half
of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter in Section 2, Township 34
North, Range 9 West of the 2nd Principal Meridian, in Lake County, Indiana;
excepting therefrom the following: part of the northeast quarter of Section 2,
Township 34 North, Range 9 West of the 2nd Principal Meridian, being more
particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point on the south line of
the northeast quarter of said Section 2 and being 607.45 feet east of the
southwest corner thereof, said point being the northwest corner of Lot 14,
Green Acres Estates; thence south 89 degrees 28 minutes 09 seconds east along
the south line of said northeast quarter a distance of 190 feet; thence north
00 degrees 45 minutes 39 seconds east, 230 feet; thence north 89 degrees 28
minutes 09 seconds west, 190 feet; thence south 00 degrees 45 minutes 39
seconds west, 230 feet to the point of beginning.
   Also, the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 2, Township
34 North, Range 9 West of the 2nd Principal Meridian, in Lake County, Indiana;
Excepting therefrom the west 330 feet and the east 132 feet and the west 273
feet of the east 405 feet of the north 323 feet of said quarter section.
(Ord. No. 1398, §§ 1-3, 10-29-97; Ord. No. 1563, § 3, 12-12-02; Ord. No. 1829,
12-12-12; Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-8-21)
 
Notes
4 4   I.C., § 36-5-2-5, addresses legislative districts.
5 5   I.C., § 36-5-2-4.1, pertains to the division of Towns into districts, and
  I.C., § 36-5-1-10.1, pertains to the composition of districts.
  6   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1293 which would have repealed Ord. No. 1250 and
  would have elected Council Members at large by the voters of the entire Town,
6 was "denied" in 1994. Ord. No. 1390 passed on September 10, 1997, and Ord. No.
  1250 passed on October 20, 1993 were replaced by Ord. No. 1398 passed on October
  29, 1997. Ord. No. 1563 passed on December 12, 2002, changed the voting process
  to elect Council Members at large by the voters of the entire Town.
Sec. 3-3 Terms of Office
   a.   The office of Councilman from each of all five (5) wards as well as the
Clerk-Treasurer shall run in the primary election and general elections
regularly held in a general election year during the year 1991 pursuant to
Indiana Code, §§ 3-10-6-2 and 3-10-6-3 for a four (4) year term each.
(Ord. No. 1137, § 5, 12-11-89)
   b.   Each of the terms of all Councilmen from each of the five (5) wards, as
well as the Clerk-Treasurer will then commence January 1, unless otherwise
amended by State law or further action by this Council.
See. 3-4 through Sec. 3-7 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Governing Regulations of the Council
Sec. 3-8 Selection of a Council President.  7
   a.   The Town Council shall select one of its members to be its president
for a definite term, which may not exceed his term of office as a member of the
legislative body.
(Schererville Town Code, § 2-4-4)
   b.   The President of the Town Council is the Town Executive.
 
Notes
7 7   I.C., § 36-5-2-7, addresses the selection of a President, and I.C., § 36-5-2-
  2, addresses the Town Executive.
Sec. 3-9 Selection of a Vice-President.
   a.   The Town Council shall select one of its members to be its vice-
president for a definite term, which may not exceed his or her term of office
as a member of the legislative body.
   b.   The Vice-President of the Town council shall serve as Executive in the
absence, sickness or illness of the President.
Sec. 3-10 Quorum.  8
   A majority of all the elected members of the Town Council constitutes a
quorum.
(Schererville Town Code, § 2-4-4)
 
Notes
8 8   I.C., § 36-5-2-9.1, defines a quorum of the Council.
Sec. 3-11 When Majority Vote Required.
   A majority vote of the Town Council is required to pass an ordinance, unless
a greater vote is required by statute. A majority vote means at least a
majority vote of all the elected members.
(Schererville Town Code, § 2-4-5)
Sec. 3-12 When Two-Thirds (2/3) Vote Required.  9
   A two-thirds (2/3) vote, with unanimous consent of the members present, is
required to pass an ordinance on the same day or at the same meeting at which
it is introduced. A two-thirds (2/3) vote means at least two-thirds (2/3) vote
of all the elected members.
 
Notes
9 9   I.C., § 36-5-2-9.8, addresses votes of the Council.
Sec. 3-13 Town Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Break Ties.  10
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is the clerk of the Town Council. Whenever the Town
Council has an even number of members for any reason, the Clerk-Treasurer is an
ex officio member for the purpose of casting the deciding vote to break a tie.
(Schererville Town Code, § 2-4-7)
 
Notes
10 10   I.C., § 36-5-2-8, authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to vote in case of a
   tie.
Sec. 3-14 When an Ordinance Takes Effect.  11
   An ordinance, order, or resolution passed by the Town Council becomes
effective when signed by the president of the Council unless the ordinance,
order or resolution by its own terms establishes the date upon which it takes
effect. If required by statute, an adopted ordinance, order, or resolution must
be promulgated or published before it takes effect.
(Schererville Town Code, § 2-4-9)
 
Notes
11 11   I.C., § 36-5-2-10, addresses adoption of ordinances, orders, resolutions, and
   their publication.
Sec. 3-15 Regular and Special Meetings of the Town Council.  12
   a. The regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held at the Town Hall
in the Town of Schererville at any reasonable hour of the day or evening (such
hour, if not the usual ordinarily appointed one having been previously agreed
upon by the majority of the Council and the Clerk-Treasurer duly and promptly
notified thereof), provided that in all cases where a special meeting or called
meeting is called, at least forty-eight (48) hours written notice shall be
given to the Town Council, Clerk-Treasurer, and the public, pursuant to Indiana
Code, § 5-14-1.5.
   b.   Special or called meetings may be called by the President of the
Council, or in his absence, sickness, inability or refusal to make such call,
by the Vice-President of the Council, and in his absence, sickness, inability
or refusal to make such call, then by a majority of the Council when deemed
necessary. The President and Vice President may by verbal notice at the public
meeting, when all members of the Council are present, call a special meeting of
the Council, and in all cases where the provisions of the statutes of Indiana
regulating the calling of the special meeting do not forbid such action by
prescribing differently. In all cases where provisions of the statute prescribe
the method of the call, the provisions must be strictly followed.
   c.   Executive sessions shall be conducted in strict compliance with Indiana
Code, § 5-14-1.5-6.
 
Notes
12 12   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-1, et seq., addresses the Indiana Open Door Law.
Sec. 3-16 Powers of the Town Council.  13
   The Council may:
   a.   adopt Ordinances and Resolutions for the performance of functions of
the Town;
   b.   purchase, hold, and convey any interest in property, for the use of the
Town;
   c.   adopt and use a common seal; and
   d.   exercise all powers that are needed for the effective operation of
local governmental affairs.  14
 
Notes
13 13   I.C., § 36-5-2-9, sets forth the powers of the legislative body.
14 14   I.C., §§ 36-1-3-1 through 36-1-3-9, set forth Home Rule powers of
   municipalities.
Sec. 3-17 Order of Business at Town Council Meetings.
   The following order of business shall be followed at Town Council meetings:
   I.   Call to order and Pledge of Allegiance.
   II.   Roll Call.
   III.   Personnel Business.
   IV.   Approval of Minutes of Previous Meeting(s).
   V.   Claims.
   VI.   Old Business.
   VII.   Reports.
      1.   Staff
      2.   Council
   VIII.    New Business.
   IX.    Business for Floor.
   X.    Adjournment.
Sec. 3-18 Rules of Order.
   The most recent version of Roberts Rules of Order shall govern all meetings
of the Town Council, unless ordinance or statute provide otherwise.
Sec. 3-19 Taping and Recording of Meetings.  15
   a.   Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-5-2-8 the, Clerk-Treasurer of every town
shall attend all meetings of the Town Council and shall be the keeper and have
custody of the records, books, and papers of the Town Council.
   b.   The Town Council has determined that it is necessary to further protect
the legal interests of the Town of Schererville and its citizens by requiring
the Clerk-Treasurer to keep, maintain, and have custody of any and all recorded
tapes of public hearings or meetings of the Town of Schererville including, but
not limited to:
      1.   Town Council meetings.
      2.   Utility Board meetings.
   c.   Tape or tapes shall be kept by the Clerk-Treasurer for a minimum period
of one (1) year from the date of said public meeting or hearing.
(Ord. No. 851, 3-11-81; Schererville Town Code, § 2-19-2)
 
Notes
15 15   Ord. No. 851 cited I.C., § 18-3-1-31, which has been replaced by I.C., § 36-
   5-2-8.
Sec. 3-20 Town Recording Secretaries.
   The Town Recording Secretaries addressed in Section
2-172 of this Code shall work exclusively under the direction of the Town
Council and Town Manager.
Sec. 3-21 Tax Anticipation Warrant Procedures.
   The Town Council may pass ordinances authorizing the Town to borrow money
and issue tax anticipation warrants pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Section
2-370 through Section
2-377 of this Code.
Sec. 3-22 Claim Docket Procedures.
   The claim docket procedures set forth in Section
2-344 through Section
2-347 of this Code shall govern.
Sec. 3-23 Compensation of the Town Council.  16
   a.   The Town Council shall, by Ordinance, fix the compensation of its own
members.
   b.   The compensation of an elected Town officer may not be changed in the
year for which it is fixed nor may it be reduced below the amount fixed for the
previous year.
 
Notes
16 16   I.C., § 36-5-3-2, addresses the compensation for members of the Council for
   their Town officers and employees.
Sec. 3-24 Life Insurance Benefits and Coverage for Council Members.
   a.   Those members of the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, who
elect to do so, are entitled to life insurance benefits and coverage for
themselves, and eligible dependents, as offered and provided to the other
employees of the Town of Schererville, as part of the employee compensation
package.
(Ord. No. 1317, § 1, 11-8-95)
   b.   The life insurance coverage set forth in paragraph a, shall terminate
upon the expiration of term of the Council Member so electing such coverage, at
which time, said Member, and covered dependents, shall be entitled to convert
the coverage to an individual life insurance program.
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 11-8-95)
Sec. 3-25 Ordinances Which Amend the Town Code.
   All Ordinances which are of a general and permanent nature and which would
amend the Town Code, shall be in the form depicted on the following page.
Ord. No._   
(A specific number is assigned by the Clerk-Treasurer's Office)
(Short Title)
An Ordinance of the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana,
Amending Chapter___, Article___,
Section(s)_, of the Schererville Town Code
by THE INCLUSION/DELETION OF SECTION(s),
Entitled______________.
Whereas, (background statements setting forth the purpose or background of the
Ordinance where appropriate)
Whereas,
Whereas,
Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, as
follows:
Section I. Chapter_, Article__, Section(s)__, of the Schererville Town Code,
is/are hereby amended to read as follows:
(set forth specific amendatory language)
Section II. All prior Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with any
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section III. This Ordinance is hereby passed and adopted at a regular meeting
of the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, this____ day of_____
, 19__ .
ATTEST:
               Town Council of Schererville, Indiana
               By:   ____________________________
                  President
                  ____________________________
                  Council Member
                  ____________________________
                  Council Member
                  ____________________________
                  Council Member
__________________            ____________________________
Clerk-Treasurer            Council Member
 
Sec. 3-26 Electronic Participation in Town Council Meetings.
   a.   1.   The provisions of the Indiana Public Meeting Law (“the Act”), or
Indiana Code, § 5-14-1.5-3.5(d), and all other relevant terms of Indiana Code,
§§ 5-14-1.1-1 et seq., including definition, apply to this section.
      2.   This section shall be known as the “Electronic Meetings Policy” of
the Council, and applies to the Council and any Committee or Body appointed
directly to this Council, of its presiding Officer.
   b.   1.   Subject to the provisions of subsections c. and e. hereinafter,
any member of the Town Council may participate in a public meeting by any
electronic means of communication that:
         A.   Allows all participating members of the Governing/Legislative
body to simultaneously communicate with each other; and
         B.   Other than a public meeting that is an executive session, allows
the public to simultaneously attend and observe the public meeting.
      2.   A member who participates by an electronic means of communication:
         A.   Shall be considered present for purposes of establishing a
quorum; and
         B.   May participate in final action only if the member can be seen
and heard.
      3.   All votes taken during a public meeting at which at least one (1)
member participates by an electronic means of communication must be taken by
roll call vote.
   c.   1.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the members must be physically
present at a public meeting at which a member will participate by means of
electronic communication. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the members may
participate by an electronic means of communication at that same public
meeting.
      2.   A member may not attend more than fifty percent (50%) of the public
meetings in a calendar year by an electronic means of communication, unless the
member’s electronic participation is due to:
         A.   Military service;
         B.   Illness or other medical condition;
         C.   Death of a relative; or
         D.   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to person or
property.
      3.   A member may attend two (2) consecutive meetings (a set of meetings)
by electronic communication. A member must attend in person at least one (1)
public meeting between sets of public meetings that the member attends by
electronic communication, unless the member’s absence is due to:
         A.   Military service;
         B.   Illness of other medical condition;
         C.   Death of a relative; or
         D.   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to person or
property.
   d.   The minutes or memoranda of a public meeting at which any member
participates by electronic means of communication must:
      1.   Identify each member who:
         A.   Was physically present at the meeting;
         B.   Participated in the meeting by electronic means of
communications; and/or
         C.   Was absent; and
      2.   Identify the electronic means of communication by which:
         A.   Members participated in the public meeting; and
         B.   Members of the public attended and observed the public meeting if
the public meeting was not an executive session.
   e.   No member of the Council may participate by means of electronic
communication in a public meeting at which the Council may take final action:
      1.   Adopt a budget;
      2.   Make a reduction in personnel;
      3.   Initiate a referendum;
      4.   Impose or increase a fine;
      5.   Impose or increase a penalty;
      6.   Exercise the Council’s power or eminent domain; or
      7.   Establish, impose, raise or renew a tax.
   f.   1.   In the event that an emergency is declared by:
         A.   The Governor under the provisions of Indiana Code, § 10-14-3-29,
or
         B.   The Town Council President under the provisions of Indiana Code,
§ 10-14-3-29, then members are not required to be physically present for a
public meeting until the emergency is terminated.
      2.   Members may participate in a public meeting by any means of
communication, provided that:
         A.   At least a quorum of the members participate in the public
meeting by means of electronic communication or in person;
         B.   The public may simultaneously attend and observe the public
meeting unless the meeting is an executive session; and
         C.   The minutes or memoranda of the public meeting must comply with
the provisions of subsection d. of this section, as amended from time to time.
      3.   All votes taken during a public meeting at which at least one (1)
member participates by an electronic means of communication must be taken by
roll call vote.
(Ord. No. 1981, §§ 1 - 6, 5-11-22)
Sec. 3-27 through Sec. 3-29 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Procedures Governing Deliberations and Actions of the Governing
Bodies of the Town.  17
 
Notes
17 17   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-8, addresses accessibility to individuals with
   disabilities under the Open Door Law.
Sec. 3-30 Definitions.  18
   a.   Governing body means any board, commission, or other legislative or
administrative body of the Town of Schererville which takes official action
upon public business and includes any committee appointed by the governing body
or its presiding officer to which authority to take official action upon public
business has been delegated.
   b.   Meeting means a gathering of a majority of a governing body of the Town
of Schererville for the purpose of taking official action upon public business.
It does not include: 1) any social or chance gathering not intended to avoid
this chapter; 2) any on-site inspection of any project or program; 3) traveling
to and attending meetings of organizations devoted to betterment of government;
or 4) a caucus.
   c.   Official action means:
      1.   to receive information or to deliberate on public business;
      2.   to make recommendations pursuant to statute, ordinance, or executive
order;
      3.   to establish policy;
      4.   to make decisions on public business; or
      5.   to take final action.
   d.   Public business means the function for which the Town of Schererville
is created.
   e.   Executive session means a meeting from which the public is excluded
except, the governing body may admit those persons necessary to carry out the
purpose of the executive session.
   f.   Final action means a vote by the governing body on any motion,
proposal, resolution, rule, regulation, ordinance, or order.
   g.   Caucus means a gathering of members of a political party or coalition
which is held for purposes of planning political strategy and holding
discussions designed to prepare the members for taking official action.
   h.   Deliberate means a discussion which may reasonably be expected to
result in official action defined under Section
3-30 'c' '2', '3', '4' or '5' of this Division.
   i.   News Media means all newspapers qualified to receive legal
advertisements under Indiana Code., § 5-3-1, all wire services and all licensed
commercial or public radio or television stations.
(Ord. No. 885, § 1, 3-10-82)
 
Notes
18 18   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-2, sets forth definitions of the Indiana Open Door
   Law.
Sec. 3-31 Open Meetings; Secret Ballot Votes.  19
   a.   Except as provided in Section
3-34 herein, all meetings of the governing bodies of public agencies must be
open at all times for the purpose of permitting members of the public to
observe and record them.
   b.   A secret ballot vote may not be taken at a meeting.
(Ord. No. 885, § 2, 3-10-82)
 
Notes
19 19   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-3, addresses open meetings and secret ballot votes.
Sec. 3-32 Posting of Agenda; Memoranda of Meetings; Public Inspection of
Minutes.  20
   a.   A governing body of the Town of Schererville utilizing an agenda shall
post a copy of the agenda at the entrance to the location of the meeting prior
to the meeting. A rule, regulation, ordinance or other final action adopted by
reference to agenda number of item alone is void.
   b.   As the meeting progresses, the following memoranda shall be kept: 1)
the date, time and place of the meeting; 2) the members of the governing body
recorded as either present or absent; 3) the general substance of all matters
proposed, discussed or decided; and 4) a record of all votes taken, by
individual members if there is a roll call. The memoranda are to be available
within a reasonable period of time after the meeting for the purpose of
informing the public of the governing body's proceedings. The minutes, if any,
are to be open for public inspection and copying.
(Ord. No. 885, § 3, 3-10-82)
 
Notes
20 20   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-4, addresses agendas and minutes.
Sec. 3-33 Public Notice of Meetings.  21
   a.   Public notice of the date, time and place of any meetings, executive
sessions, or of any rescheduled or reconvened meeting, shall be given at least
forty-eight (48) hours before the meeting; this requirement does not apply to
reconvened meetings where announcement of the date, time and place of the
reconvened meeting is made at the original meeting and recorded in the
memoranda and minutes thereof, and there is no change in the agenda.
   b.   Public notice shall be given by a governing body of the Town of
Schererville by:
      1.   posting a copy of the notice at the Town Hall of the Town of
Schererville, and at the building where the meeting is to be held; and
      2.   depositing in the United States mail with postage prepaid or by
delivering notice to all news media which file by each January 1 an annual
written request for such notices with the Town Council of the Town of
Schererville. Said media shall be entitled to receive said notices immediately
upon the filing of their written request.
   c.   Notice of regular meetings need be given only once each year, except
that an additional notice shall be given where the date, time and place of a
regular meeting or meetings is changed. This subsection does not apply in
executive sessions.
   d.   If a meeting is called to deal with an emergency involving actual or
threatened injury to person or property, or actual or threatened disruption of
the governmental activity under the jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville by
any event, then the time requirements of notice under this section shall not
apply, but:
      1.   news media which have requested notice of meetings must be given the
same notice as is given to the members of the governing body; and
      2.   the public must be notified by posting a copy of the notice
according to this section.
(Ord. No. 885, § 4, 3-10-82)
 
Notes
21 21   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-5, addresses public notice of meetings.
Sec. 3-34 Executive Sessions.  22
   a.   Executive sessions may be held only in the following instances: 1)
where authorized by federal or state statute; 2) for discussion of strategy
with respect to: collective bargaining, initiation of litigation or litigation
which is either pending or has been threatened specifically in writing, the
implementation of security systems, or the purchase or lease of real property
up to the time a contract or option to purchase or lease is executed by the
parties; however, all such strategy discussions must be necessary for
competitive or bargaining reasons; 3) interviews with industrial or commercial
prospects or their agents; 4) interviews with prospective employees; 5) with
respect to any individual over whom the governing body has jurisdiction; to
receive information concerning the individual's alleged misconduct, and to
discuss, prior to any determination, that individual's status as an employee,
student, or independent contractor, 6) for discussion of records classified as
confidential by state or federal statute; and 7) to discuss a job performance
evaluation of individual employees.
   b.   A final action must be taken at a meeting open to the public.
   c.   Public notice of executive sessions must state their purpose or subject
matter. The requirements stated in Sec.
3-32 of this chapter for memoranda and minutes being made available to the
public is modified as to executive sessions in that they need identify only the
subject considered.
   d.   A governing body may not conduct an executive session during a meeting,
except as otherwise permitted by applicable statute or ordinance. A meeting may
not be recessed and reconvened with the intent of circumventing this
subsection.
(Ord. No. 885, § 5, 3-10-82)
 
Notes
22 22   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-6.1, addresses executive sessions.
Sec. 3-35 Collective Bargaining Meetings; Applicable Requirements.  23
   Whenever a governing body, or any person or persons authorized to act for a
governing body, meets with an employee organization, or any person or persons
authorized to act for an employee organization, for the purpose of collective
bargaining or discussion, the following apply:
   a.   Any party may inform the public of the status of collective bargaining
or discussion as it progresses by release of factual information and expression
of opinion based upon factual information.
   b.   If a mediator is appointed, any report he may file at the conclusion of
mediation is a public record open to public inspection.
   c.   If a factfinder is appointed, any hearings he holds must be open at all
times for the purpose of permitting members of the public to observe and record
them. Any findings and recommendations he makes are public records open to
public inspections provided by Indiana Code, § 20-7.5-1-13(e) or any other
applicable statute relating to factfinding in connection with public collective
bargaining.
(Ord. No. 885, § 6,3-10-82)
 
Notes
23 23   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-6.5, addresses collective bargaining.
Sec. 3-36 Violations; Remedies; Limitations; Costs and Fees.  24
   a.   An action may be filed by any citizen of this state in any court of
competent jurisdiction to enjoin continuing, threatened or future violations of
this Division or to declare void any action taken at an executive session in
violation of Section
3-31 of this Division or at any meeting of which notice is not given in
accordance with Section
3-33 of this Division. The plaintiff in such suit need not allege or prove
special damage from that suffered by the public at large.
   b.   Any action to declare any act of a governing body null and void, or to
enter an injunction which would invalidate any act of a governing body, based
on violation of this Division occurring before the action is commenced,
including but not limited to provisions on executive sessions and notice, shall
be commenced 1) prior to the delivery of any warrants, notes, bonds, or
obligations if the relief sought would have the effect, if granted, of
invalidating the notes, bonds or obligations, or 2) within thirty (30) days of
the act or failure to act complained of, whichever is sooner.
   c.   In any action filed under this section, a court may award reasonable
attorney fees, court costs, and other reasonable expenses of litigation to the
prevailing party if 1) the plaintiff prevails and the court finds the
defendant's violation is knowing and intentional, or 2) the defendant prevails
and the court finds the action is frivolous and vexatious.
(Ord. No. 885, § 7, 3-10-82)
 
Notes
24 24   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-7, addresses violations, remedies, costs and fees.
Sec. 3-37 through Sec. 3-49 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Miscellaneous Regulations.
Sec. 3-50 Town Membership Authorized.  25
   a.   The Town Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds from the
General Fund or from other funds to provide membership for the Town of
Schererville and the elected and appointed officials and members of the
municipality's boards, council, departments or agencies in local, regional,
state, and national associations of a civic, educational nature, which have as
their purpose the betterment and improvement of municipal operations.
   b.   The Town Council is further authorized to budget and appropriate funds
to pay the expenses of duly authorized representatives to attend the meetings
and functions of organizations to which the municipality belongs.
 
Notes
25 25   I.C., § 36-1-3-2, authorizes powers for the effective operation of
   government
Sec. 3-51 Interlocal Governmental Agreements.
   The Town is authorized pursuant to Indiana Code, §§ 36-1-7-1 through 36-1-7-
12, as it may be amended from time to time, to enter into joint agreements for
the purchase or exchange of property and services with other governmental
bodies through appropriate ordinance or resolution of the Town Council.
Sec. 3-52 Method to Vacate Alleys and Public Ways.  26
   Whenever the Town Council of the Incorporated Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana, shall desire to vacate an alley or alleys or a portion or
portions thereof, within such town, and shall determine that public necessity,
public convenience or public interest require the vacation thereof, it shall
adopt a declaratory resolution to that effect setting forth said desire and
determination to vacate said alley or alleys, or portion or portions thereof,
and vacating the same.
(Ord. No. 342, § 1, 10-17-61)
 
Notes
   26   I.C., § 36-7-3-12, addresses vacating public ways. Editor's Note: Since the
26 codifiers received no further update on this section from the Town Attorney, the
   section remains in its original version.
Sec. 3-53 Purchasing Equipment, Supplies, and Services with Other Communities.
27
   a.   The Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
shall take all appropriate and legal measures to enter into the joint
Interlocal Cooperation Agreement with the Towns of Highland, St. John and Dyer,
to purchase and utilize supplies, equipment, and services for the mutual
benefit of the four (4) participating communities, at shared costs.
(Res. No. 94-6, § 1, 2-23-94)
   b.   The President of the Town Council is authorized and permitted to enter
into a Joint Interlocal Cooperation Agreement for the purchase and utilization
of equipment, supplies and services for the mutual benefit of the Towns of
Dyer, Highland, Schererville and St. John, at shared costs, pursuant to the
applicable provisions of I.C. 36-1-7-1, et seq., as amended from time to time;
further, the Town Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to attest the execution of said
agreement by the President of the Town Council.
(Res. No. 94-6, § 2, 2-23-94)
 
Notes
   27   Editors' Note: Res. No. 95-1 is of a similar nature as Res. No. 94-6 with
27 all copies of such interlocal agreements being maintained in the Office of the
   Clerk-Treasurer and available for public inspection during regular business
   hours.
Sec. 3-54 through Sec. 3-69 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Town Court.  28
 
Notes
28 28   I.C., § 33-10.1-1, authorizes the establishment of a Town Court.
Division I. Municipal Judge.  29
 
Notes
29 29   I.C., §§ 3-10-6 or 3-10-7, address the election of a Town Judge.
Sec. 3-70 Town Court Established.
   Under the power vested in it by I.C. § 33-10.1-1-3, the Town Council of
Schererville establishes a Town Court.
(Ord. No. 1273, § 1, 3-9-94)
Sec. 3-71 Duration of Town Court.
   The Town Court will come into existence on January 1, 1996 and shall
continue in operation until abolished by ordinance.
(ord. No. 1273, § 2, 3-9-94)
Sec. 3-72 Election of Town Court Judge.
   The Judge for the Court shall be elected in the general election held in
November of 1995 and every four (4) years thereafter or as otherwise provided
by Indiana law for the election of municipal judges. The Judge shall be elected
in accordance with I.C., § 3-10-6 by the voters of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1273, § 3, 3-9-94)
Sec. 3-73 Qualifications of Town Court Judge.
   To be eligible to hold the office of Town Judge, the Judge must be a
resident of the Town of Schererville during the term of office or the office
becomes vacant. The person selected as Town Judge must be an attorney in good
standing under the requirements of the Supreme Court of Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1273, § 4, 3-9-94)
Sec. 3-74 Town Judge's Oath and Bond.
   Before beginning the duties of office, the Judge of the Town Court shall
take and subscribe to the same Oath of Office as Judges of the Circuit Courts.
The Judge shall also execute a bond payable to the Town of Schererville in the
penal sum of five-thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the judge's office with good and sufficient
surety. The bond must be approved the Schererville Town Council an d filed in
the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer pursuant to Indiana Code § 5-4-1 et seq.
(Ord. No. 1273, § 5, 3-9-94)
Sec. 3-75 Court Sessions.
   The Schererville Town Court Judge shall hold sessions of the Town Court as
the business of the court demands at a place to be provided and designated by
the Schererville Town Council.
(Ord. No. 1273, § 6. 3-9-94)
Sec. 3-76 Compensation of Town Court Judge.  30
   The Schererville Town Council shall prescribe compensation for the
Schererville Town Court Judge.
(Ord. No. 1273, § 7, 3-9-94)
 
Notes
   30   Ord. No. 1322A, passed February 14, 1996, established the salaries and
30 wages of the Municipal Judge, Clerks, Bailiff , and Telecom Operators, a copy
   of which is on file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer and can be viewed by
   the Public during regular business hours.
Sec. 3-77 Style of Court.
   The style of the Town Court is "The Town Court of Schererville".
(Ord. No. 1273, § 8, 3-9-94)
Sec. 3-78 Notice to State Court Administration
   The Schererville Town Council shall give Notice of its action to the
Division of State Court Administration of the Office of Judicial Administration
under Indiana Code § 33-2.1-7.
(Ord. No. 1273, § 9, 3-9-94)
Sec. 3-79 Court Procedures.
   The powers, jurisdiction, procedures, practices and administration of the
Court are as provided under I.C. § 33-10.1, et seq., as amended from time to
time.
(Ord. No. 1273, § 10, 39-94).
Sec. 3-80 through Sec. 3-94 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Code Violations.
Sec. 3-95 Court Cases.
   The Court costs imposed and applied by the clerk of the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana for violations of the ordinances of the Town
Code of the Town of Schererville or for infractions of the Town Code of the
Town of Schererville confirm to Indiana Code, § 33-19-5 or as follows:
   a.   A charge of $50.00 for infractions or Town Code Ordinance violations.
   b.   A charge of $3.00 for a law enforcement continuing education program
fee where a defendant in any action is found to have committed a crime,
violated a statute defining an infraction, or violated an ordinance of the Town
of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 1-13-88; Schererville Town Code, § 1-8-2)
Sec. 3-96 Disbursement.
   Amounts collected by the Clerk or the Court shall be disbursed pursuant to
existing applicable Indiana Code sections. (See the Title 33 Section: 19 of the
Indiana Code)
(Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 1-13-88; Schererville Town Code, § 1-8-2)
Sec. 3-97 Town Attorney to Enforce.  31   
   Unless specific town ordinances or state statutes provide otherwise, or are
in conflict herewith, all ordinances of the Town of Schererville which carry
fines for their violation, and do not provide for or require injunctions,
declaratory judgments or other monetary penalties, shall be enforced by the
Town Attorney, or special prosecuting attorney as designated according to the
procedure set forth in this ordinance, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 3-13-85)
 
Notes
   31   Editor's Note: During the recodification process the Town requested that
31 "or special prosecuting attorney as designated" be added to this Section. See
   also, § 6-235 which addresses the Deferred Prosecution Program.
Sec. 3-98 Ordinance Violation Citation.
   All ordinance violations included within this ordinance shall be filed on a
form entitled "Town Of Schererville Ordinance Violation Citation which shall
state:
   a.   That the Town of Schererville, Indiana, a municipal corporation, is the
Plaintiff;
   b.   The name, address, telephone number, Social Security Number and date of
birth of the Defendant, if known;
   c.   The date and time when the Ordinance violation occurred;
   d.   The specific Ordinance alleged to have been violated by the Defendant;
   e.   The place where the Ordinance violation occurred;
   f.   The manner in which the Ordinance was violated;
   g.   Whether the violation is a single occurrence or a continuing violation.
If the violation is continuing, the date such violation commenced;
   h.   The signature of the complainant, affirming under oath that he has
reasonable and just grounds to believe that the defendant violated the
Ordinance;
   i.   The approval of the Town Attorney or his designate;
   j.   If the violation is a single occurrence, that it is payable and that
the defendant has ten (10) days to pay the designated fine in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville, and that if the fine is not paid
within said period of time, that the defendant will be cited to appear in
Court.
(Ord. No. 976, § 2, 3-13-85)
Sec. 3-99 Fines.
   Any party who violates any of the provisions of any ordinance of the Town of
Schererville for which another penalty is not specifically provided, and which
is not a continuing violation, commits a payable violation and may pay a fine
of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), in the Clerk-Treasurer's Office of the Town of
Schererville within ten (10) days from the date of the citation. In the event
the violation must be enforced through the Lake County Court, a fine of not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00), shall be imposed in addition to Court costs. (See also
Section
1-15 of this Code)
(Ord. No. 976, § 3, 3-13-85)
Sec. 3-100 Non-Payable Violations.
   Any party who violates any of the provisions of any ordinance of the Town of
Schererville for which another penalty is not specifically provided, and which
is a continuing violation, commits a non-payable violation which must be
enforced through the Lake County Court. The fine imposed shall be not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than two-thousand five-hundred dollars
($2,500.00). Each day that said violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 976, § 4, 3-13-85)
Sec. 3-101 through Sec. 3-109 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Prepayment of Ordinance Violations.  32
 
Notes
32 32   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1346A replaced Ord. No. 1346 which had been
   passed on July 17,1996, and addressed this same topic.
Sec. 3-110 Procedure to Acknowledge Liability - Fines and Court Costs.
   Any individual who is charged with a violation of a town ordinance in the
Town of Schererville, Indiana who wishes to acknowledge liability for aforesaid
violation and pay fine and costs prior to his assigned court date shall be
provided that opportunity by paying a fine of thirty-one dollars and fifty
cents ($31.50) plus court costs of sixty-three dollars and fifty cents
($63.50).
(Ord. No. 1346A, § 1, 8-14-96)
Sec. 3-111 Date When Payments Due.
   Said fine and costs shall be paid to the Clerk of the Court of the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, and must be paid at least five (5) days prior to the
assigned court date.
(Ord. No. 1346A,§ 2, 8-14-96)
Sec. 3-112 Exceptions to Procedures.
   Any individual who violates the following ordinances shall not be provided
the option of prepaying and must appear in court:
   - Speeding in a School Zone;
   - Speed in Excess of Twenty-six (26) Miles per Hour over the Posted Limit;
   - Open Container Violation;
   - Curfew Violation;
   - Vandalism;
   - Nuisance Violation;
   - Zoning Violation;
   - Junk Vehicle;
   - Failure to Obtain a Building Permit;
   - Failure to Obtain a Contractor's License.
(Ord. No. 1346a, § 3, 8-14-96)
Sec. 3-113 through Sec. 3-119 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Community Service Option.
Sec. 3-120 Role of Town Judge.
   The Town Judge for the Town of Schererville, Indiana in passing sentence
upon a finding of guilt or liability related to a violation of Schererville
Town ordinance shall have the discretion to assess community service in lieu of
part or all of any fine imposed.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 1,7-17-96)
Sec. 3-121 Role of Town Court.
   The Town Court shall be responsible for assigning community service provided
that the service take place within the boundaries of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 2, 7-17-96)
Sec. 3-122 Accounting of Community Service Hours.
   The Town Court shall be responsible for accounting for the hours of
community service assigned and shall keep a record of where and when the
community service is performed.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 3, 7-17-96)
Sec. 3-123 through Sec. 3-129 Reserved for Future Use.
Chapter 4
Fees, Licenses and Permits
Article 1. General Provisions.
   
Sec. 4-1   Authority to License.
   
Sec. 4-2   Applications.
   
Sec. 4-3   Approval or Disapproval.
   
Sec. 4-4   Duration of License, Display Required, Inspections.
   
Sec. 4-5   Issuance, Revocation and Suspension.
   
Sec. 4-6   through Sec. 4-9 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Specific Activities Regulated.
Division I. Motorized Bicycles.
   
Sec. 4-10   Definitions.
   
Sec. 4-11   Registration and Licensing Required.
   
Sec. 4-12   Rules and Regulations.
   
Sec. 4-13   Penalties.
   
Sec. 4-14   through Sec. 4-17 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Registration of All Electronic or Video Type Entertainment
Machines or Games and Cigarette Dispensing Machines.
   
Sec. 4-18   Definitions.
   
Sec. 4-19   Record of Registration and Registration Stickers.
   
Sec. 4-20   Rotation of Machines.
   
Sec. 4-21   Registration Fees.
   
Sec. 4-22   Temporary Registration.
   
Sec. 4-23   Inspections.
   
Sec. 4-24   Violations and Penalties.
   
Sec. 4-25   Monies Collected by Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 4-26   Maximum Registration Fee.
   
Sec. 4-27   through Sec. 4-29 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Licensing of Businesses, Business Activities, Occupations and
Commercial Establishments.
   
Sec. 4-30   License Required.
   
Sec. 4-31   Applications.
   
Sec. 4-32   Role of Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 4-33   Investigations.
   
Sec. 4-34   Non-Refundable License Fee.
   
Sec. 4-35   Fees Paid to Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 4-36   Validity and Termination.
   
Sec. 4-37   Compliance Required.
   
Sec. 4-38   Reasons Not to Issue License.
   
Sec. 4-39   Change of Location.
   
Sec. 4-40   Inspections.
   
Sec. 4-41   Reasons for Suspension.
   
Sec. 4-42   Hearings; Revocations and Suspensions.
   
Sec. 4-43   Display of License Required.
   
Sec. 4-44   Operating Without License.
   
Sec. 4-45   Penalties.
   
Sec. 4-46   through Sec. 4-49 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Massage Establishments, Masseurs and Masseuses.
   
Sec. 4-50   Short Title.
   
Sec. 4-51   Policy.
   
Sec. 4-52   Definitions.
   
Sec. 4-53   Permit Required.
   
Sec. 4-54   Application.
   
Sec. 4-55   Masseur or Masseuse Permit.
   
Sec. 4-56   Investigations.
   
Sec. 4-57   Regulations.
   
Sec. 4-58   Daily Register.
   
Sec. 4-59   Exemptions.
   
Sec. 4-60   Fees.
   
Sec. 4-61   Violation and Penalty.
   
Sec. 4-62   through Sec. 4-64 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Automatic and Manual Alarm Systems.
   
Sec. 4-65   Definitions.
   
Sec. 4-66   Permitted Devices.
   
Sec. 4-67   Monitoring System.
   
Sec. 4-68   Permit Required.
   
Sec. 4-69   Application for Permit.
   
Sec. 4-69A   Yearly Service Fee.
   
Sec. 4-70   Certification by Alarm Equipment Supplier.
   
Sec. 4-71   Inspection.
   
Sec. 4-72   Local Alarms.
   
Sec. 4-73   Fines Applicable for False Alarms.
   
Sec. 4-74   Registration Fees, Yearly Service Fee.
   
Sec. 4-75   False Alarm Registration Fee, Failure to Disconnect.
   
Sec. 4-76   Revocation of Permit.
   
Sec. 4-77   Disconnection.
   
Sec. 4-78   Hold Harmless.
   
Sec. 4-79   through Sec. 4-81 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Peddlers, Hawkers, Salesmen, Solicitors, Canvassers, and Transient
Merchants.
   
Sec. 4-82   Definitions.
   
Sec. 4-83   License and Registration Requirements.
   
Sec. 4-84   Application.
   
Sec. 4-85   Fees.
   
Sec. 4-86   Processing of Application.
   
Sec. 4-87   Badge Required.
   
Sec. 4-88   Hours of Solicitation.
   
Sec. 4-89   Penalty and Violation.
   
Sec. 4-90   through Sec. 4-99 Reserved for Future Use.
   Division VII. Outdoor Events.
   
Sec. 4-100   Outdoor Events Governed.
   
Sec. 4-101   Permit Required.
   
Sec. 4-102   Regulations Addressing Alcohol.
   
Sec. 4-103   Noise Regulations at Outdoor Events.
   
Sec. 4-104   Parking Requirements.
   
Sec. 4-105   Security Requirement.
   
Sec. 4-106   Insurance Requirements.
   
Sec. 4-107   Inspections Required.
   
Sec. 4-108   Permit Fee.
   
Sec. 4-109   Issuance of Permit.
   
Sec. 4-110   Penalties.
   
Sec. 4-111   through Sec. 4-113 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Ambulance Services.
   
Sec. 4-114   Ambulance Service Rates.
   
Sec. 4-115   Ambulance Services - Exceptions.
   
Sec. 4-116   Policy Regarding Deceased Persons.
   
Sec. 4-117   Patient Transfer Policy.
   
Sec. 4-118   Refusal of Service Form.
   
Sec. 4-119   Billings by Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 4-120   Ambulance Run Reports
   
Sec. 4-121   through Sec. 4-147 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Maximum Towing Rates.
   
Sec. 4-148   Towing and Removing Charges.
   
Sec. 4-149   Day and Night Rates/Times.
   
Sec. 4-150   through Sec. 4-153 Reserved for Future Use.
Division X. Reserved.
   
Sec. 4-154 through Sec. 4-159 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XI. Electric, Zoning, Building, Wrecking, Moving, Sign,
and Plumbing Permit Fees.
   
Sec. 4-160   Application Required.
   
Sec. 4-161   Fees Imposed.
   
Sec. 4-162   Building, Planning and Zoning Fees.
   
Sec. 4-163   Zone Application Fees.
   
Sec. 4-164   Wrecking Permit Fees.
   
Sec. 4-165   Moving Permit Fees.
   
Sec. 4-166   Electrical and Mechanical Electrical Fees.
   
Sec. 4-167   Plumbing Permit Fees.
   
Sec. 4-168   Red Tagged and Reinspection Fees.
   
Sec. 4-169   Specific Building and Zoning Regulations.
   
Sec. 4-170   through Sec. 4-174 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XII. Licensing of Dogs and Cats.
   
Sec. 4-175   Animal Licensing Required.
   
Sec. 4-176   Application.
   
Sec. 4-177   Duration of License.
   
Sec. 4-178   Deadlines for Filing Application.
   
Sec. 4-179   Exemptions.
   
Sec. 4-180   License Tag Issued by Clerk-Treasurer.
   
Sec. 4-181   Identification Tags to be Worn at All Times.
   
Sec. 4-182   Records and Licensing Period.
   
Sec. 4-183   Fines.
   
Sec. 4-184   Fees.
   
Sec. 4-185   Non-Transferring of License.
   
Sec. 4-186   Commercial Animal Establishments and Animal Shelters.
   
Sec. 4-187   Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIII. Sales and Solicitations Prohibited on Public Streets and
Intersections.
   
Sec. 4-188   Solicitation on Public Streets and Intersections Prohibited -
Penalty.
   
Sec. 4-189   Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIV. Fire Department Fees.
   
Sec. 4-190   Fees for Responses to Hazardous and Toxic Material Spills and
Leaks.
   
Sec. 4-191   Thirty (30) Day Payment Period.
   
Sec. 4-192   Clean-up and Clean-up Contractors.
   
Sec. 4-193   Billing Procedures.
   
Sec. 4-194   Penalty for Failure to Pay.
   
Sec. 4-195   Fire Investigation Reports.
   
Sec. 4-196   through Sec. 4-199 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XV. Police Department Fees.
   
Sec. 4-200   Licensing of Handguns - Procedures and Fees.
   
Sec. 4-201   Out of State Vehicle Inspection Fee.
   
Sec. 4-202   Fees for Traffic Accident Reports.
   
Sec. 4-203   Fees for Applications to Police Department.
   
Sec. 4-204   Incident Reports, Accident Reports, Photographs, Vehicle
Identification Number Checks, Video Tapes and Audio Tapes.
   
Sec. 4-204A   Miscellaneous Fees.
   
Sec. 4-204B   Law Enforcement Processing Service Charge and Release Fee.
Division XVI. Miscellaneous Fees.
   
Sec. 4-205   Assessment Registration.
   
Sec. 4-206   Fees Charged by the Plat Review Committee.
   
Sec. 4-207   Community Service Program Fees.
   
Sec. 4-208   Fire Hydrant Rental Fees.
   
Sec. 4-209   Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Franchise Regulations.
Division I. Cable Television Rate Regulations.
   
Sec. 4-210   Adoption of Rules and Regulations.
   
Sec. 4-211   Public Hearing Requirements.
   
Sec. 4-212   Period for Review of Rates.
   
Sec. 4-213   Forms and Information Required by the FCC.
   
Sec. 4-214   Resolution of Council Required.
   
Sec. 4-215   Non-Disclosure of Certain Information.
   
Sec. 4-216   Refund Order Requirements.
   
Sec. 4-217   Violation.
   
Sec. 4-218   Allocation of Cable TV Monies Collected.
   
Sec. 4-219   through Sec. 4-224 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 4. Fees and Charges.
   
Sec. 4-225   Chart on Administrative Fees and Charges.
   
Sec. 4-226   through Sec. 4-229 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 5. Taxi Cab Regulations.
   
Sec. 4-230   Taxi Cab Regulations Incorporated.
   
Sec. 4-231   Insurance and Bond Requirements of Taxi Cab Owners/Operators.
   
Sec. 4-232   Rates or Fares to be Charged and Regulations Governing Operation
of Taxi Cabs.
   
Sec. 4-233   Penalties.
   
Sec. 4-234   through Sec. 4-239 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 1. General Provisions.
Sec. 4-1 Authority to License.  1
   The Town has the authority to impose a license fee that is reasonably
related to the administrative cost of exercising such regulating power.
 
Notes
1    I.C., § 36-1-3-8(5), provides Towns with such licensing power.
Sec. 4-2 Applications.
   All applications for a permit or license under this Chapter shall be made
available by the Town Clerk-Treasurer, unless otherwise specified.
Sec. 4-3 Approval or Disapproval.
   After examination, the Town may grant such permit or license, unless good
cause be shown why said permit or license should not be granted.
Sec. 4-4 Duration of License, Display Required, Inspections.  2
   a.   All licenses issued under this Chapter, unless specified otherwise
shall be issued for the duration of the calendar year for which they were
issued, and shall expire on December 31 st.
   b.   Every person who is issued a license under the provisions of the
licensed activity is being conducted, or if there are no premises shall carry
the license while engaged in the activity for which he has been licensed, and
shall exhibit it to any Town official or citizen upon request.
   c.   The Police Department may inspect all places of business under license
or required to have a license.
 
Notes
2 2   I.C., § 36-8-3-10, authorizes the Police Department to do inspections and set
  forth other duties.
Sec. 4-5 Issuance, Revocation or Suspension.  3
   a.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue licenses upon payment of the license
fees and compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code.
   b.   Licenses issued by the Town may be revoked or suspended if the person
holding the license has violated the terms or conditions of the license or the
law under which it was issued, or has conducted the business in such a manner
as to constitute a threat to public health, safety, or the general welfare of
the Town citizens.
 
Notes
3 3   I.C., § 36-1-3-10, authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to issue licenses.
Sec. 4-6 through Sec. 4-9 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 2. SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES REGULATED.
Division I. Motorized Bicycles.  4
 
Notes
4 4   I.C., § 9-13-2-109, defines "motorized bicycle".
Sec. 4-10 Definitions.
   The following definitions shall be applicable for purposes of this division.
   a.   Motorized bicycle - A bicycle with operable petals which may be
propelled by human power or by an internal combustion engine or a battery
powered motor, or by both, and when powered by an internal combustion engine
having a rating of no more than two (2) (2.0) brake horsepower and a cylinder
capacity not exceeding fifty (50) cubic centimeters, and automatic
transmission, and a maximum design speed of no more than twenty-five (25) miles
per hour on a flat surface.
   b.   Owner - A person who holds the legal title of a motorized bicycle or
any person renting or leasing a motorized bicycle and having exclusive use
thereof for period longer than thirty (30) days, or in the event a motorized
bicycle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional vendee or lessee, or
in the event the mortgagor thereof, with the right of purchase upon the
performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate
right of possession of a motorized bicycle is entitled to possession, then such
conditional vendee or mortgagor shall be deemed to be the owner for the purpose
of this division.
   c.   Operate - The word "operate" or any form or tense thereof shall mean to
ride in or on, to drive, to use, to put into action, cause to function, or to
be in actual physical control of a motorized bicycle as defined herein.
   d.   Persons - Every natural person, firm, co-partnership or corporation or
association.
   e.   Pedestrian - Any person afoot.
   f.   Operator - Any person who drives, operates, or is in actual physical
control of a bicycle or vehicle defined herein.
   g.   Vehicle - Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a roadway or highway, except devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-8-89; Schererville Town Code, § 8-10-1)
Sec. 4-11 Registration and Licensing Required.
   a.   The provisions of this division shall apply whenever a motorized
bicycle is operated in the Town of Schererville, subject to those exceptions
stated herein.
   b.   Every motorized bicycle, either owned by a resident of the Town of
Schererville or stored within the Town of Schererville (excepting motorized
bicycles held primarily for resale in the ordinary course of business) shall be
registered and licensed with the Police Department of the Town of Schererville.
   c.   Every person who owns or store a motorized bicycle within the Town of
Schererville on the effective date of this ordinance or thereafter shall
register and license his or her motorized bicycle within thirty (30) days
following said effective date. Thereafter, every person subject to this
division shall register his or her motorized bicycle and obtain a license
within fifteen (15) days after becoming the owner, as defined herein, of the
said motorized bicycle or commencing the storage of the said motorized bicycle.
The license shall expire two (2) years following the date the license was
issued. Each motorized bicycle shall be re-registered and re-licensed not less
than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the license.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 2, 3-8-89; Schererville Town Code, § 8-10-2)
   d.   Licensing of Motorized Vehicles - Any person fifteen (15) years of age
or older owning a motorized bicycle shall obtain a license for each motorized
bicycle from the Schererville Police Department. No license shall be issued to,
or for the benefit of any person under the age of fifteen (15) years, owning a
motorized bicycle.
   The license issued for a motorized bicycle is not transferable
   Each person filing an application for registration and issuance of a license
for a motorized bicycle shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each
motorized bicycle so registered and licensed. The funds paid for said
registration shall be placed in an account for the purchase or repair of
equipment for the police department maintained for that purpose by the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   The Schererville Police Department shall set specific times regarding the
issuance of licenses and said times shall be posted at the Schererville Police
Department. No licenses shall be issued at any times, but those designated by
the department.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 2, 3-8-89; Schererville Town Code, § 8-10-3)
Sec. 4-12 Rules and Regulations.
   a.   Minimum Age of Operator   5  - A motorized bicycle shall not be
operated by any person under the age of fifteen (15) years of age, without an
identification card issued pursuant to Indiana Code, § 9-24-16-1, et seq. or a
valid driver's license issued pursuant to Indiana Code, § 9-13-2, et seq. Each
operator shall carry on his or her person sufficient evidence of his or her
age.
   b.   Obedience to Traffic Control Devices - Operators of motorized bicycles
shall obey the direction and instruction of all traffic control devices,
signals, signs, or other control devices applicable to vehicles, as defined in
and subject to the rules and regulations of the Indiana Code.
   c.   Obedience to Traffic Control Signs - Whenever authorized signs are
erected, including, but not limited to stop, yield, no right or left or "U"
turns, no person operating a motorized bicycle shall disobey the purpose and
direction of any such sign, except where such operator dismounts from the
motorized bicycle and obeys the regulation as defined in the Indiana Code
applicable to pedestrians.
   d.   Use of Seats; Maximum Capacity - A person operating a motorized bicycle
shall not drive it other than upon the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, nor shall the operator permit a passenger. If a passenger is allowed,
the motorized vehicle shall be equipped with fixed foot pegs or pedals for the
use of said passenger.
   e.   Speed - No person shall operate a motorized bicycle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. The operator
of a motorized bicycle shall not exceed the speed of twenty-five (25) miler per
hour or the posted speed limit, whichever is less.
   f.   Driving on the Right; Riding Abreast Restricted - Every person
operating a motorized bicycle shall drive as near to the right hand side of the
roadway as is possible, and in single file when passing other vehicles, parked
or moving.
   g.   Merging from Alley or Driveway - The operator of a motorized bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a
sidewalk, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering a roadway, shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles on the roadway close enough to constitute a hazard.
   h.   Clinging to Vehicles - No person operating a motorized bicycle shall
attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a public highway, street, alley,
public way, park way or public path.
   i.   Carrying Articles - No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry
any package, bundle, or article which prevents the operator from keeping both
hands upon the handlebars.
   j.   Trick Riding - Trick riding is prohibited. The hands of the operator of
a motorized vehicle shall be on the handlebars at all times, except while in
the act of signaling.
   k.   Curving Side to Side - No operator of a motorized bicycle shall cause
or permit a motorized bicycle to curve side to side.
   1.   Parking - No person shall park a motorized bicycle in such a manner as
to interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian traffic, vehicular parking or
vehicular flow of traffic.
   m.   Operation on Sidewalk Prohibited - The operation of motorized bicycles
upon sidewalks is expressly prohibited.
   n.   Lights - Every motorized bicycle, operated on a public highway, street,
alley, public way or public path, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front
exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet
(500') to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red tight visible
from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear. In lieu of such rear
lighted red lamp on motorized bicycles, a red reflector glass button no less
than one and one-half inches (1½") in diameter, or red reflecting tape of not
less than four square inches (4") may be mounted securely on the rear mudguard,
or lacing a mudguard on the rear of the saddle. The tights are to be on at all
times the motorized bicycle is in use.
   o.   Audible Warning Devices - No person shall ride a motorized bicycle
unless it is equipped with horn or other device capable of giving a signal
audible for a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more.
   p.   Brakes - Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which
will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, or clean
pavement.
   q.   Turning Signals - Every person operating a motorized bicycle shall
employ the use of hand signals in the manner provided by state law for turning
or changing lanes if such vehicle is not equipped with a lighted turn signal
device.
   r.   Protective Headgear - A person who operates a motorized bicycle within
the Town of Schererville shall at all times wear protective headgear meeting
the minimum standards set by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles or a helmet
that meets the standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation under 4a CFR 571-218 and in effect as of January 1,1979, or as
amended or replaced thereafter.
   s.   Protective Glasses, Goggles, or a Transparent Face Shield - A person
who operates a motorized bicycle within the Town of Schererville shall at all
times wear protective glasses, goggles, or transparent face shield.
   t.   Motorized Bicycle Traffic Prohibited on Highways U.S. 30 and U.S. 41
Within the Town of Schererville - The operation of a motorized bicycle is
expressly prohibited on the roadway or shoulder areas of Highways U.S. 30 or
U.S. 41 within the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 3, 3-8-89; Schererville Town Code, § 8-10-3)
 
Notes
  5   Editor's Note: At the time Ord. No. 1098 was passed, it referred to I.C., §§
5 9-4-1 and 9-5-3.1, et seq., which have been repealed. The section references
  current state law.
Sec. 4-13 Penalties.
   a.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Division relating to
motorized bicycles shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense. The parent or guardian of any person under
the age of fifteen (15) years old violating any provision herein shall be
deemed to have violated this ordinance. It is the duty and obligation of every
parent or guardian to ensure that the provisions herein are adhered to by those
persons under the age of fifteen (15) years.
   b.   Should a party violate the provisions of this Division the Schererville
Police Department may impound the vehicle and if the operator of an impounded
vehicle is a minor, said motorized bicycle will only be released to the minor
child's parents or legal guardians.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 4, 3-8-89; Schererville Town Code, § 8-10-4)
Sec. 4-14 through Sec. 4-17 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Registration of All Electronic or Video Type Entertainment
Machines or Games, and Cigarette Dispensing Machines.
Sec. 4-18 Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply to this Division:
   a.   Video Game - Any device that provides entertainment in exchange for the
payment of money by the player or players, whether said device operates or
projects an image on a video screen or not.
   b.   Electronic Game - Any device that provides entertainment in exchange
for the payment of money by the player or players. An example is a pin ball
machine.
   c.   Cigarette Dispensing Machine - Any device which dispenses cigarettes in
exchange of the payment of money.
   d.   Commercial Establishment - Any building or part of a building used for
any commercial or business purpose whether for profit or not-for-profit. These
include, but are not limited to - stores, arcades, restaurants, service
stations, taverns, social clubs, private clubs, shopping centers, malls,
religious or charitable organization establishments.
   e.   Owner - A persons corporation, partnership, association or entity who
hold title or right of possession to any video game, electronic game, cigarette
dispensing machine, or any building, establishment or real estate upon which a
building is located, or a commercial establishment within a building.
(Ord. No. 1084, § 1, 9-14-88; Schererville Town Code, § 5-4-1)
Sec. 4-19 Record of Registration and Stickers Registration.
   a.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall cause to be
printed or produced registration stickers, or emblems, with consecutive numbers
printed upon them. As each machine or device is registered and the required
registration fee paid, a sticker shall be issued to the person or entity paying
the fee. The registrant shall complete or cause to be completed a questionnaire
form disclosing the following information:
      1.   Name of owner of commercial establishment in which the device or
machine is located
      2.   Business name of the establishment.
      3.   Address of said establishment.
      4.   Owner of the real estate in which said establishment is located.
      5.   Address of the owner of the real estate.
      6.   Type of device or machine or game.
      7.   Name of the game or machine or device.
      8.   Name of the owner of said game or machine or device.
      9.   Address of said owner.
      10.   Serial number of the game, device, or machine.
      11.   Date when said machine, game or device was placed into service at
this particular location.
      12.   Any other information which the Clerk-Treasurer or Police
Department of the Town may require or deem necessary.
   b.   A copy of this record of registration shall be maintained by the Clerk-
Treasurer and one copy sent to the Police Department.
   c.   These records of registration are public records.
   d.   Each sticker or emblem shall be assigned to one machine, game or device
and a record kept by the Clerk-Treasurer and Police Department showing which
number of each sticker or emblem is assigned to which machine, game or device.
   e.   This sticker or emblem shall be prominently displayed upon the game,
device or machine to which it is assigned.
(Ord. No. 1084, § 2, 9-14-88, Schererville Town Code, § 5-4-2)
Sec. 4-20 Rotation of Machines.
   a.   The Town recognizes that some devices or games may be rotated from time
to time by the owner of any device or game. No new registration fee is required
if any such game or device is moved from one location in Schererville to
another location in Schererville,
   b.   The owner shall be required to notify the Clerk-Treasurer of the
rotation of any machine, device or game within the town, into the town or out
of the town within ten (10) days of their rotation or movement.
   c.   A registration fee paid on any machine or device shall not be refunded
should any machine or device be removed prior to the expiration of the term of
registration.
(Ord. No. 1084, § 3, 9-14-88; Schererville Town Code, § 5-4-3)
Sec. 4-21 Registration Fees.
   a.   The registration fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
registration of each video game, electronic game or cigarette machine per year.
   b.   The term of registration shall be one year commencing January 1, 1989
and beginning each successive first day of January each year thereafter and
commencing on December 31 of each year.
   c.   Said registration fee shall be paid on or before February 1 of each
year.
   d.   Any machine, game or device brought into the town or placed into
service prior to July 1 of any year shall pay the full one hundred dollar
($100.00) registration fee.
   e.   Any machine or device or game brought into the town or placed into
service after July 1 of any year shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) as
registration fee for the remainder of that registration period only.
(Ord. No. 1084, § 4, 9-14-88; Schererville Town Code, § 5-4-4)
Sec. 4-22 Temporary Registration.
   a.   Any said machines used on a temporary basis or seven (7) consecutive
days or less for purposes of fairs, carnivals, fund raising events,
entertainment events or the like shall also be registered as temporary machines
in accordance with the terms of this Division.
   b.   The fee for temporary registration shall be twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per week or five dollars ($5.00) per day.
(Ord. No. 1084, § 5, 9-14-88; Schererville Town Code, § 5-4-5)
Sec. 4-23 Inspections.
   a.   The Schererville Police Department shall be required to inspect and
supervise this registration. The Police Department shall make periodic
inspections of all commercial establishments within the town and inspect all
such devices, games and machines and ensure they are properly operating for the
protection of the public.
   b.   Any device, machine or game not registered shall be promptly reported
to the Clerk-Treasurer and the Police Department.
(Ord. No. 1084, § 6, 9-14-88; Schererville Town Code, § 5-4-6)
Sec. 4-24 Violations and Penalties.
   a.   Failure to register any device, game or machine required to be
registered under the terms of this Division shall be considered a violation.
   b.   Any violation reported to or discovered by the Police Department or any
other representative or employee of the Town of Schererville shall be processed
as follows:
      1.   A written notice of failure to register shall be mailed or delivered
to the owner or operator of the commercial establishment in which said device,
game or machine is located allowing a ten (10) day period from the date of the
notice to pay the full one year registration fee regardless whether it occurs
prior or after July 1 of any year.
      2.   If the ten (10) day grace period passes and the registration fee is
still not paid, a second notice shall be mailed or delivered to the owner or
operator of the commercial establishment in which said game or device or
machine is located requiring its immediate removal or payment of double the
annual registration fee within five (5) days of the notice.
      3.   Failure to remove the game, machine or device or failure to pay the
double registration fee shall result in a civil penalty of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) assessed against the owner of the machine, device or game,
the owner of the real estate in which the commercial establishment is located
or the owner of the commercial establishment in which the machine, game or
device is located or all of the above jointly or singularly. Should the town be
required to enforce this penalty in Court, the above named persons or entities
shall also be liable for court costs and attorney fees for enforcement which
attorneys fees shall not be less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   c.   The civil penalty shall be applicable even though the machine, device
or game was eventually removed from the premises during or after the five (5)
day notice period.
(Ord. No. 1084, § 7, 9-14-88; Schererville Town Code, § 5-4-7)
Sec. 4-25 Monies Collected by Clerk-Treasurer.
   a.   All proceeds from registration fees, penalties or fines thereon shall
be placed in a separate account to be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   b.   All funds or fines collected by the Clerk-Treasurer shall be divided as
follows:
      1.   Twenty-five percent (25%) shall be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer
to defray the costs of printing stickers, creating and maintaining files and
other general clerical expenses and other expenses for supplies and overhead.
      2.   Seventy-five percent (75%) shall be deposited in a separate fund
created and maintained for the sole purpose of purchasing or maintaining
equipment for the Police Department.
(Ord. No. 1084, § 8, 9-14-88; Schererville Town Code, § 5-4-8)
Sec. 4-26 Maximum Registration Fee.
   a.   The Town Council establishes that there shall exist a maximum
registration fee for any and all video games which are operated out of the same
address in the Town of Schererville, Indiana, and that said maximum fee shall
be two thousand, five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
   b.   Any business owner who has in excess of twenty-five (25) machines at a
single location shall not be assessed any registration cost above and beyond
two thousand, five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   c.   It is the intent of the Town Council that this ordinance take affect
for the calendar year 1999 and that its application shall be intended to be
retroactive to January 1, 1999.
   d.   Should any business owner already have registered his machines and aid
in excess of two thousand, five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) minimum fee, then
the Town of Schererville, Indiana, shall refund any excess portion to the
business owner.
(Ord. No. 1084A, § § 1-4, 4-14-99)
Sec. 4-27 through Sec. 4-29 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Licensing Businesses, Business Activities, Occupations, and
Commercial Establishments.
Sec. 4-30 License Required.
   All persons and parties, of whatever nature, engaged in the maintenance,
operation and conduct of any business, business activity, occupation or
commercial establishment, shall be required to first obtain a license for such
business from the Town of Schererville. The requirement to obtain a business
license shall include any individual person, party, partner or corporate
entity, as well as their agents, employees, and representatives presenting
themselves as engaged in the business or soliciting patronage therefore,
actively or passively, or performing or attempting to perform any part of such
business within the Town.
(Ord. No. 1 31, § 1, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-1)
Sec. 4-31 Applications.
   Applications for all business licenses required by this Division shall be
made in writing to the Town Clerk-Treasurer. Each application shall state the
name of the applicant, the business name, the nature of the business, the
location of the business, the fee to be paid, the time period for such license,
and all other information deemed appropriate and necessary by the Town for
review in the consideration of issuance of the business license. Additionally,
each business located within the boundaries of the Town, upon being licensed or
obtaining any renewal thereof, shall provide as part of its business
application a Recycling Plan, on a Town provided form, describing how its solid
waste will be managed, including reduction, reuse and recycling steps taken to
reduce its solid waste stream, which plan shall be subject to approval as
provided in this Division.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 2, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-2; Ord. No. 1649, §
1, 7-13-05)
Sec. 4-32 Role of Clerk-Treasurer.
   All forms for business licenses required by this Division, including
applications, shall be maintained and held in the Office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 3, 6-10-87, Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-3)
Sec. 4-33 Investigations.
   Upon receipt of an application for a business license required by this
Division, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the application to the Town
Official duly designated and appointed by the Town Council for such purpose.
The duly designated Town Official shall, upon receipt of an application,
investigate the matters contained on said application, and prepare a report and
recommendation. The Town Official investigating applications shall have the
authority to review said application and related matters with all other
appropriate and necessary Town Officials, including, but not limited to,
Inspectors, Health Officials, and the like.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 4, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-4)
Sec. 4-34 Non-Refundable License Fee.
   Any person or party, of whatever nature, engaged in the maintenance,
operation or conduct of any business, business activity, occupation or
commercial establishment, within the Town shall pay a bi-annual non-refundable
license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event any person or party becomes
engaged in the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business, business
activity, occupation or commercial establishment within the Town prior to June
30th of any calendar year, that person or party shall be required to comply
with the provisions, regarding fee paid, of this ordinance, as amended from
time to time. In the event any person or party becomes engaged in the
maintenance, operation or conduct of any business, business activity,
occupation or commercial establishment within the Town after June 30th of any
calendar year, then that person or party shall be entitled to a one-half (½)
reduction of the license fee owed. The reduction shall be based upon the bi-
annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). The reduction of fee owed shall be for
that partial calendar year only. The license issued for the partial calendar
year shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year, and thereafter, the
person or party engaged in the maintenance operation or conduct of any
business, business activity, occupation or commercial establishment within the
Town shall be required to comply with the provisions of this Division, as
amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1031 A, 8-12-87; Schererville Town Code; § 5-1-5)
Sec. 4-35 Fees Paid to Clerk-Treasurer.
   All fees for the licensing of a business within the Town shall be paid in
advance at the time application therefore is made to the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
All business license fees collected pursuant to this Division shall be paid
into the General Fund of the Town.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 6, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code; § 5-1-6)
Sec. 4-36 Validity and Termination.
   a.   All business licenses shall be valid for a two (2) year period,
commencing on January 1st of any given year, except as provided for partial
time periods of a year in Section
4-34 as amended from time to time. All business licenses shall terminate on the
last day of the second calendar year, after issuance and validity, except as
provided in Section
4-34.
   b.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall mail to all business licensees within
the Town a notice and statement of expiration and renewal three (3) weeks prior
to the expiration of the license at the end of a calendar year. A failure to
mail such notice and statement or failure of a business licensee to receive
such notice shall not excuse the business licensee from a failure to obtain a
new license or renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for
operation without a license.
(Ord. No. 1031 A, 8-12-87; Schererville Town Code; § 5-1-7)
Sec. 4-37 Compliance Required.
   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business or business
activity if the premises and building to be used for the business purpose do
not fully comply with all other requirements and ordinances of the Town.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 8, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-8)
Sec. 4-38 Reasons Not to Issue License.
   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of
any act which is in violation or which would involve a violation of any
ordinance of the Town, or any law, rule, statute or regulation of the State of
Indiana or the United States.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 9, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-9)
Sec. 4-39 Change of Location.
   The location of any business or occupation for which a business license has
been issued may be changed, on the condition that ten (10) days' prior notice
thereof is given to the Town Clerk-Treasurer and the new location meets all of
the requirements for the issuance of the original license.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 10,6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-10)
Sec. 4-40 Inspections.
   Whenever inspection is required by the duly designated Town Official
investigating the application for a business license, the duly designated Town
Official shall be permitted to inspect the premises where the business would be
conducted, at any reasonable time. A licensee shall be required to permit
inspection of the business premises by the duly designated Town Official after
issuance of the business license, at any reasonable time, to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable Town
requirements and ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 11, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-11)
Sec. 4-41 Reasons for Suspension.
   Any business license issued by the Town may be suspended or revoked by the
Town Council for any one (1) or more of the following reasons:
   a.   Violation by the licensee of a Town requirement or ordinance;
   b.   Violation by the licensee of any rule, law, statute or regulation of
the State of Indiana or of the United States, or any department or division
thereof;
   c.   Misrepresentation or falsification of statements in the application for
license, or renewal thereof;
   d.   Any cause deemed just, but which cause shall not be unreasonable,
arbitrary or capricious
(Ord. No. 1031A, 8-12-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-12)
Sec. 4-42 Hearings, Revocations and Suspensions.
   a.   In the event of violation of this Division as described in Section
4-40, an investigation shall be conducted by the duly designated Town Official
regarding such violation. If the violation is one which the duly designated
Town Official has reason to believe may be corrected, written notice shall be
served upon the licensee setting forth the violations. Upon receipt of the
notice of violations, the licensee shall have not less than five (5) days nor
more than thirty (30) days, as set by the duly designated Town Official, to
correct the violation and submit evidence of the correction to the Town.
   b.   In the event that corrections of license violations are not made as
required, or the violation is one which the duly designated Town Official has
reason to believe is unable to be corrected, the Town may suspend or revoke any
business license issued for violation described in Section
4-40, provided, however, that a business licensee shall have the right to a
hearing. Before the suspension or revocation of any business license, the duly
designated Town Official shall give written notice to the licensee of the
violation or violations and set forth a date for hearing for the purpose of
suspending or revoking such license or permit. The revocation or suspension
hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of written
notice upon the licensee. However, in the event a determination is made that
immediate and irreparable harm or damage to person or property may occur by
reason of the violation or violations, the hearing may be held after twenty-
four (24) hours following the service of the written notice upon the licensee.
   c.   A suspension or revocation of a business license shall be supplementary
to any other remedies available to the Town and shall not stay any other
enforcement proceedings of the Town.
   d.   Any business licensee whose license has been revoked shall not have the
right to re-apply for a license until the calendar year beginning after the
year in which the specific business license has been revoked. The Town Council
may deny a business license to any applicant who has had a license issued by
the Town revoked.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 13, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-14)
Sec. 4-43 Display of License Required.
   A business licensee shall be required to place his license in a prominent
place on the premises used for such business or activity at all times.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 14, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-15)
Sec. 4-44 Operating Without a License.
   The maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or business activity
in the Town of Schererville without a license, as required by this Division,
shall be deemed to be in violation of this Division.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 15, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-16)
Sec. 4-45 Penalties.
   Any person, party, firm or corporation which violates any of the provisions
of this Division shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) for each offense. Each day of the existence of any violation of
this Ordinance shall be deemed a separate offense. The remedy provided herein
shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other
remedies provided by law, including, but not limited to, injunction.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 16, 6-10-87; Schererville Town Code, § 5-1-17)
Sec. 4-46 through Sec. 4-49 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Massage Establishments. Masseurs and Masseuses.
Sec. 4-50 Short Title.
   This Division shall be known and may be cited as the "Massage Parlor
Ordinance of the Town of Schererville, Indiana".
(Ord. No. 623, § 1, 11-13-74; Schererville Town Code, § 5-6-1)
Sec. 4-51 Policy.
   It is declared that the business of operating massage establishments as
defined herein is a business affecting the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(Ord. No. 623, § 2, 11-13-74; Schererville Town Code, § 5-6-2)
Sec. 4-52 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Division, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   a.   Massage - Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external
soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, lotions, ointments or
other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.
   b.   Massage establishment - Any establishment having a fixed place or
business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or
carried on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities
mentioned in Section
4-52 of this Division.
   c.   Masseur or masseuse - Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever,
engages in the practice of massage as herein defined.
   d.   Employee - Any and all persons, other than the masseurs or masseuses,
who render any service to the permittee, who receive compensation directly from
the permittee, and who have no physical contact with customers and clients.
   e.   Person - Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
(Ord. No. 623, § 3, 11-13-74; Schererville Town Code, § 5-6-3)
Sec. 4-53 Permit Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or to
permit to be engaged in, conducted or earned on, in or upon any premises in the
Town of Schererville, Indiana, the operation of a massage establishment as
herein defined, without first having obtained a license as hereinafter
provided.
(Ord. No. 623, § 4, 11-13-74; Schererville Town Code, § 5-6-4)
Sec. 4-54 Application.
   Application for such licenses shall be made to the Clerk-Treasurer of the
Town of Schererville, Indiana, in writing signed by the applicant, if an
individual, if a partnership by all partners, if a corporation by a duly
authorized agent, verified by oath or affidavit and shall contain the following
statements and information:
   a.   The name, age and home address, occupation and social security number
of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership,
the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a
corporation, all officers and directors and if a majority interest of the stock
of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, then such person
shall be included.
   If a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation approved by the
Secretary of State shall be attached.
   b.   Business address of the proposed location of applicant's business.
   c.   Name and home address of owner of the real property of proposed
location of applicant's business.
   d.   a statement as to whether applicant had made application for any
license issued by the Town of Schererville, Indiana, and the disposition of
such other applications.
   e.   a statement as to whether any previous license issued to the applicant
by the state or subdivision thereof or by any federal agency or department has
been revoked or suspended and the reasons therefore.
   f.   a statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime
or misdemeanor, if an individual; in the case of a partnership, the persons
entitled to share in the profits thereof; the case of a corporation, all
officers and directors and if a majority interest of the stock of such
corporation is owned by one person, or his nominee, then such person shall be
included. Such statement shall include the nature of the offense, date of
conviction, court where convicted, and punishment of penalty assessed therefor.
   g.   If the business is to be managed by anyone other than an individual
applicant, then the applicant shall state the name and home address, social
security number, present occupation and a statement of any convictions of any
crime or misdemeanor including the nature of the offense and date of
conviction, court where convicted, and punishment or penalty assessed therefor
of any person or persons who will manage or operate said business.
   h.   The fingerprints of the applicant, if an individual; in the case of a
partnership, all persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case
of a corporation, all officers and directors, and if a majority interest of the
stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, then such
person shall be included.
   In the event a manager is employed then said manager shall be included. The
finger-prints shall be taken by the Town Police Department.
   i.   a description of the premises of the proposed location indicating the
dimensions of all rooms, the location of the tables, the location of exits and
such other information as may be requested by the Clerk-Treasurer in order to
determine whether the premises complies with all applicable laws.
   j.   The names of at least two (2) reliable real property owners of Lake
County who will certify as to the good character and business respectability of
the applicant, if an individual; in the case of a partnership, all persons
entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, all
officers and directors, and if a majority interest of the stock of such
corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, then such person shall be
included. In the event the applicant cannot provide such names then, in lieu
thereof, such applicant shall state the reasons for noncompliance and may then
provide such other available evidence that may be requested by the Clerk-
Treasurer to show the good character and business responsibility of the
applicant.
   k.   Two (2) portraits at least 2 inches by 2 inches in size.
   1.   The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state
under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor,
and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension
or revocation.
(Ord. No. 623, § 5, 11-13-74; Schererville Town Code, § 5-6-5)
Sec. 4-55 Masseur or Masseuse Permit.
   Any person, including an applicant for a massage establishment license, who
engages in the practice of massage as herein defined shall file an application
for a masseur or masseuse license with the Clerk-Treasurer upon a form provided
and shall pay a riling fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) which shall not be
refundable.
(Ord. No. 623, § 6, 11-13-74)
Sec. 4-56 Investigations.
   a.   Upon receipt of a completed application, as hereinabove prescribed,
together with the stated fee, the Clerk-Treasurer shall refer the same to the
Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners of the Town who shall cause the
matters stated in the application, as well as the applicants, to be
investigated by the Police Department of the Town. At the conclusion of such
investigation, the Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners shall make a
report to Town Council of the Town, which shall be confidential in nature and
which, together with the application, shall be considered by the Board in
determining whether or not to grant the application and issue the license
applied for.
   b.   If the Town Council determines the application to be in order, and upon
receipt of a favorable report from the Police Commission, then the Town Council
of the Town shall authorize the Clerk-Treasurer to issue the license applied
for. If, on the other hand, the application is defective, or the report of the
Police Commission is adverse or tends to indicate that the information in the
application is not viable, or is defective then, and in that event, the Town
Council of the Town shall instruct the Clerk-Treasurer not to issue the license
and to notify the applicant accordingly of the Council's action.
(Ord. No. 623, § 7, 11-13-74)
Sec. 4-57 Regulations.
   The holder of any license issued pursuant to this Division shall at all
times comply with the following requirements:
   a.   Minors under the age of eighteen years shall under no circumstances
frequent, loiter, go or remain in any massage establishment licensed hereunder
at any time, unless it be upon some lawful errand and sent under the direction,
and the consent and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person having
the lawful custody of such minor; and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor
of any hall so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter
or remain within the hall in violation of this section.
   b.   No massage establishment shall be operated, maintained or conducted in
such a manner as to constitute a common nuisance.
   c.   No license issued pursuant to this Division shall be transferred to any
other person, partnership or corporation.
   d.   All licenses issued pursuant to this Division shall be conspicuously
posted in the licensed premises.
   e.   All massage establishments shall be open for inspection by authorized
city officers and employees during normal business hours.
   f.   Every portion of a massage establishment including appliances,
apparatus, and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.
   g.   All employees shall be clean and wear clean outer garments whose use is
restricted to the massage establishment. Provisions for a separate dressing
room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for
each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be
self-closing.
   h.   All employees, masseurs, and masseuses must be modestly attired.
Diaphanous, flimsy, transparent, form-fitting, or tight clothing is prohibited.
Clothing must cover the employees', masseurs' or masseuses' chests at all
times. Hemlines of skirts, dresses, or other such attire must be no higher than
the top of the knee.
   i.   The private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths, or
undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur or masseuse. Any
contact with a patron's genital area is strictly prohibited.
   j.   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in approved, sanitary manner.
   k.   Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each use.
   l.   Advertising. No massage establishment granted a permit under provisions
of this Division shall place publish or distribute or cause to be placed,
published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the
human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any
service is available other than those services as described in Section
4-52 or that employees, masseurs, or masseuses, are dressed in any manner other
than described in Sec. 4-52 (3) nor shall any massage establishment indicate in
the text of such advertising that any service is available other than those
services described in Section
4-52.
   m.   All services enumerated in Section
4-52 must be carried on in one cubicle, room, booth, or area within the massage
establishment. No service enumerated in Section
4-52 may be carried on in any other cubicle, room, booth or area except where
such cubicle, room, booth, or area has transparent doors or walls, such that
all activity within the cubicle, room, booth or area is visible from outside
the same.
   n.   A massage establishment shall not carry on, engage in, or conduct
business on Sunday and on other days shall not carry on, engage in, or conduct
business before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.
(Ord. No. 623, § 8, 11-13-74)
Sec. 4-58 Daily Register.
   Every person who engages in or conducts a massage establishment shall keep a
daily register, approved as to form by the Police Department, of all patrons,
with names, addresses and hours of arrival and, if applicable, the rooms or
cubicles assigned. Said daily register shall at all times during business hours
be subject to inspection by Health Department officials and by the Police
Department and shall be kept on file for one (1) year.
(Ord. No. 623, § 9, 11-13-74)
Sec. 4-59 Exemptions.
   This Division shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria, or
persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the State of Indiana or to persons working under the direction of any
such person or in any such establishments.
(Ord. No. 623, § 10, 11-13-74)
Sec. 4-60 Fees.
   The annual fee for such licenses shall be as follows:
   a.   Massage Establishment   $50.00
   b.   Masseur, Masseuse      $25.00
(Ord. No. 623, § 11, 11-13-74)
Sec. 4-61 Violation and Penalty.
   Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this
Division, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner,
operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for
the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any
way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment without first
obtaining a permit and paying a license fee to do so from the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, or shall violate any of the provisions of this Division
shall be guilty of an ordinance violation. Upon being found in violation, such
person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 623, § 12, 11-13-74)
Sec. 4-62 through Sec. 4-64 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Alarm Systems.
Sec. 4-65 Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section for the purposes of this Division:
   a.   Alarm Equipment Supplier - Any person that sells, leases, installs or
otherwise deals in automatic protection devices or signaling devices which
transmit alarms upon a stimulus from a detection apparatus or a manually
operated system.
   b.   Alarm Conditions - Alarms activated by unlawful violation of a user's
property, other violations that the systems were designed to protect against,
acts of God, other violent conditions, outside agencies, hazards or external
forces not under the control of the owner, lessee or his employee or agent.
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, A, B, 4-10-85)
   c.   Alarm User - Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
within the Town of Schererville, including those systems which employ an
audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to alert
or signal persons outside the premises.
(Ord. No. 13 85-A, § 1,7-9-97)
   d.   Alarm System - An assembly of equipment and devices, such as a solid
state unit, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which the Police or Fire Departments are expected to respond.
   e.   Central Station - A facility whose prime purpose is to monitor incoming
alarm signals twenty-four (24) hours a day and relay the signal information to
the appropriate authorities.
   f.   Direct Line - A telephone line leading directly into the communications
center of the Police Department that is for use only to report signals on a
station-to-station basis.
(Ord. No, 977, § 1, D, E, F, 4-10-85)
   g.   False Alarms - The activation of an alarm system caused by improper
operation, negligence of the owner of lessee or his employee or agent, or
equipment malfunction.
(Ord. No. 1385-A, § 1, 7-9-97)
   h.   Local Alarms - A signaling system which, when activated, causes an
audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises
within which the system is installed.
   i.   Person - Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
society, but such term does not include the Town of Schererville.
   j.   Police Chief or Chief of Police - The Chief of the Police Department of
the Town of Schererville or his authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 1385-A, § 1, 7-9-97)
   k.   Public Trunkline - A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Police Department that is for the purpose of handling emergency
and administrative calls on a person-to-person basis.
   l.   Signaling Device - An electrically operated instrument which
automatically sends visual and/or audible signals to be registered by
indicators at a monitor panel at the receiving terminal or central station.
   m.   Signal Board - A system located in the Police Department to receive
visual and audible signals over direct lines to note a fire, burglary or other
emergency at specific locations within the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 977, § 1H, I, J, K, L, M, 4-10-85)
   n.   Town - Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1385A, § 1, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-66 Permitted Devices.
   No person shall use or cause or permit to be used an alarm system utilizing
signaling devices that automatically select a public trunkline of the police
department of the Town of Schererville and then reproduce any prerecorded
message to report any robbery, burglary, fire, hazard, or other emergency. With
the exception of local alarms, only signaling devices shall be permitted to be
installed in the Town for the purpose of reporting any robbery, burglary, fire,
hazard, or other emergency to the police department of the town.
(Ord. No. 1385-A, § 2, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-67 Monitoring System.
   The Police Department of the Town is authorized to contract for the
installation of and maintain a Signal Board within the Police Department of the
Town.
(Ord. No. 977, § 3, 4-10-85)
Sec. 4-68 Permit Required to Operate.
   a.   An alarm user shall not install, operate or maintain an alarm system in
the Town without first obtaining a permit as required herein.
   b.   Any alarm user who operates an alarm system without first obtaining a
permit as required by this section, or who, after having a permit revoked,
fails to disconnect his alarm system, shall be in violation of this Division.
(Ord. No. 977, § 4, 4-10-85)
Sec. 4-69 Application for Permit.
   a.   Every alarm user shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town, an
application for permit to install, maintain and operate an alarm system in the
Town.
   b.   The alarm user applying for the permit shall complete an application
form as provided and prescribed by the Departments of Police and Fire. Every
permittee shall update any material change in the information provided in the
application whenever such change occurs.
   c.   The information contained in the application as required by this
ordinance and other information received by the Chief of Police through
correspondence or communications with an alarm user shall be secured,
maintained and restricted in its inspection and review to the Chief of Police
and to employees of the town specifically assigned the responsibility for
handling and processing alarm user permit applications. Town employees and
others assigned the duty to handle and process this information shall not
knowingly or willfully reveal the information to any person other than for the
purpose specifically related to this ordinance or specifically related to
official law enforcement matters without the express written consent of the
alarm user.
   d.   Upon receipt of the application for permit, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
distribute the basic information therein to the building inspector, police
chief and fire chief. Each such person shall make such inspection and inquiry
as is reasonable and necessary to determine that the equipment complies with
industry standards and that the alarm equipment supplier has secured a business
license and other permits required by the Town of Schererville and the State of
Indiana. Each such person shall notify the Clerk-Treasurer within seven (7)
days of his approval or rejection of the application, and if rejected, shall
state specifically in writing the basis for his objection. If all such persons
approve the application, the clerk-treasurer shall issue the permit.
   e.   Upon receipt of the updated material change, the applicant shall file a
new application which shall be processed in the same manner provided for an
initial application and in conformity with other provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1385-A, § 5, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-69A Yearly Service Fee.
   Every alarm user shall, prior to installation of an alarm system, pay a
registration fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Every alarm user incorporating a
Direct Line or Public Trunkline into the communication center of the Police
Department shall pay in addition to the registration fee one hundred dollars ($
100.00) per year fee for the privilege of accessing said line.)
   Every existing alarm user not incorporating either a Direct Line or Public
Trunkline directly into the communication center of the Police Department may
register with the Clerk-Treasurer their alarm system upon the completion of the
appropriate registration form and payment of the registration fee.
(Ord. No. 13 85A, § 6, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-70 Certification by Alarm Equipment Supplier.
   a.   Within ten (10) days after the initial installation of an alarm system,
and within ten (10) days after a modification of an existing alarm system, the
alarm equipment supplier shall deliver to the Clerk-Treasurer a certification
by it that the alarm system is installed and operating in accordance with
standard industry practices and in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1385A, § 7, 7-9-97)
   b.   No permit shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer without the
satisfactory compliance with the certification required herein.
(Ord. No. 977, § 6, 4-10-85)
Sec. 4-71 Inspection.
   a.   The Chief of Police, or his designate, shall have the right to inspect
any Alarm System on the premises where it is intended to be used, both prior to
and subsequent to the issuance of a permit, at reasonable times, for the
purpose of determining whether a permit should be granted and/or continued, and
to determine if said Alarm System is being used in conformity with the terms of
the permit, industry standards, and in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances.
   b.   Upon evidence of frequent false alarms or other good cause as evidenced
in writing, the Chief of Police or his delegate is authorized by each Alarm
User, but not required, to have the Alarm System inspected by an Alarm
Equipment Supplier licensed by the Town for such purpose. Any costs incurred
for said inspection shall be the responsibility of the licensee, and shall in
no way be the responsibility of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1385 A, § 8, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-72 Local Alarms.
   a.   Local alarms with any externally audible alert shall not make a sound
similar to that of Civil Defense Warning Systems.
   b.   Such local alarms in residential districts must have an automatic cut-
off after thirty (30) minutes of sounding.
(Ord. No. 1385A, § 9, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-73 Fines Applicable for False Alarms.
   a.   Any Alarm User who has more than two (2) false alarms in any calendar
year shall be fined for each false alarm in excess thereof occurring within the
same calendar year. The fine shall be in the amount of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each false alarm thereafter.
   b.   A fine shall be due and payable by the Alarm User within ten (10)
business days after written notice of the violation.
   c.   All fines shall be payable to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town and
deposited to the General Fund.
(Ord. No. 977, § 9, 4-10-85)
Sec. 4-74 Registration Fees, Yearly Service Fee.
   a.   Every alarm user shall, prior to installation of an alarm system, pay a
registration fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). Every alarm user incorporating a
Direct Line or Public Trunk Line into the communication center of the Police
Department, shall pay in addition to the registration tee, a twenty dollar
($20.00) per month fee for the privilege of accessing said line.
   b.   Every existing alarm user not incorporating either a Direct Line or
Public Trunk Line directly into the communication center of the Police
Department may register with the Clerk-Treasurer their alarm system upon the
completion of the appropriate registration form and payment of the registration
fee.
(Ord. No. 1211, § 1, 6-29-92)
Sec. 4-75 False Alarm Administrative Fees, Failure to Disconnect Penalty.
   a.   Any alarm user having more that three (3) false alarms in a six (6) -
month period shall pay a fine in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
additional false alarm beyond the three (3) occurrences, said fines payable to
the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville to be deposited according to
applicable ordinances, within ten (10) days after notice of said violation.
   b.   Any person who refuses to disconnect their alarm system once their
permit to install, operate or maintain has been revoked as provided in Section
Ten (10) of Ordinance #977, shall be subject to having the permit revoked
pursuant to Section Ten (10) of Ordinance #1077 and Section Five (5) of
Ordinance #1083.
   c.   Failure to pay any fee or fine after thirty (30) days notice may result
in civil penalty up to twice the amount of fee or fine and said person shall be
liable for all attorney's fees and expenses incurred in the collection of said
fee or fine.
(Ord. No. 1211, § 2, 6-29-92; Ord. No. 1385A, § 10, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-76 Revocation of Permit.
   a.   The Clerk-Treasurer may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this ordinance upon a finding of any one or more of the following
violations:
      1.   False information in an application for issuance of a permit for an
Alarm System;
      2.   Failure to comply with any provision of this ordinance, as amended
from time to time, and any other Ordinance of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana;
      3.   Violation of any criminal law of the State of Indiana or the United
States of America;
      4.   Installation, maintenance or operation of an Alarm System in
violation of this Ordinance or of any term or condition of the permit granting
authority;
      5.   Failure to pay any fine charged hereunder;
      6.   Failure to obey an order of the Police Chief to disconnect the Alarm
System;
      7.   Excessive twelve (12) false alarms.
   b.   Before exercising his power to revoke any permit issued hereunder, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall first give written notice to the Alarm User, describing
therein the violation or failure by the Alarm User, and advising the Alarm User
that:
      1.   He shall have a reasonable time, but not exceeding five (5) business
days, to cure the matter and effect compliance, or
      2.   He shall provide to the Chief of Police, or his authorized
representative, such additional information and data as the Alarm User believes
sufficient to deny or excuse the claim of violation or failure.
   An alarm system user whose authorization has been revoked is not precluded
under this Section from applying for a new authorization pursuant to Sec. 4-69.
Provided, however, that before a new permit is issued, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall have a report from the Police Chief as hereinafter defined and in
addition, all fines due must be paid and the system corrected from any
deficiencies. Before the Clerk-Treasure shall issue a new permit, the Police
Chief shall make reasonable efforts to determine that the alarm user's system
has been properly serviced and its deficiencies corrected. The Police Chief
shall notify the Clerk-Treasurer that the alarm system meets all requirements
and that the system has been corrected from its previous deficiencies and upon
all fines being paid, the Clerk-Treasurer shall then issue a new permit
provided all requirements of Sec. 4-69 are complied with.
(Ord. No. 1385A, § 11, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-77 Disconnection.
   a.   Whenever the Police Department become aware of Alarm conditions that
evidence a failure of the Alarm Equipment or the Alarm User to comply with the
requirements of this Division, the Chief of Police may order that the Alarm
User disconnect such Alarm System until it is made to comply with the
requirements of this Division. If there are more than twelve (12) false alarms
in any one calendar year from any Alarm System, the Chief of Police may remove
the Alarm System from the Signal Board.
   b.   No action of disconnection shall take place unless the Chief of Police
first gives written notice of his intention to do so, and the date on which the
action will be taken; provided, however, that in the event the Chief of Police
deems that an action of disconnection is necessary for the public health or
safety, he may disconnect the Alarm System immediately and provide the Alarm
User with prompt notification thereof.
(Ord. No. 977, § 11, 4-10-85)
   c.   Any person effected by the Police Chiefs order to disconnect or by the
Police Chiefs refusal to certify to the Clerk-Treasurer that the system
currently meets all requirements, shall have the right to request the
Metropolitan Board of Police Commissioners to review the decision or action
taken by the Police Chief by requesting review within ten (10) days after any
adverse action or decision made by the Police Chief.
(Ord. No. 1385A, § 12, 7-9-97)
Sec. 4-78 Hold Harmless.
   In the event that an Alarm User or an Alarm Equipment Supplier has violated
or failed to comply with any provision of this Division such Alarm User and
such Alarm Equipment Supplier shall hold the Town, or any of its officials,
employees, and/or agents, harmless from any cost, expense, claim or the like
incurred or paid by the Town arising out of or occurring as a result of the
installation and operation of an Alarm System within the Town, including but
not limited to, reasonable attorney fees, litigation expenses and court costs.
   The Alarm User and the Alarm Equipment Supplier, by applying for a permit,
and by installing Alarm System within the Town of Schererville, waive any claim
or cause of action which either may have against the Town for acts or actions
taken by the Town of Schererville, or any of its officials, employees, and/or
agents in good faith.
(Ord. No. 977, § 12, 4-10-85)
Sec. 4-79 through Sec. 4-81 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Peddlers, Hawkers, Salesmen, Solicitors, Canvassers, and Transient
Merchants.  6
 
Notes
6 6   I.C., § 25-37-1-11, permits towns and cities to lax. license and regulate
  transient merchants and charge a fee lor the transaction of business.
Sec. 4-82 Definitions.
   Solicitor and/or Canvasser. A person who acts to obtain business orders or
sell items to potential customers, carries samples of the subject for sale
while traveling door to door by foot or any type of conveyance from house to
house, or in, along, or about, any street or place within the municipal
corporate boundaries of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana. The
definition shall also include any person taking orders for future delivery, or
for services to be furnished or performed in the future.
   Non-Profit. An entity that does not earn profit for its owners. All money
earned through pursuing business activities or through donations is remitted
and returned such funds to the organization.
   Fundraiser. Any person whose primary purpose is to raise money for a non-
profit organization by traveling by foot, vehicle, or other conveyance from
place to place, house to house, or in, about, or upon any street, alley, or
highway, or any other property in the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana.
(Ord. No. 2008, § 1, 5-8-24)
Sec. 4-83 License and Registration Requirements.
   a.   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor and/or canvasser to engage in or
carry on the business of solicitation within the Town of Schererville without
first establishing that they are a not-for-profit organization, as certified
under Section 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Upon satisfying
said prerequisite, the individual shall be required to obtain a license as set
forth in this Division.
   b.   A solicitor license shall only be valid for a maximum of one (1) month
from the date of issuance. (Ord. No. 2008, § 2, 5-8-24)
   (October, 2025 Supplement)
Sec. 4-84 Application.
   a.   A not-for-profit solicitor application is available at the Town Clerk-
Treasurer Office.
   b.   A completed application for a solicitor license, as required by this
Division, as amended from time to time, shall be transmitted to the Clerk-
Treasurer two (2) weeks prior to the requested solicitation dates. The
application includes, but may not necessarily be limited to the following
documents and/or information, namely:
      1.   The applicant's name and home address;
      2.   A photo ID, such as a driver's license, that includes a physical
description of the applicant, i.e., age, sex, height, weight, date of birth,
and eye color;
      3.   A brief description of the type of goods, wares or merchandise to be
sold and a statement whether delivery of such goods, wares or merchandise is to
be made immediately or in the future;
      4.   If the applicant places orders for such wares, goods or merchandise,
a sample copy of the order form used in connection with such activity;
      5.   The length of time for which the organization seeks to fundraise;
      6.   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of same, together with the
license number and a copy of current insurance coverage;
      7.   A copy of the letter from the IRS stating that your organization is
a 26 U.S.C. Section 501 (c)3 non-profit organization; and
      8.   A copy of a fundraising request letter or flyer from the non-profit
organization. (Ord. No. 2008, § 3, 5-8-24)
Sec. 4-85 Fees.
   a.   A filing fee shall be charged with each applicant. Said fee shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Payment shall be made to the Town of
Schererville.
   b.   In the event that the application is processed and approved, a cash
only (no credit card or check) license fee shall be charged by the Police
Department. Said fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per week or a maximum of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for thirty-one (31) days. Such funds shall be deposited
in the General Fund. (Ord. No. 2008, § 4, 5-8-24)
   (October, 2025 Supplement)
Sec. 4-86 Processing of Application.
   a.   Upon receipt of a completed application and receipt of a filing fee at
the Clerk-Treasurer's office, the applicant shall deliver the application to
the Police Department. At that time, the applicant shall provide and present a
Social Security Number to the Police Department to complete a background check.
   b.   In the event that the applicant's character and responsibility are
found to be unsatisfactory, the Police Department shall endorse on said
application the denial of the application and the reason for same. The
applicant shall then be notified by the Police Department that the application
has been denied and that no license will be issued.
   c.   In the event that the character and responsibility of the applicant are
determined to be satisfactory, the Police Department shall endorse on the
application the approval, and shall then notify the applicant. The applicant
must visit the Police Department to pay the appropriate license fee, and be
issued a license and a badge.
   d.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall retain and maintain a permanent record of all
licenses issued.
(Ord. No. 2008, § 5, 5-8-24)
Sec. 4-87 Badge Required.
   Any and all persons procuring a not-for-profit solicitor license shall be
issued a badge reflecting the solicitor’s name, photograph, expiration date and
organization name. such badge shall be worn conspicuously upon the solicitor’s
person. Such badge is non-transferrable. (Ord. No. 2008, § 6, 5-8-24)
Sec. 4-88 Hours of Solicitation.
   A solicitor shall only be allowed to address and communicate the front door
of a residence. It shall be unlawful to use any other door of a residence. All
solicitation shall occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Solicitation on Sundays and federal holidays shall be prohibited. (Ord. No.
2008, § 7, 5-8-24)
Sec. 4-89 Penalty for Violation.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Division shall be
fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. Each day such
violation is committed shall constitute a separate violation of the Division,
as amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 2008, § 8, 5-8-24)
Sec. 4-90    through Sec. 4-99 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Outdoor Events-Circuses, Carnivals, Etc.
Sec. 4-100 Outdoor Events Governed.
   Outdoor events are intended to include any circus, carnival, bizarre,
festival, exhibition, athletic contests, outdoor beer gardens, and other public
spectacles or outdoor events which are detrimental to the health, safety,
welfare and protection of the citizens of the Town of Schererville. This
Division is not intended to include established businesses such as private
clubs or other established private organizations or associations.
(Ord. No. 936, § 1, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-101 Permit Required.
   a.   No person, firm, corporation, organization or association, foreign or
domestic, shall erect or maintain any structure, building, stand, platform, or
operate any machinery on any municipally owned real estate in the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, for use in connection with the operation or maintenance
of any circus, carnival, bizarre, festival, exhibition, athletic contest,
outdoor beer gardens, or any other public spectacle, until and unless such
person, firm, corporation, organization or association, foreign or domestic,
has first obtained a permit, as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 936, § 2, 8-14-83)
   b.   No person, firm, corporation, organization, or association, foreign or
domestic, shall operate or maintain or permit the operation or maintenance of
any circus, carnival, bizarre, festival, exhibition, athletic contest, outdoor
beer gardens, or any other public spectacle, on any privately owned real estate
in the Town of Schererville, Indiana, unless and until such person, form,
corporation, organization or association, foreign or domestic, has first
obtained a permit as hereafter provided.
(Ord. No. 936, § 3, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-102 Regulations Addressing Alcoholic Beverages at Outdoor Events.
   Any person, firm, corporation, organization or association, foreign or
domestic, sponsor-ing or operating an outdoor event which dispenses and serves
beer and/or liquor must rope or block off said area where beer and/or liquor is
dispensed and served, with only one (1) entrance to this area and said area
must be posted with a "No Minors" sign. Responsibility for ascertaining age (21
or over) lies with the sponsor or operator of the event. Serving of any beer
and/or liquor must end no later than 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and
10:00 p.m. Sunday.
(Ord. No. 936, § 4, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-103 Noise Regulations at Outdoor Events.
   Any outdoor event which has any type of outside music, loud speakers or
other form of amplification must end said music or amplification no later than
11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and no later than 10:00 p.m. on Sundays.
Undue or excessively loud music or other noise resulting from the operation of
an outdoor event will not be permitted and is subject to regulation by the
Chief of Police of the Town of Schererville or an authorized representative
from the Schererville Police Department.
(Ord. No. 936, § 5, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-104 Parking Requirements.
   Definite parking areas must be established in cooperation with the
Schererville Police Department, to accommodate any outdoor event. Residential
streets shall not be used for parking for said outdoor event, unless permitted
by the Chief of Police of the Schererville Police Department.
(Ord. No. 936, § 6, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-105 Security Required.
   All outdoor events shall be required to provide security for said event. The
amount and degree of security shall be determined by the Chief of Police of the
Schererville Police Department.
(Ord. No. 936, § 7, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-106 Insurance Requirements.
   Any sponsors or operators of an outdoor event will be required to show proof
of financial responsibility in the form of liability insurance to cover injury
to person or property of not less than one millions dollars ($1,000,000.00) in
respect of bodily injury or death to any one person and not less than three
million dollars ($3,000,000.00) in respect of any one occurrence or accident,
and not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property
damage. No permit shall be issued until said proof of liability insurance is
submitted with the Application for Permit.
(Ord. No. 936, § 8, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-107 Inspections Required.
   Any sponsors or operators of an outdoor event shall be required to have an
electrical and fire inspection by the Town of Schererville prior to the
commencement of said outdoor event.
(Ord. No. 936, § 9, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-108 Permit Fee.
   Applications for permits contemplated under the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be made upon the forms prescribed by the Town Council of the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, and shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town
of Schererville, Indiana. Each and every such application, except applications
of not-for-profit associations or organizations, shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which fee shall be
paid to the Clerk-Treasurer. Such application shall be filed not less than ten
(10) days prior to the meeting of the Town Council of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana, at which time the same is to be considered and granted or denied. The
Clerk-Treasurer shall furnish copies of said application to the Fire Chief,
Police Chief, and each member of the Town Council of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
(Ord. No. 936, § 10, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-109 Issuance of Permit.
   In the event that the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana,
shall grant said application and direct the Clerk-Treasurer to issue said
permit, the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, shall
thereupon issue a permit to the applicant upon a form prescribed by the Town
Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana consistent with the provisions of
this Division.
(Ord. No. 936, § 11, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-110 Penalties.
   Any person, firm, corporation, organization or association, foreign or
domestic, operating or sponsoring an outdoor event as defined in Section
4-100, who violates any of the provisions of this Division shall be liable for
a fine up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Further, the Chief
of Police of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, or an authorized representative
from the Police Department of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, shall have the
authority to close down any outdoor event for flagrant violation of any of the
provisions of this Division and to confiscate the permit issued by the Town of
Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 936, § 12, 8-14-83)
Sec. 4-111 through Sec. 4-113 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Ambulance Services.
Sec. 4-114 Ambulance Service Rates.
   The Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, shall charge the following
rates for ambulance emergency medical services and related provided by the Town
of Schererville Metropolitan Fire Department Ambulance Service commencing on
August 1, 2021:
   a.   Basic Life Support (BLS) Transport Fees.
      1.   Residents of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
receiving ambulance and related emergency medical services, which services
include transport, shall be charged the amount of seven hundred sixty-eight
dollars ($768.00) per call, and shall be charged twenty-four and 50/100 dollars
($24.50) per mile traveled.
      2.   Non-residents receiving ambulance and related emergency medical
services, which services include transport, shall be charged the amount of one
thousand one hundred nine dollars ($1,109.00) per call, and shall be charged
twenty-four and 50/100 dollars ($24.50) per mile traveled.
      3.   Residents of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
receiving ambulance and related emergency medical services consisting of
treatment and site release shall be charged the amount of two hundred fifty-six
dollars ($256.00) per call. The rates and charges herein for treatment and site
release shall be inclusive of lift assistance in any care facility or
residential home wherein request was made and service response of the Town
Metropolitan Fire Department occurred. This user fee/rate charge shall be made
to each of the owner/operator of the care facility, or the owner/occupant of
the residential property. The user fees charged for such lift assistance and
care at a care facility or at a residential property shall be charged, and upon
collection, such rates and charges shall be deposited for Fire Department use
in the Town Special Ambulance Equipment Non-Reverting Fund, with use thereafter
to be in conformance with the rules, regulations and requirements of the
Indiana State Board of Accounts.
      4.   Non-residents receiving ambulance and related emergency medical
services consisting of treatment and site release shall be charged the amount
of four hundred twenty-seven dollars ($427.00) per call. The rates and charges
herein for treatment and site release shall be inclusive of lift assistance in
any care facility or residential home wherein request was made and service
response of the Town Metropolitan Fire Department occurred. This user fee/rate
charge shall be made to each of the owner/operator of the care facility, or the
owner/occupant of the residential property. The user fees charged for such lift
assistance and care at a care facility or at a residential property shall be
charged, and upon collection, such rates and charges shall be deposited for
Fire Department use in the Town Special Ambulance Equipment Non-Reverting Fund,
with use thereafter to be in conformance with the rules, regulations and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
   b.   Advance Life Support (ALS, Level 1) Transport Fees. For the Advance
Life Support, Level 1, Level of Service, the same shall be defined as set forth
and provided hereinafter as described, namely:
      Advance Life Support (ALS), Level 1. Advance Life Support Level 1 (ALS1)
is the transportation by ground ambulance vehicle and the provision of medical
necessary supplies and services including the provision of an ALS assessment of
at least one (1) ALS intervention.
      Advanced Life Support Assessment. Advance life support (ALS) assessment
is an assessment performed by an ALS crew as part of an emergency response that
was necessary because the patient's reported condition at the time of dispatch
was such that only an ALS crew was qualified to perform the assessment. An ALS
assessment does not necessarily result in determining that the patient required
an ALS level of service.
      The determination to respond with an ALS ambulance must be in accord with
the local 911 or equivalent service dispatch protocol.
      1.   Residents of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
receiving ambulance and related emergency medical services, which services
included transport, shall be charged the amount of one thousand one hundred
ninety-five dollars ($1,195.00) per call, and shall be charged twenty-four and
50/100 dollars ($24.50) per mile traveled.
      2.   Non-residents receiving ambulance and related emergency medical
services, which services include transport, shall be charged the amount of one
thousand four hundred fifty-one dollars ($1,451.00), and shall be charged
twenty-four and 50/100 dollars ($24.50) per mile traveled.
   c.   Advance Life Support (ALS), Level 2 Transport Fees. For the Advance
Life Support Level 2 of service, the same shall be defined as set forth and
provided hereinafter as set forth and provided as described, namely:
      Advance Life Support (ALS), Level 2. Advance life support, Level 2
(ALS2), is the transportation by ground ambulance vehicle and the provision of
medically necessary supplies and services including: (A) at least three (3)
separate administrations of one (1) or more medications by intravenous push/
bolus or by continuous infusion (excluding crystalloid fluids); or (B) ground
ambulance transport and the provision of at least one (1) of the ALS2
recognized and identified procedures.
      1.   Residents of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
receiving ambulance services, which services include transport and are
identified as ALS Level 2, shall be charged the amount of one thousand two
hundred eighty dollars($1,280.00) per call, and shall be charged twenty four
and 50/100 dollars ($24.50) per mile traveled.
      2.   Non-residents receiving ambulance and related emergency medical
services consisting of treatment and site release shall be charged the amount
of one thousand five hundred seventy-nine dollars ($1,579.00) per call, and
shall be charged twenty-four and 50/100 dollars ($24.50) per mile traveled.
(Ord. No. 975B, § 1, 10-13-99; Ord. No. 1516, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 985C, § 1, 3-9-
05; Ord. No. 985D, § 1, 4-13-05; Ord. No. 985E, § 1, 2-8-06; Ord. No. 985H, §
1, 6-11-14; Ord. No. 985J, § 1, 7-14-21)
Sec. 4-115 Ambulance Services - Exceptions.
   a.   It is the declared policy of the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana, and its Metropolitan Fire Department Ambulance Service, that when
necessary or determined that transport of a person or persons is required, such
person or persons shall be transported to the following hospital care
providers, namely:
      1.   Franciscan St. Margaret Health in Dyer, Indiana; or
      2.   Methodist Hospital in Merrillville, Indiana; or
      3.   Franciscan Healthcare in Munster, Indiana; or
      4.   Community Hospital in Munster, Indiana; or
      5.Franciscan St. Anthony Health in Crown Point, Indiana; or
      6.   University of Chicago in Crown Point, Indiana.
   b.   The determination as to the place of transport shall be in the sole
discretion of the Town of Schererville Fire Department Ambulance Service
personnel on scene responsible on-site for such matters. The following are the
only exceptions to the aforementioned Town policy, namely:
      1.   In a life-threatening situation or circumstance, the responsible
Town Fire Department Ambulance personnel shall have the option to direct
transport to the nearest hospital.
      2.   In the event of rendering ambulance and related emergency medical
services pursuant to Mutual Aid assistance, then transport may be made to any
hospital.
   c.   The Indiana Trauma Rule, currently cited at 836 IAC 1-2.1, and as the
same is amended hereafter from time to time, is hereby adopted as the
Schererville Metropolitan Fire Department Ambulance Service Trauma Policy.
(Ord. No. 985A, § 2, 3-12-97; Ord. No. 985B, § 2, 10-13-99; Ord. No. 985I, § 2,
1-13-16; Ord. No. 985K, § 2, 10-16-24)
Sec. 4-116 Policy Regarding Deceased Persons.
   The Schererville Fire Department ambulance shall not be used for the
transportation of deceased persons.
(Ord. No. 985, § 3, 8-26-85)
Sec. 4-117 Patient Transfer Policy.
   Patient transfers to or from any hospital will not be handled by the
Schererville Fire Department ambulance. Transfers of this type shall be
arranged on a private basis by the person concerned.
(Ord. No. 985, § 4, 8-26-85)
Sec. 4-118 Refusal of Service Form.
   Any conscious person eighteen (18) years of age or older shall have the
right to refuse ambulance service provided, however, a "refusal of service
form" shall be signed by any person refusing said service. If a person refuses
said service and also refuses to sign a "refusal of service form" said form
shall be signed on behalf of said person by any law enforcement officer present
at the time said refusal is made.
(Ord. No. 985, § 5, 8-26-85)
Sec. 4-119 Billings by Clerk-Treasurer.
   a.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall bill and collect
all charges made for service pursuant to this Division. Collection shall be
enforced as needed in the name of the Town of Schererville by the town
attorney.
   b.   The Ambulance Fund is addressed in Section
2-396 of this Code.
Sec. 4-120 Ambulance Run Reports.
   a.   The Town of Schererville Fire Department shall charge a fee of five
dollars ($5.00) for each Ambulance Run Report which is furnished to any person
lawfully entitled to receive said information.
   b.   All fees for Ambulance Run Reports shall be deposited into a separate
account known as the EMT Fund.
(Ord. No. 1517, 3-14-01)
Sec. 4-121 through Sec. 4-147 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Maximum Towing Rates.
Sec. 4-148 Towing and Removing Service Charges.
   a.   An authorized towing service may charge for towing or removing a
vehicle under
Chapter 8 of this Code as follows:
      Tow Fees:
      Day Time Tow Charge*   $185.00
      Night Time Tow Charge**   $185.00
      Day Time Flat Bed Charge*   $185.00
      Night Time Flat Bed Charge**   $185.00
      Day Time Winch and Tow Charge*   $125.00
      Day Time Winch Only**   $185.00
      Storage Fees:
      Outside            $50.00
      Indoor               $60.00
      *Day time defined as 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
      **Night time defines as 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 1487, § 1, 5-10-00; Ord. No. 1636, § 1, 1-19-05; Ord. No. 1687, § 1,
12-13-06; Ord. No. 1820, 8-8-12; Ord. No. 1992, § 1, 3-8-23)
   b.   If two (2) or more trucks are used, the charge shall be based on two
(2) call-outs.
      Day Time Winch Only   $70.00
      Night Time Winch Only   $85.00
      Disconnect Linkage (No Keys)   $20.00
   c.   The rates set forth above are the maximum allowed and applied to
passenger cars and other vehicles up to one (1) ton. The cost of towing
vehicles heavier than one (1) ton are to be changed at the discretion of the
individual towing firm.
(Ord. No. 1203, § 2, 4-8-92; Ord. No. 1636, § 1, 1-19-05)
      Storage per day:
      1.   Outside   $25.00
      2.   Inside      $35.00
[See Also, §
8-130 of this Code]
(Ord. No. 1203, § 1, 4-8-92; Ord. No. 1636, § 1, 1-19-05)
Sec. 4-149 Day and Night Rates and Times.
   For purposes of this Division, day rate time is 7:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m.
Night rate time is 6:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 1059, § A, 3-9-88).
Sec. 4-150 through Sec. 4-153 Reserved for Future Use.
Division X. Reserved.
Sec. 4-154 through Sec. 4-159 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XI. Electric, Zoning, Building, Wrecking, Moving, Sign and Plumbing
Permit Fees.
Sec. 4-160 Application Required.
   After an application for permit shall have been filed with the Building
Inspector, together with the plans and specifications as provided herein, and
said plans and specifications have been approved by the said Building Inspector
and all other legally required agencies and/or officials, applicant shall be
entitled to a permit upon payment of a fee therefore as follows, and all other
fees as be required by separate Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1094, § 1,12-14-88; Schererville Town Code, § 11-1-6)
Sec. 4-161 Fees Imposed.
   The following shall be the costs assessed by the Town of Schererville,
Indiana, for Building Permits, Zoning Applications, Wrecking Permits, Moving
Permits, Fence Permits, Electrical Permits, Plumbing permits, and Sign Permits.
(Ord. No. 1094, § 2, 12-14-88)
Sec. 4-162 Building, Planning and Zoning Fees.
   Building, Planning and Zoning fees are set forth in §
7-21 of this Code.
Sec. 4-163 Zone Application Fees.
   Zone Application Fees are set forth in §
7-24 of this Code.
Sec. 4-164 Wrecking Permit Fees.
   Wrecking Permit Fees are set forth in §
7-21 of this Code.
Sec. 4-165 Moving and Fence Permit Fees.
   Moving Permit Fees are set forth in §
7-21 of this Code.
Sec. 4-166 Electrical and Mechanical Electrical Permit Fees.
   Electrical and Mechanical Electrical fees are set forth in §
7-23 of this Code.
Sec. 4-167 Plumbing Permit Fees.
   Plumbing Permit Fees are set forth in §
7-22 of this Code.
Sec. 4-168 "Red-tagged" and Re-inspection Fees.
   "Red-tagged" and re-inspection fees are set forth in §
7-22 and §
7-23 of this Code.
Sec. 4-169 Specific Building and Zoning Regulations.
   Building regulations are set forth in
Chapter 7 of the Code, and Zoning Regulations are set forth in
Chapter 10 of this Code.
Sec. 4-170 through Sec. 4-174 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XII. Licensing of Dogs and Cats.
Sec. 4-175 Animal Licensing Required.
   Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of any animal over
three (3) months of age within this town must obtain a license as herein
provided. This provision may not apply to small cage birds or to aquatic and
amphibian animals kept solely as pets.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 3, 1-23-02)
Sec. 4-176 Application.
   Written application for licenses, which shall include name and address of
applicant, description of the animal, the appropriate fee, and rabies
certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or anti-rabies clinic, shall be
made to the licensing authority.
(Ord. No. 1236, § 3 [b], 5-12-93)
Sec. 4-177 Duration of License.
   If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats shall be for a
period of one (1) year.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 3, 1-23-02)
Sec. 4-178 Deadlines for Filing Application.
   Application for a license must be made within thirty (30) days after
obtaining a dog or cat over three (3) months of age; this requirement will not
apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the town for not longer than
thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 3, 1-23-02)
Sec. 4-179 Exemptions.
   (A)   License fees shall not be required for certified Seeing Eye dogs,
hearing dogs, governmental police dogs, or other certified dogs that are
trained to assist the physically handicapped.
(Ord. No. 1236, § 3 [e], 5-12-93)
   (B)   Animals rented solely for the purpose of guarding a business or
residence are exempt from this subsection.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 3, 1-23-02)
Sec. 4-180 License Tag Issued by Clerk-Treasurer.
   Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall issue a durable tag or identification collar, stamped with an identifying
number and the year of issuance. Tags should be designed so that they may be
conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's collar or harness.
(Ord. No. 1236, § 3 [f], 5-12-93)
Sec. 4-181 Identification Tags to be Worn at All Times.
   Dogs and cats must wear identification tags or collars at all times when off
the premises of the owners.
(Ord. No. 1236, § 3 [g], 5-12-93)
Sec. 4-182 Records and Licensing Period.
   a.   The licensing authority shall maintain a record of the identifying
numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public.
   b.   The licensing period shall begin with the fiscal year and shall run for
one (1) year. A license application may be made thirty (30) days prior to, and
up to March 31st of the fiscal year.
(Ord. 1549, § 3, 1-23-02)
Sec. 4-183 Fines.
   Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time period
specified in this section will be subjected to a fine of ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. No. 1236, § 3 [j], 5-12-93)
Sec. 4-184 Fees.
   a.   A license shall be issued after payment of the following application
fee:
      unneutered male dog   $20.00      neutered male dog   $5.00
      unneutered male cat   $10.00      neutered male cat   $5.00
      unspayed female dog   $20.00      spayed female dog   $5.00
      unspayed female cat   $10.00      spayed female cat   $5.00
      breeder permit      $25.00
   b.   A duplicate license may be obtain upon payment of a one dollar ($1.00)
replacement fee.
(Ord. No. 1236, § 3 [k] [l], 5-12-93)
Sec. 4-185 Non-transferring of License.
   No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for which
it was issued.
(Ord. No. 1236, § 3 [m], 5-12-93)
Sec. 4-186 Commercial Animal Establishments and Animal Shelters.
   a.   Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee:
      1.    Kennel authorized to house fewer than six dogs or cats         $
150.00
      2.    Kennel authorized to house six or more but fewer than 10 dogs or
cats   $ 200.00
      3.    Kennel authorized to house 10 or more dogs or cats            $
250.00
      4.    Breeder permits                        $ 100.00
      5.    Pet shops                           $ 200.00
      6.    Riding Stable                           $ 100.00
      7.    Auction                           $ 100.00
      8.    Zoological park                        $ 200.00
      9.    Circus                              $ 200.00
      10.    Grooming shops                        $ 50.00
      11.    Petting Zoo                           $ 150.00
      12.    Guard-dog training center                     $ 200.00
      13.    Miscellaneous Hunting Permits                  $ 5.00
   b.   Every facility regulated by this ordinance shall be considered a
separate enterprise requiring an individual permit.
   c.   No more than five (5) dogs and/or cats combined over the age of three
months may be kept on any residential, commercial or other premises within the
town unless the owner or owners of the animals hold a valid permit.
   d.   No fee may be required of any veterinary hospital, animal shelter, or
government operated zoological park.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 4 [g]-[i], [m], 1-23-02; Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-13-04)
Sec. 4-187 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIII. Sale and Solicitations Prohibited on Public Streets and
Intersections.
Sec. 4-188 Soliciting on Public Streets and Intersections Prohibited - Penalty.
   a.   It shall be, and is declared to be, unlawful for any person, firm,
group, association, corporation or entity of any kind, public or private, for
profit or not for profit, commercial or charitable, to sell or solicit for
sale, or to cause to be sold or solicited for sale, or to seek contributions,
for or in exchange for, any goods, merchandise or commodities, or cause, in the
Town of Schererville, Indiana, upon or on any public street, highway, road or
thoroughfare, or at or in any intersection of such public streets and/or roads
and/or highways and/or thoroughfares in or bounding said Town.
(Ord. No. 1153, § 2, 7-11-90)
   b.   Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this Section, or
causing violation of said provisions of this Section shall, for each day of
said violation, be fined a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
day, per person.
(Ord. No. 1153, § 3, 7-11-90)
Sec. 4-189 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIV. Fire Department Fees.
Sec. 4-190 Fees for Responses to Hazardous and Toxic Material Spills and Leaks.
   Shippers, transporters, owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and
including owners (or tenants) of fixed facilities within the Town of
Schererville, who cause or suffer leaks or spills of potentially hazardous or
toxic materials within the Town of Schererville, either at fixed side
facilities or on local roads and highways (other than state highways), to such
leaks or spills the Schererville Fire Department must initially respond, shall
pay the Town of Schererville within thirty (30) days as compensation and
reimbursement for providing said response services, the appropriate sums of
money set forth in the approved schedule of fees adopted through the State Fire
Marshall's office, those being as follows:
   a.   For initial response with fire engine, trucks, or fire apparatus,
$250.00;
   b.   For each hour or fraction of on-scene assistance, $150.00.
(Ord. No. 1204, § 1, 5-13-92)
Sec. 4-191 Thirty (30) Day Payment Period.
   Shippers, transporters, owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and
including owners (or tenants) of fixed facilities within the Town of
Schererville, who cause or suffer leaks or spills of potentially hazardous or
toxic materials within the Town of Schererville, for which leaks or spills the
Schererville Fire Department vehicles and equipment are used in response, shall
reimburse the Town within thirty (30) days for any such equipment which has
been damaged, destroyed, discarded or otherwise adversely affected, based upon
an estimate obtained accurately stating the cost of said damage.
(Ord. No. 1204, § 2, 5-13-92)
Sec. 4-192 Clean-Up and Clean-Up Contractors.
   Shippers, transports, owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and
including owners (or tenants) of fixed facilities within the Town of
Schererville, who cause or suffer leaks or spills of potentially hazardous or
toxic materials within the Town of Schererville, for the cleanup of which
separate clean-up contractors are required to be called in (in the
determination and at the discretion of the Schererville Fire Department) shall
assume and bear full responsibility for the direct payment for said clean-up to
the clean-up contractor.
(Ord. No. 1204, § 3, 5-13-92)
Sec. 4-193 Billing Procedure.
   The Schererville Fire Department and the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of
Schererville shall be responsible for billing the shippers, transporters,
owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and including owners (or tenants) of
fixed facilities within the Town of Schererville, causes or suffers the leak or
spill, within a reasonable time after the Schererville Fire Department's
initial response to the said leak or spill, for the use of Schererville Fire
Department's resources.
(Ord. No. 1204, § 4, 5-13-92)
Sec. 4-194 Penalty for Failure to Pay.
   Shippers, transporters, owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and
including owners (or tenants) of fixed facilities within the Town of
Schererville, who cause or suffer leaks or spills of potentially hazardous or
toxic materials within the Town of Schererville, who fail to reimburse the Town
within thirty (30) days after receipt of said billing, shall be deemed to have
violated this Division and shall suffer a penalty, in addition to the
determined reimbursement, as provided in applicable Ordinances of the Town of
Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1204, § 5, 5-13-92)
Sec. 4-195 Fire Investigation Reports.
   a.   The Town of Schererville Fire Department shall charge a fee of five
dollars ($5.00) for each Fire Investigation Report which is furnished to any
person lawfully entitled to receive said information.
   b.   All fees for Fire Investigation Reports shall be deposited into a
separate account known as the Fire Equipment Fund.
(Ord. No. 1517, 3-14-01)
Sec. 4-196 through Sec. 4-199 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XV. Police Department Fees.
Sec. 4-200 Licensing of Handguns - Procedures and Fees.
   a.   Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 35-47-2-1, et seq., more particularly
Indiana Code, § 35-4-2-1, a person desiring a license to carry a handgun shall
apply to the Chief of Police or Acting Chief of Police of the Town of
Schererville, providing the applicant is a resident of the Town of
Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 10-12-88)
   b.   The Police Department by and through its Chief or Acting Chief or
designee shall make available the forms recommended by the Indiana State Police
or other designated proper agency, and shall assist the applicant in properly
filling out said forms and providing other required information and data.
(I.C., § 35-47-2-3).
   c.   The Police Department, Chief or Acting Chief, or other designee does
not have discretion to grant or deny licenses or applications except as
provided by State Law. The Police Department, Chief or Acting Chief, or their
designee then shall forward the application to the Indiana State Police or
other proper agency as a ministerial function only. The Police Department,
Police Chief, Acting Police Chief, or their designee or the Town of
Schererville does not have any discretion in the issuing of such licenses, and
does not warrant or take any responsibility for any of the information
contained in or on any application.
(Ord. No. 1087, § 4, 10-12-88)
   d.   The license fee the Police Department shall charge for processing a
handgun application shall be the same as provided under I.C. § 35-47-2-3, as
amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1141, § 1, 2-14-90)
   e.   The administrative fee provided in I.C. § 35-47-2-3 shall be placed in
an account created by and maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer for law enforcement
training expenses for the Schererville Police Department. Said account to be
maintained with accepted standards of accounting recommended by the Indiana
State Board of Accounts. The disbursement of the funds therefrom shall be in
the discretion of the Superintendent of Police, Chief of Police, Acting Chief
of Police or whoever is at any time the highest ranking person designated as
department head of the Police Department.
(Ord. No. 1087, § 5, 10-12-88; Ord. No. 1674, § 1, 7-12-06)
Sec. 4-201 Out-of-State Vehicle Inspection Fee.
   Whenever an employee of the Schererville Police Department performs and
inspection of a motor vehicle, semi-trailer, or recreational vehicle prior to
its registration in the State of Indiana, pursuant to Indiana Code, § 9-1-2-1,
the Department shall be entitled to charge a fee in an amount of five dollars
($5.00) for each such inspection. The revenue from the inspection fee shall be
deposited in a special vehicle inspection fund (See Sec.
2-402 of this Code). The fiscal body (Town Council) must appropriate the money
collected from the inspection only for law enforcement purposes. (Ord. No.
1069, § 1, 6-8-88) The person inspecting such vehicle shall make a record of
inspection upon the application form, as prepared by the Department, and verify
the facts set out in said application.
   a.   Non-commercial applicants shall pay the inspection fee at the time of
the inspection. A receipt will be issued for each fee collected, on a receipt
form designated, in triplicate, with one (1) copy given to the applicant, one
(1) copy attached to the fee, and one (1) copy remaining in the receipt book.
The fee shall then be deposited in the designated safe and remitted to the
Clerk-Treasurer at least once each week.
   b.   Commercial applications shall be billed on a monthly basis, payable on
or before the 15th day of the following month. All requests for inspections by
auto dealerships shall be recorded on an "assist cash sheet", specifying the
number of vehicles inspected. An inspection form, specifying the date, name of
the business, the number of vehicles inspected, and designated space for
signatures of the commercial representative and the inspecting officer, will be
completed each time, and these forms turned in to the records clerk of the
police department. No fee shall be collected from any commercial applicant by
any employee of the police department without authorization from the station
commander or the Chief of Police.
(Ord. No. 957, § 1, 6-13-84, Schererville Town Code, § 8-9-1)
Sec. 4-202 Fees for Traffic Accident Reports.
   a.   The Schererville Metropolitan Police Department has a legal duty and
obligation pursuant to Indiana Code, § 9-3-1-3 to promptly on demand furnish to
any person who has sustained any loss or damage, by reason of the injury or
death of any person or damage to property caused by or resulting from the
operation, maintenance or use of any vehicle upon any public street or highway
in the State the following information on a police or accident report:
      1.   A name and address of the owner and operator of any vehicle involved
in said accident;
      2.   The license number and description of any such vehicle involved in
said accident;
      3.   The time and place of such accident occurred;
      4.   The names and addresses of any persons injured or killed in said
accident;
      5.   The names and addresses of any persons who were witnesses to said
accident.
   b.   Any person lawfully entitled to the aforesaid information may obtain
the same from the Schererville Metropolitan Police Department either in person
or through his duly authorized agent or attorney, provided that, such agent or
attorney shall first file with said department a verified written authorization
therefore signed by such person so lawfully entitled to said information.
   c.   When such information is furnished by means of a duplicating copy
machine of the investigator's report of said accident, the department shall be
entitled to charge a fee of four dollars ($4.00) for each such police or
accident report.
   d.   Such fee for the aforesaid accident or police report shall be deposited
in a separate account known as the "Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund"
and it may be expended at the discretion of the Chief Administrative Officer of
the department for any department purpose reasonably related to the keeping of
accident reports and records for the prevention of street and highway
accidents. (See §
2-395 of this Code).
(Ord. No. 866, 8-12-81)
   e.   In keeping with the provisions of this Section, the following
procedures shall be followed in accounting for this fund:
      1.   Issue a Receipt, General Form No. 352, for each fee collected.
      2.   Remit receipts to the Clerk-Treasurer at least once a month.
      3.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue an official receipt for remittance
specifying on such receipt the number of general receipts accounted for. (For
example: General Receipt Nos. 1-8, $32.00)
      4.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall receipt the fees to a separate fund in the
ledger of receipts and disbursements and deposit such receipts in the Town's
general corporation bank account.
      5.   Monies from this fund may be invested by the Clerk-Treasurer and the
interest shall be placed in the General Operating Fund.
(Schererville Town Code § 3-6-3).
Sec. 4-203 Fees for Applications to Police Department.
   a.   The Resolution of the Metropolitan Police Commission is adopted and a
twenty dollar ($20.00) fee shall be assessed to any and all applicants for the
position of a police officer with the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
   b.   The twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee shall be paid directly to the
Police Department by each prospective applicant.
(Ord. No. 1369, § 2, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1451, § 1, 2-10-99)
   c.   The twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee shall be placed into the Police
Department Equipment fund.
(Ord. No. 1369, §§ 1-3, 2-12-97; Ord. No. 1451, § 3, 2-10-99)
Sec. 4-204 Incident Reports, Accident Reports, Photographs, Vehicle
Identification Number Checks, Video Tapes and Audio Tapes.
   a.   The Metropolitan Police Department shall charge fees for the following
services, which shall be furnished to any person entitled to receive said
information:
      1.   Incidents reports: $.10 per page.
      2.   Accident reports: $8.00.
      3.   Photographs: $7.00.
      4.   Vehicle identification number checks: $5.00.
      5.   Video tapes: $2.00.
      6.   Audio tapes: $1.00.
   b.   All fees for incident reports, accident reports, photographs, vehicle
identification number checks, video tapes and audio tapes shall be deposited
into the Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund (LECEF).
(Ord. No. 1533, 8-8-01; Ord. No. 1713, § 1, 8-8-07)
Sec. 4-204A Miscellaneous Fees.
   a.   Vehicle tow release fee. A forty dollar ($40.00) fee shall be assessed
and collected for any vehicle tow release performed by the Town of Schererville
Police Department. The processing of the fee shall be in conformance with the
applicable requirements of the State of Indiana Board of Accounts, as amended
from time to time. The fee shall be paid directly to the Town Police Department
and deposited in the Police Department Special Revenue Non-reverting Equipment
Fund.
   b.   Unclaimed vehicle fee. Any authorized vehicle tow company which obtains
the appropriate and legal right and title to a car or vehicle towed at the
request of the Town of Schererville Police Department, and then sells or
“scraps” that car or vehicle, shall be assessed an unclaimed vehicle fee of
forty dollars ($40.00). The fee shall be paid directly to the Town Police
Department and deposited in the Police Department Special Revenue Non-Reverting
Equipment Fund. (Ord. No. 1564, § 1, 12-11-02; Ord. No. 1688, § 1, 12-13-06;
Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 5-10-23)
   c.   Fingerprint Service Fee. A fifteen dollar ($15.00) fee shall be
assessed and collected for any fingerprint services performed by the Town of
Schererville Police Department. The processing of the fee shall be in
conformance with the applicable requirements of the State of Indiana Board of
Accounts, as amended from time to time. The fee shall be paid directly to the
Town Police Department and deposited in the Law Enforcement Continuing
Education Fund.
(Ord. No. 1565, § 1, 12-11-02; Ord. No. 1686, § 1, 12-13-06)
Sec. 4-204B Law Enforcement Processing Service Charge and Release Fee.
   a.   In order to support the administrative and processing responsibilities
of the Metropolitan Police Department, as well as for the convenience provided
and associated with processing the receipt of cash or surety bonds connected
with a criminal charge or offense for which the posting of a bond in lieu of
incarceration is a lawful option, there is hereby authorized and established a
special user fee, to be known as Schererville Police Department Law Enforcement
Processing Service Charge and Release Fee.
   b.   The Schererville Police Department Law Enforcement Processing Service
Charge and Release Fee hereinafter identified may be collected by the
Metropolitan Police Department in each instance of providing additional
processing and release services for persons charged with criminal offenses for
which they have been placed under lawful arrest and whereby the posting of a
bond in lieu of incarceration is a lawful option. The Schererville Police
Department Law Enforcement Processing Service Charge and Release Fee shall be
charged at the same time the bond is collected.
   c.   The Schererville Police Department Law Enforcement Processing Service
Charge and Release Fee shall be initially established in the amount of $35.00,
which is hereby deemed to be a reasonable and just amount, and reasonably
related to the administration of the law enforcement services as specified
hereinabove.
   d.   All Schererville Police Department Law Enforcement Processing Service
Charge and Release Fee remitted to the Metropolitan Police Department shall be
deposited with the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and credited to the
Schererville Police Department Law Enforcement Processing Service Charge and
Release Fee Special Revenue Non-Reverting Fund established by separate town
ordinance as such exists or may be amended from time to time hereinafter in
conformance with applicable law.
(Ord. No. 1819, 9-12-12)
Division XVI. Miscellaneous Fees.
Sec. 4-205 Assessment Registration.
   a.   Owners of property subject to I.C., § 6-1.1-5-15 shall not be required
to file an assessment registration notice with the Town of Schererville on
behalf of the Township Assessor.
(Ord. No. 1279, § l, 5-11-94)
   b.   The owner of property subject to I.C., § 6-1.1-5-14, or the person
performing the work on behalf of the owner, who has obtained a permit from the
Town of Schererville for said work, shall not be required to pay a five-dollar
($5.00) fee for the filing of an assessment registration notice.
(Ord. No. 1279, § 2, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-206 Fees Charged by the Plat Review Committee.  8
   The following fee schedule is approved and adopted and is effective from
this date:
      Establishing lot-of-record from metes and bounds legal
description   $50.00
      Creation of one (1) lot subdivision (Commercial or Residential)   $75.00
      Creation of two (2) lot subdivision (Commercial or Residential)   $100.00
      Zoning Fee (Per Petition)                  $25.00
(Ord. No. 1287, 8-22-94)
 
Notes
  8   Editor's Note: The Plan Commission adopted Res. No. 94-5 recommending the
8 fee schedule chargeable by the Plat Review Committee pursuant to its duties set
  forth in Ord. No. 1206. I.C., §§ 36-5-2-1 through 36-5-2-11, address Town
  legislative body and executive.
Sec. 4-207 Community Service Program Fees.
   a.   The Town Council for the Town of Schererville, Indiana, implements the
following user's fee for participants in the Community Service Program:
      1.   One day community service (5 hours)   $25.00
      2.   Two days community service (10 hours)   $50.00
      3.   Four days community service (20 hours)   $75.00
   b.   If the Court should assign community service in excess of twenty (20)
hours, then at aforesaid time, there shall be assessed a user's fee at the rate
of five dollars ($5.00) per hour, not to exceed one hundred and twenty dollars
($120.00) in full.
   c.   The Judge of the Schererville Town Court shall have the discretion to
waive any or all of the Community Service Fee should it determine from the
facts and circumstances of the individual case that a financial hardship shall
result if the fee be imposed, or if there should exist other just and
reasonable circumstances to waive the user's fee.
(Ord. No. 1421, §§ 1, 2, 5-13-98)
Sec. 4-208 Hydrant Rental Fees and Penalties.
   a.   Fire hydrant rental for residences located within the Schererville
water district, but outside the Schererville corporate boundaries, shall be in
the sum of three dollars and eighty cents ($3.80) per unit per month, and said
billing shall be sent on the tenth (10th) of each month. (Ord. No. 1375C, § 1,
8-12-98; Ord. No. 1375D, § 1, 4-14-99; Ord. No. 1660, 5-10-06)
   b.   The cost of a 5/8" meter and an unmetered water customer shall be three
dollars and seventeen cents ($3.17) per month. (Ord. No. 1375, 3-12-97)
   c.   The bill for fire hydrant rental shall be due on or before the twenty-
fourth (24th) of each month. (Ord. No. 1375D, § 2, 4-14-99)
   d.   Any payments not made within the fourteen (14) day billing cycle shall
bear a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the balance owed after due date which
shall be assessed upon any and all overage charges for fire hydrant services
billed to water utility customers. (Ord. No. 1375B, § 1, 6-10- 98; Ord. No.
1375D, § 3, 4-14-99; Ord. No. 1375E, § 1, 12-9-09)
Sec. 4-209 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Franchise Regulations.
Division I. Cable Television Rate Regulations.  9
 
Notes
9 9   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1278 repealed Ord. No. 1258 which was passed on
  November 10, 1993.
Sec. 4-210 Adoption of Rules and Regulations.
   a.   The Town President and the Council of the Town of Schererville adopts
the rules and regulations set forth by the Federal Communications Commission
pursuant to Section 623(b) of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. 543[b]) for the review of the basic service
tier of cable television services and equipment necessary for the provision of
such service tier. Such rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission are found in Exhibit “A” which is on file in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer and open for inspection during regular business
hours.
   b.   For the purposes of this Division, the basic service tier of cable
television services shall mean a separately available service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as
a minimum, but not limited to, all signals of domestic television broadcast
stations provided to any subscriber, (except a signal secondarily transmitted
by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless
of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system) any public,
educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise to be
carved on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals or
service added to the basic tier by the cable operator. Equipment necessary to
provide said basic tier of service shall be defined as those items of
associated equipment necessary for the reception of basic cable service by a
subscriber, including, but not limited to converter boxes, remote control
units, additional outlets, and installations.
(Ord. No. 1278, § 1, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-211 Public Hearing Requirements.
   a.   The Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, authorizes the Lake
County Indiana CATV Consortium (Consortium) to provide the grantee of the cable
television franchise, the public, and interested parties with an opportunity to
be heard either through the submission of written comments to the Consortium
over a period not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days during the period of
review of basic cable rates and associated equipment, or at a public hearing
before the Town Council upon fourteen (14) days written notice to the grantee
of the cable television franchise of the time and place of the public hearing
provided further that said notice shall indicate that the purpose of the public
hearing is to receive the views of the grantee and interested parties on issues
pertaining to regulation of the basic service tier of cable television services
and equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of service; and provided
further that notice of said public hearing shall be published in a local
newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days before the date of this
hearing, and provided further, that an agenda for said public hearing shall be
posted in a public place at the Town Hall, at least seven (7) days prior to
said public hearing.
   b.   Upon the adoption of this ordinance the Town of Schererville shall
permit the Lake County, Indiana CATV Consortium to immediately notify the cable
operator by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the Town intends to
regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated
equipment as authorized by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992.
   Upon receipt of said notice from the Consortium, the Cable for shall, within
thirty (30) days, file with the Consortium its current rates for the basic
service tier and associated equipment along with any additional documentation
justifying the reasonableness of its rates.
(Ord. No. 1278, § 2, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-212 Period for Review of Rates.
   a.   The Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, shall permit the
Consortium to establish that the period for review of rates of the basic
service tier of cable television services and the equipment necessary to
provide said basic tier of service shall be thirty (30) days from the
submission by the grantee of the cable television franchise of Federal
Communications Commission Form 393. If the Consortium indicates to the Town of
Schererville that it will take no action within thirty (30) days from the date
the cable operator files its basic cable rates with the Town, the proposed
rates will continue in effect.
   b.   In the event that additional time for review of the Federal
Communications Commission Form 393 submitted by grantee is necessary, the Town
Council shall permit the Consortium issue a brief written order prior to the
end of the thirty (30) day review period, with a copy of said Order to be sent
by certified United States Mail to the grantee, providing for an additional
ninety (90) day period for review of rates of the basic service tier and the
equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of service.
(Ord. No. 1278, § 3, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-213 Forms and Information Required by the FCC.
   a.   Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, shall permit the Consortium
to establish that the period for review of the basic service tier of cable
television services and the equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of
service shall be thirty (30) days from the submission by the grantee of
information and forms prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission for a
showing of cost-of-service, as defined by the Federal Communications
Commission.
   b.   In the event that additional time for review of the cost-of-service
showing submitted by the grantee is necessary, the Town Council shall permit
the Consortium to issue a brief written order prior to the end of the thirty
(30) day review period with a copy of said order to be sent by certified United
States Mail to the grantee, providing for an additional one hundred fifty (150)
day period for review of rates of the basic service tier and the equipment
necessary to provide said basic tier of service. During the extended review
period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the Consortium shall hold
at least one public hearing in which interested citizens may express their
views and record objections.
(Ord. No. 1278, § 4, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-214 Resolution of Council Required.
   a.   Upon completion of its review of the proposed rates for the basic
service tier of cable television services and the equipment necessary to
provide said basic tier of service, the Consortium shall provide the Town
Council with its' determinations and findings. The Town Council shall adopt the
findings of the Consortium by formal resolution. Said resolution shall indicate
the reasons for the decision. Upon passage of the resolution, the Town Council
shall publish the resolution in pamphlet form.
   b.   In the event that the cable operator's proposed rates exceed the
reasonable rate standard as established by the Federal Communications
Commission in its rules and regulations which are on file in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, the Town Council may order the rates reduced by rollbacks or
refunds to subscribers, in the manner so prescribed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
(Ord. No. 1278, § 5, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-215 Non-Disclosure of Certain Information.
   In considering information provided by the grantee as a part of review of
his rates for the basic service tier of cable television services and the
equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of service, neither the Town of
Schererville nor the Consortium, shall not disclose to the public the content
of any records, forms, reports, calculations, or other documents as provided
which the grantee has indicated as being of a proprietary interest or
constituting a trade secret in nature. The duly designated municipal officer
and Consortium administrator responsible for administration of the Indiana Open
Door Act, I.C., § 5-14-3-1, et seq. shall rain the right to determine the
validity of the grantee's claim of proprietary interest or trade secrecy in
accordance with the provisions of the Indiana Open Door Act.
(Ord. No. 1278, § 6, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-216 Refund Order Requirements.
   The Town may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of
previously paid rates under the following circumstances:
   a.   A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in
excess of the permitted basic cable service tier charge or above the actual
cost of equipment; or
   b.   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued
by the Town.
(Ord. No. 1278, § 7, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-217 Violations.
   Failure by the cable operator to comply with the terms and conditions
established by this Ordinance, including its attachment hereto, shall
constitute a violation of the Cable Television Franchise Ordinance of the Town
of Schererville, said penalties for such violation are subject to the
conditions of penalties set forth in §
1-15 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1 278, § 8, 5-11-94)
Sec. 4-218 Vocation of Cable TV Monies Collected.
   a.   Cable TV monies collected may be utilized for the promotion of local
government in the Town of Schererville as well as for repairs to streets,
alleys, and ditches located in the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
   b.   Cable TV monies which are specifically designated as Innkeeper's Tax
shall be utilized for the promotion of tourism within the Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1258A, §§ 1-2, 3-10-99)
See. 4-219 through Sec. 4-224 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 4. Fees and Charges.
Sec. 4-225 Chart on Administration Fees and Charges.
   The following chart sets forth a summary of the major fees and charges of
the Town. It is not intended to be all inclusive.
   Chart on Fees and Charges
Topic Regulated Amount Charged Code Section
Topic Regulated             Amount Charged                  Code Section
Accident Reports            $4.00                           4-202
Adoption of Animals         $30.00 - $50.00                 6-23
Alarm Systems               $15.00 plus monthly fees - $100 4-74,
                                                            4-69
Ambulance Services          $100.00 - $125.00 per call      4-114
Animal Shelters             $50.00 - $200.00                4-186
Assessment Registration     $5.00                           4-205
Athletic Fields             See Chart                       5-48
Building Inspections        See Chart                       7-53
Building, Planning & Zoning See Chart                       7-21,
                                                            7-22
Businesses                  $50.00                          4-34
Canvassers                  $5.00 - $100.00                 4-87
Carnivals                   $100.00                         4-108
Cats                        $5.00 - $25.00                  4-184,
                                                            6-13
Cats - Impoundment          $10.00 plus $3.00 daily         6-17
Cigarette Machines          4100.00                         4-21
Circuses                    $100.00                         4-108
Community Service           $25.00 - $120.00                4-207
Dogs                        $5.00 - $25.00                  4-184,
                                                            6-13
Dogs - Impoundment          $$10.00 plus $3 - $4/day        6-17
Electrical Game             $100.00 - $2,500.00             4-21,
                                                            4-26
Fire Hydrant Rental         $3.17 per month                 4-208
Firework Sales                                              6-69
Garbage Collection          $8.90 per month                 6-116
Handguns                    see I.C. § 35-47-2-3           4-200
Hawkers                     $5.00 - $100.00                 4-87
Hazardous/Toxic Spills      $250.00 plus hourly chgs.       4-190
Lot-of-Record               $50.00                          4-206
Lot Subdivisions            $75.00 - $100.00                4-206
 
TOPIC REGULATED Amount Charged Code Section
TOPIC REGULATED             Amount Charged  Code Section
Massage Establishment       $50.00          4-60
Masseur, Masseuse           $25.00          4-60
Matrimony Charges           $1.00-$25.00    2-10C
Motorized Bicycles          $10.00          4-11
Outdoor Events              $100.00         4-108
Pavilion                    $35.00 -$300.00 5-47
Peddlers                    $5.00-$100.00   4-87
                                            4-154,
Picnic Shelter              $10.00-$150.00  4-155,
                                            5-45,
                                            5-46
Planning Building & Zoning  See Sections    7-21,
                                            7-22
Police Application          $25.00          4-203
Salesman                    $5.00-$100.00   4-87
Sewage Rates                See Sections    9-142 et seq.
Shooting Galleries/Clubs    $25.00          6-181
Solicitors                  $5.00-$100.00   4-87
Storage/Towing Vehicles     See Chart       4-186,
                                            6-160
Towing/Storage Vehicles     See Chart       4-148,
                                            6-160
Transient Merchants         $5.00-$100.00   4-87
Utility Rates               See Section     9-60 et seq.,
                                            9-142 et seq.
Vehicle Inspections         $5.00           4-201
Out of State
Vehicle Towing/Storage      See Chart       4-148,
                                            6-160
Water Rates & Charges       See Sections    9-60 et seq.
Zoning, Building & Planning See Chart       7-21,
                                            7-22
Zoning Petition             $25.00          4-206
 
(Ord. No. 1370, 2-12-97)
Sec. 4-226 through Sec. 4-229 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 5. TAXI CAB REGULATIONS.
Sec. 4-230 Taxi Cab Regulations Incorporated.
   a.   Ord. No. 543 addressing taxi cabs is incorporated by reference and is
amended as set forth in this Article.
   b.   Said ordinance is on file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
Sec. 4-231 Insurance and Bond Requirements of Taxi Cab Owners/Operators.  10
   No license shall be issued for any taxi cabs or to any operator thereof
until the owner of the taxi cab shall file with the Town Clerk-Treasurer an
insurance policy issued by a responsible insurance company licensed to do
business in the State. The insurance company and the form of the policy shall
be approved by the Town Council. These policies shall co-insure the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, and shall provide insurance coverage for each and every
taxi cab owned and operated by the applicant within the Town with a minimum of
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for comprehensive coverage
including personal injury and property damage regardless of whether the taxi
cab was driven by the owner or an employee.
   No license shall be issued for a taxi cab unless it shall comply with the
following rules and regulations:
   1.   In lieu of the policy of insurance provided for here above, licensee
may furnish a good and sufficient surety bond or bonds in a form to be approved
by the Town Council in the penal sum of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) with a surety company authorized to do business in the State, to
run to the Town to indemnify it against any loss due its authorizing the
licensee to proceed under this section. In addition, the licensee shall post
with the Town an insurance policy, providing for minimum liability coverage of
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for the death or injury of any
person, and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for the death or
injury of any number of persons in any single accident and a limit of minimum
liability of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage in
any one accident, regardless of whether the taxi cab was being driven by the
owner or his employees.
   2.   No license shall be issued under this section unless the licensee shall
show proof that he has obtained a valid certificate of self-insurance from the
State Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
(Ord. No. 1378, § 1, 4-9-97)
 
Notes
10    Editor's Note: The reader should consult Ord. No. 543, § 4 for paragraphs a-
   d.
Sec. 4-232 Rates or Fares to be Charged and Regulations Governing Operation of
Taxi Cabs.
   a.   All taxi cabs operating within the municipal boundaries of the Town
shall be equipped with taxi cab meters approved by the Lake County Department
of Weights and Measures.
   b.   All taxi cab companies shall prominently post a rate card listing
charges for each service on the interior and exterior of each taxi cab.
   c.   All rate changes of any type by an applicant after the initial issuance
of license shall be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer’s Office for review by the
Town Council. In evaluating a request for a rate change, the Town Council shall
evaluate relevant factors, including, but not necessarily limited to, public
safety, service value and convenience to the traveling public. The Town Council
shall approve or deny said rate change within sixty (60) days of the public
filing. If the requested rate change is denied, the Town Council shall issue
reasons for denying the same. In the event that the Town Council fails or
declines to act on a request for a rate change within said sixty (60) days, the
rate change applied for shall be deemed approved and will become immediately
effective.
   d.   Said rate change shall not be effective until approved by the Town
Council or passage of the sixty (60) day period referenced in paragraph c.
above.
(Ord. No. 1378, § 2, 4-9-97; Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 9-8-04)
Sec. 4-233 Penalties.  11
   Failure to comply with an provisions of this Article by operator or a driver
of a taxi cab shall be subject both the owner and the operator of the cab to a
fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than twenty-
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any violation of this ordinance by the owner
and/or operator of a taxi cab shall submit said license to forfeiture at the
discretion of the Town Manager for the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1378, § 3, 4-9-97)
 
Notes
11 11   Editor's Note : This section amends § 11 of Ord. 543.
Sec. 4-234 through Sec. 4-239 Reserved for Future Use.
Chapter 5
Parks and Recreation
Article 1. Parks and Recreation in General.
   
Sec. 5-1   Authority to Create.
   
Sec. 5-2   Administration of Parks and Recreation Programs.
   
Sec. 5-3   through Sec. 5-5 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Parks and Recreation Master Plan.
   
Sec. 5-6   Adoption of Parks and Recreation Master Plan.
   
Sec. 5-7   Town Parks.
   
Sec. 5-8   through Sec. 5-14 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Park Regulations.
Division I. Specific Rules and Regulations Governing Conduct in Town Parks.
   
Sec. 5-15   Board of Parks and Recreation Rules Adopted.
   
Sec. 5-16   Construction and Scope of Division.
   
Sec. 5-17   Definitions of Terms.
   
Sec. 5-18   Defacement, Destruction, Removal and Disturbance of Property,
Equipment and Natural Features.
   
Sec. 5-19   Littering, Rubbish, Garbage, Sewage and Noxious Material, Air
Pollution, Nuisance and/or Damage.
   
Sec. 5-20   Molesting Wildlife; Hunting and Fishing.
   
Sec. 5-21   Camps and Camping.
   
Sec. 5-22   Hours of Operation.
   
Sec. 5-23   Traffic Regulations.
   
Sec. 5-24   Swimming, Swimming Areas and Beaches.
   
Sec. 5-25   Snowmobiles, Sledding, Skiing and Skating.
   
Sec. 5-26   Indecent Conduct.
   
Sec. 5-27   Disorderly Conduct.
   
Sec. 5-28   Firearms, Weapons, Explosives, Etc.
   
Sec. 5-29   Household Pets Prohibited in Parks - Exceptions; Control of
Animals.
   
Sec. 5-30   Advertising Signs Prohibited.
   
Sec. 5-31   Commercial Enterprises Prohibited; Concessioneering Without Permit.
   
Sec. 5-32   Fee Permits, Rental Facilities Authorized.
   
Sec. 5-33   Obedience to Posted Rules and Regulations Required.
   
Sec. 5-34   Board Agents and Employees of the Board.
   
Sec. 5-35   Penalties.
   
Sec. 5-36   through Sec. 5-39 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Procedure for Requesting Use of Athletic Facilities.
   
Sec. 5-40   Procedures to Request Athletic Facilities Usage.
   
Sec. 5-41   through Sec. 5-44 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Fees.
   
Sec. 5-45   Shelter Fees.
   
Sec. 5-46   Reserved.
   
Sec. 5-47   Reserved.
   
Sec. 5-48   Fees for Non-Lessee Users of Athletic Fields.
   
Sec. 5-49   Procedures to Reserve Shelter.
   
Sec. 5-50   Limitations of Usage.
   
Sec. 5-51   Pavilion Rental Fees for Schools.
   
Sec. 5-52   Mobile Band Shell; Policies and Procedures.
   
Sec. 5-53   Activities Fee Schedule.
   
Sec. 5-54   Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Miscellaneous.
   
Sec. 5-55   Funds.
   
Sec. 5-56   Lightning Prediction and Warning System Policy and Procedures.
   
Sec. 5-57   through Sec. 5-79 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Additional Traffic Control Regulations in Parks.
   
Sec. 5-80   Signs Erected.
   
Sec. 5-81   Restrictions.
   
Sec. 5-82   Exceptions.
   
Sec. 5-83   Penalties.
   
Sec. 5-84   through Sec. 5-89 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Hours of Public Restrooms in Parks.
   
Sec. 5-90   Hours of Park Public Restroom Facilities.
   
Sec. 5-91   When Restroom Facilities are Closed.
   
Sec. 5-92   Role of Park Superintendent.
   
Sec. 5-93   through Sec. 5-96 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Skate Park Facility.
   Sec.
5-97   Rules and regulations.
   Sec.
5-98   and 5-99 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 4. Park and Recreation Equitable Impact Fees.
   
Sec. 5-100   Limitation on Imposition of Impact Fee.
   
Sec. 5-101   Establishment of Infrastructure Impact Zone.
   
Sec. 5-102   Zone Improvement Plan.
   
Sec. 5-103   Establishment of Park and Recreational Impact Fee.
   
Sec. 5-104   Credit in Lieu of Payment Exemptions.
   
Sec. 5-105   Impact Fee Due Upon Issuance of Structural Building Permit.
   
Sec. 5-106   Lien Rights Established.
   
Sec. 5-107   Form of Receipt.
   
Sec. 5-108   Appeals.
   
Sec. 5-109   Establishment of Non-Reverting Park and Recreational Fund.
   
Sec. 5-110   Use of Impact Fees Collected.
   
Sec. 5-111   House Enrolled Act No. 1467.
   
Sec. 5-112   Amendments and Review.
   
Sec. 5-113   through Sec. 5-119 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 1. Parks and Recreation in General.
Sec. 5-1 Authority to Operate.  1
   The Town may establish, aid, maintain, and operate public parks,
playgrounds, and recreation facilities and programs.
 
Notes
1 1   I.C., § 36-10-2-2, addresses recreation facilities and programs.
Sec. 5-2 Administration of Parks and Recreation Programs.
   a.   The Park Department as established in Section
2-48, et seq., and the Parks and Recreation Board established in Section
2-50, et seq., of this Code shall be responsible for administering programs
under the Park and Recreation Law, Indiana Code, § 36-10-3-1, et seq.
   b.   The Park Superintendent is addressed in Section
2-59 and Park Assistants are addressed in Section
2-60.
Sec. 5-3 through Sec. 5-5 Reserved for Future Use
Article 2. Parks and Recreation Master Plan.
Sec. 5-6 Adoption of Park and Recreation Master Plan.
   a.   The Schererville Park and Recreation Master Plan is adopted as its
official plan for the next five (5) years, for the growth and development of
parks and recreational opportunities in Schererville.
(Park Board Res. No. 89-1, 8-3-89)
   b.   Copies of the Master Plan are on file in the Office of the Clerk-
Treasurer and available for public inspection during regular business hours.
Sec. 5-7 Town Parks.  2
   a. Parks and recreation facilities that exist within the Town of
Schererville's boundaries are divided into four (4) categories. The first
category is that land which is owned by the Town for use by the Park Board. The
second category is property owned by the Lake Central School Corporation. The
third category is land which is owned by private schools. The fourth category
consists of land and facilities owned by other organizations.
   b.   The first category consists of eight (8) parks. A brief description of
each park follows.
      1.   Beidron Park is a six (6) acre Neighborhood Park located in the
center of town just southeast of Redar Park. The adjacent land use is
residential. Beidron currently has one (1) tennis court, one (1) picnic
shelter, and a playground.
      2.   Grimmer Tot Lot is a one (1) acre Tot Lot located in the north
central portion of Schererville in a residential neighborhood. Grimmer contains
a play structure, tot toys and park benches.
      3.   Grove Park is a one (1) acre special use area located in a
residential area. Grove currently has a sheltered picnic table,
      4.   Plum Creek Park is an eight (8) acre neighborhood park in the Plum
Creek area of Schererville. Plum Creek is a fast-growing residential area. Plum
Creek currently has a restroom, playground and soccer field. Summer day camp
and soccer are the programs available.
      5.   Redar Park is a 9.2 acre neighborhood park that is also used as a
community park. Redar is located in the center of town in a residential area.
Redar has a parking lot, 2 Softball fields, basketball court, security
lighting, restrooms, picnic shelter and playground. Current programs are the
summer day camp and girls softball.
      6.   Rolling Hills Park is a 2.5 acre neighborhood park located in the
eastern part of Schererville just north of U.S. 30. The area is residential in
nature and is not currently growing. Currently, Rolling Hills has a picnic
shelter, backstop, basketball court and playground.
      7.   Smith Tot Lot is a one (1) acre tot lot located in a residential
area south of U.S. 30 and west of Austin Avenue. The tot lot has a play
structure, sheltered picnic table, and other tot toys. Smith was developed as a
Lions Club project.
      8.   Stephen Park is a twenty (20) acre community park located in the
southwest portion of Schererville. The land use is residential. The park
currently has a picnic shelter, restroom, volleyball court, 2 softball fields,
overlapping soccer fields, 2 tennis courts, a playground and parking lot.
Programs offered are summer day camp, tennis lessons, girls softball and
soccer.
(1989 Park and Recreation Plan, pp. 24-25)
 
Notes
  2   Editor's Note: A listing of additional parks is to be on file in the Town
2 Manager's Office and was to be prepared by the Town during the recodification
  process.
Sec. 5-8 through Sec. 5-14 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Park Regulations.
Division 1. Specific Rules and Regulations Governing Conduct in Town Parks.
Sec. 5-15 Board of Parks and Recreation Rules Adopted.
   The rules and regulations contained in Resolution No. 88-4 of the Board of
Parks and Recreation of the Town of Schererville are adopted.
(Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-16 Construction and Scope of Division.
   It is the interpretation of this Division that its provisions be construed
as follows:
   a.   All references to a specific gender (eg., he, himself, etc.) shall
henceforth, refer to both genders (e.g., the word "he" shall represent both
male and female persons).
   b.   The superintendent, with the approval of the Park and Board and
subsequent approval of the Town Council, shall have the power to add or delete
rules and regulations from the contents of this Division.
   c.   Detailed information of rules and regulations referred to in general
terms in this Division and contained in different literature published by the
department shall be considered supplemental material of this Division and shall
be binding by law.
   d.   Any requirement or provisions of this Division relating to any act
shall respectively extend to and include the causing, procuring, aiding or
abetting, directly or indirectly, of such act or the permitting or the allowing
of any minor in the custody of any person to do any act prohibited by any
provision hereof.
   e.   No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed
by any officer of the law or employee of the Parks and Recreation Department in
the line of duty.
   f.   This Division is in addition and supplemental to all municipal, state
and federal laws and ordinances.
   g.   This Division shall be effective within and upon all areas under the
jurisdiction of the board and shall regulate the use thereof by all persons.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 1, 8-4-88 of the Park Board Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-17 Definition of Terms.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this Division, the
following terms shall respectively mean and include each of the meanings set
forth.
   a.   Department - Shall henceforth refer to the Parks and Recreation
Department of the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
   b.   Duly Authorized Agent - Shall henceforth refer to any employee (full or
part-time), consultant or person authorized with the power to act lawfully in
behalf of the Park and Recreation Department of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
   c.   Gambling - As defined by the Indiana Code.
   d.   Intoxication - As defined by the Indiana Code.
   e.   Marijuana - As defined by the Indiana Code.
   f.   Narcotic Drugs - As defined by the Indiana Code.
   g.   Park Board, Board, Board of Parks and Recreation, Park Members shall
henceforth refer to the Board of Parks and Recreation, Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
   h.   Parks and Park Property shall be deemed to include all parks,
playgrounds, athletic facilities, parking areas, buildings or structures,
recreation areas, open areas, roads, waters, land under water, including all
land under and space above the surface of the ground, and all entrances and
approaches under the jurisdiction of the board or shall hereafter be acquired
by the board.
   i.   Permit shall mean and include any written authorization issued by or
under the authority of the board for a specified park privilege, activity or
event, or permitting the performance of a specified act or acts on any park or
park property.
   j.   Person shall mean and include any natural person, corporation, society,
organization or persons, company, association, joint stock association, firm or
co-partnership.
   k.   Superintendent shall henceforth refer to the Superintendent of Parks
and Recreation of the Parks and Recreation Department, Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
   l.   Town shall henceforth mean the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 2, 8-4-88 of the Park Board Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-18 Defacement, Destruction, Removal and Disturbance of Property,
Equipment and Natural Features.
   No person shall injure, deface, destroy, disturb, befoul, or remove any part
of the park or any building, sign, equipment or other property found therein;
nor shall any person maliciously cut down, destroy or injure a standing or
growing vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or flower on park property, or
maliciously injure, destroy, disturb or sever from the parkland a product
standing or growing or other thing, such as rocks or minerals attached thereto
or a part thereof.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 3, 8-4-88 of the Park Board Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-19 Littering, Rubbish, Garbage, Sewage and Noxious Material, Air
Pollution, Nuisance and/or Damage.
   a.   Depositing Unauthorized Waste in Park:
      1.   No person shall bring into, leave behind, dump or litter with
material of any kind in the park, except refuse, ashes, garbage and other
material arising from normal use and enjoyment which shall be deposited in
receptacles or pits provided for such purposes.
      2.   No person shall leave or deposit any material without or near the
parks so as to pollute the land, waters or air coursing through or over the
parks, or otherwise, to interfere with proper use and enjoyment of all parks.
      3.   No person shall leave, deposit or throw away any bottles, cans,
refuse, or foreign materials of any description, into any stream, waterways,
ponds or lakes located in or adjacent to park land.
   b.   Prohibited Noxious or Deleterious Material - No person shall, either
within or outside the park, place or permit to be placed in any lake, river,
brook, stream, ditch, sewer or drain that flows into or through park lands any
noxious or deleterious material which may render (harm to) vegetation or
aquatic life, or which may prevent, limit or interfere with the use and
enjoyment of such waters for domestic, industrial or agricultural purposes, or
which may lesson to an unreasonable degree the use and enjoyment of such waters
for park lands for recreational or other park uses.
   c.   Air Pollution and/or Damage.
      1.   No person, occupant, owner or person in charge, by himself or
herself, his or her agent or employee, shall cause, suffer or allow the burning
of garbage, refuse, waste material, trash, motor vehicles, industrial processes
or any part thereof or other combustibles within or adjacent to the park so as
to cause smoke, odor, sparks, dust, dirt, etc., to come upon, pass through or
over the park which would cause an air pollution nuisance or damage.
      2.   All fires in a park grill and those open fires allowed by special
permit signed by the Superintendent shall be permitted providing the material
used is not taken live from the park and maintained so that such burning can be
accomplished without the emission of dense smoke, sparks, odor, dust, ash,
etc., which may cause an air pollution nuisance or damage.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 4, 8-4-88 of the Park Board Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-20 Molesting Wildlife; Hunting and Fishing.
   a.   Molesting Wildlife; Hunting - No person within the confines of the park
shall hunt; pursue with dogs; trap; use walkie-talkie radios, plans,
snowmobiles (or other devices to pursue) or in any other way molest any wild
bird or animal found within the confines of the parks, or rob or molest any
animal den and/or bird nest or take the eggs of any bird.
   b.   Fishing.
      1.   No person shall fish in park waters posted as areas of no fishing by
the Board of Parks and Recreation.
      2.   In all other park water, fishing shall be permitted subject to
statutes of the State of Indiana.
      3.   Fishing shall not be permitted during the hours the park is closed.
   c.   Fires.
      1.   Starting and Tending Fires.
         a)   No person shall start a fire on park lands except small fires for
culinary purposes in park grills or privately owned grills, or fires in a place
or designated areas approved by the board.
         b)   All fires shall be continuously attended under the care and
direction of a competent person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
         c)   All fires shall be extinguished by the person or persons starting
or using the same before leaving the immediate vicinity of the fire.
         d)   No fires shall be built within ten (10) feet of any tree or
building, or beneath the branches of any tree, or in any underbrush.
      2.   Regulation Set Forth by Superintendent - The Superintendent of Parks
and Recreation may, at his discretion, prohibit fires for limited periods at
any location or for any purpose when necessary for the protection of park
property.
      3.   Dumping of Ashes - The dumping of hot ashes or fire from portable
picnic grills onto the grass or plants is prohibited. Hot ashes shall be
deposited only in specified areas or designated receptacles, but not in picnic
refuse receptacles.
      4.   Lighted Matches, Cigars, Cigarettes, and Pipe Ashes - No person
shall throw away or discard any lit or unlit match, cigar, cigarette or pipe
ashes within or adjacent to any park property.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 5, 8-4-88 of the Park Board Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-21 Camps and Camping.
   Violation of Camping Permit Requirement - No person shall establish or
maintain any camp or other temporary lodging place within the park without
specific written permit from the Superintendent.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 6, 8-4-88 of the Park Board Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-22 Hours of Operation.
   The hours of operation for use of park lands and facilities designated as
open to the public shall be from 6:00 a.m. to dusk daily, except those
activities, programs, and events previously authorized.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 7, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § I, 1-26-94; Ord. No. 1751, § 1, 5-13-09)
Sec. 5-23 Traffic Regulations.  3
   a.   Observance of Park Speed Limit.
      1.   The park speed limit shall henceforth be set at ten (10) miles per
hour for all parks in the Town of Schererville.
      2.   No person shall drive or propel or cause to be driven along or over
any road within or adjacent to the park any vehicle or conveyance at a rate of
speed greater than speed limit signs along the right-of-way.
   b.   Vehicle Restricted to Roadways.
      1.   No motorized vehicle of any kind shall be driven over or upon any
portion of the park, except drives and roadways established for vehicles by the
Board.
      2.   No moped bicycles shall be driven over or upon any portion of the
park, except drives and roadways established for vehicles by the Board.
   c.   Reckless Driving of Vehicles - No person shall drive, or propel, or
cause to be driven or propelled along or over any highway, road, parkway, drive
or parking area within the park, any vehicle, without due regard for the safety
and rights of pedestrians and drivers and/or occupants of all other vehicles,
so as to endanger the life, limb or property or wooded areas, or parking areas
of others.
   d.   Driving on Park Areas and Closed Roads or Drives - No person shall
drive a vehicle of any kind upon or along any park area, road or drive which
has been closed and posted with appropriate signs and/or barricades.
   e.   Parking in Areas Not Designated as Parking Areas - No person who is the
owner or operator of a motor vehicle or cycle shall park such vehicles in other
areas except those designated as parking areas.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 7, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
 
Notes
  3   Editor's Note: See also §§
3 5-80 through
  5-83 for additional vehicle regulations.
Sec. 5-24 Swimming, Swimming Areas and Beaches.
   a.   Areas for Swimming - Swimming is prohibited except at adequately
lifeguarded areas designated for that purpose by the Board or Superintendent.
   b.   Unsafe Floatation Objects - The use of life rafts, innertubes, air-
inflated plastic and other objects intended to support persons, not determined
as safe by the lifeguard on duty, are prohibited in any of the designated
swimming areas.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 8, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-25 Snowmobiles, Sledding, Skiing and Skating.
   a.   Snowmobiles in Restricted Areas Only - No person shall operate a self-
propelled vehicle which is designed to travel on snow-covered surfaces within
the park other than in areas designated by the Superintendent as “snowmobile”
areas.
   b.   Sledding, Skiing and Skating in Restricted Areas Only - No person shall
sled, ski or ice skate within the park in areas designated by the
Superintendent as unsafe.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 9, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-26 Indecent Conduct.
   No person shall violate any law [concerning indecent conduct] of the United
States of America, State of Indiana, or Town of Schererville.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 10, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated into Ord. No.
1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-27 Disorderly Conduct.  4
   a.   Disturbing the Peace, Loudness, Fighting - No person shall disturb the
peace or good order of the community within or adjacent to the park.
Illustrations of such disruption include, but are not limited to the loud
playing of televisions, radios, tape recorders, noise-makers, sound equipment,
or fighting, quarreling or threatening violence to the person or property of
others.
   b.   Unlawful Assemblage or Property Damage - No person or group shall
collect within the park, in bodies or crowds, for unlawful purposes, or in
riotous assemblage, or intending to annoy, harass or inflict property or bodily
injury upon another person or persons, or inflict damage to the park.
   c.   Loitering, Vagrancy - No person or group shall loiter in or near any
building, structures, facilities, vehicles, motorcycles or cycles, or on or
about bicycles within the park that would disrupt or disturb other activities.
   d.   Unlawful Entry of Facilities - No person shall unlawfully enter any
park facility which is not open to the public at time of entry.
   e.   Unlawful Entry of Restrooms - No person, except authorized park
employees, on duty, or park and/or law enforcement officers, shall enter a
restroom set aside for the opposite sex.
   f.   Assault or Bodily Injury - No person shall willfully assault or commit
bodily injury upon another while within the park or be engaged in or abet or
aid in any fight, quarrel or other disturbance.
   g. Gambling - No person shall be allowed to engage in any form of gambling
while on park property. (Res. No. 88-4, § 11 [a]-[g], 8-4-88 of the Park Bd.
Res. incorporated into Ord. No. 1267. 1-26-94)
   h. Possession of Liquor, Marijuana, Narcotic Drugs - Any application for
permit for the use of any park space within the system, by any individual or
group, which contain therein a request for the consumption, possession, and/or
serving of alcoholic beverages shall be submitted to the Town Board of Parks
and Recreation for a decision whether or not to grant permission for the same.
The policies and procedures of the Town Department of Parks and Recreation
regarding the consumption, possession, and/or serving of alcoholic beverages
shall comply with and conform to the policies and procedure of the Town
Department of Parks and Recreation for such use on park property in the town.
The Town Board of Parks and Recreation is hereby authorized and granted the
authority to decide whether such application is to be granted or denied. Such
decision of the Town Board of Parks and Recreation shall be deemed final and
conclusive. The Town Board of Parks and Recreation is hereby directed to notify
and inform the Town Council of any changes or amendments to the Town Park
Department Policy for the consumption, possession, and/or serving of alcoholic
beverages in any park within the town park system. (Ord. No. 1267, §2, 1-26-94;
Ord. No. 2002, § 1, 3-13-24)
   i. Profanity and Abusive Language - No person shall use obscene, profane or
abusive language while within or adjacent to the park.
   j. Unlawful Sales, Soliciting, Hawking, Begging, or Peddling - No person
shall beg, hawk, peddle or solicit within, or adjacent to, the park without a
permit.
   k. Equal Rights of Others - Every person shall conduct himself with due
regard to the equal rights of others to the use and enjoyment of the park.
   1. Persons Acting Unlawfully to be Removed from Park.
      1. No person shall remain within the park who does not abide by
conditions adopted and posted by the Board for preservation of good order and
the protection of property within the department.
      2. No person shall remain within the park who does not abide by the
instructions and directions of duly authorized employees or agents of the Board
in the lawful performance of their duties.
      3. Any person directed by the Superintendent, employees or agents of the
Board to leave the park shall do so promptly and peaceably.
   m. Unlawful to Resist, Obstruct or Abuse Enforcement Officers - No person
shall resist, obstruct or be abusive of, or address in a profane or obscene
manner, the Superintendent, Park Board members, law enforcement officers of
agents of the Board.
   n. Failure to Comply with Orders of the Superintendent or his Duly
Designated Agent - No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any reasonable
order relating to the regulation, direction or control of the traffic, or to
any other order lawfully given by the Superintendent or law enforcement officer
acting under the authority of the Board, nor shall he willfully resist,
obstruct, assault or abuse the Superintendent or law enforcement officer or any
other official in the execution of his office. (Res. No. 88-4, § 11 [k]-[n], 8-
4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated into Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
 
Notes
4 4   Editor's Note: ¶ a of this section was amended by the Town during the
  codification process.
Sec. 5-28 Firearms, Weapons, Explosives, Etc.
   Discharging of firearms, weapons, explosives, etc., other than in
authorized, permitted shooting areas, no person except park and/or enforcement
officers of the Board or other law enforcement officers while in the line of
duty, shall discharge or cause to be discharged any firearm, fireworks, rocket
or noisemakers within or adjacent to the park without a specific written permit
from the Superintendent.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 12, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated by reference
into Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-29 Household Pets Prohibited in Parks - Exceptions; Control of Animals.
   a.   No person shall bring into, have or keep in the park any cat, dog or
other animal which is destructive of birdlife and other wildlife, except by
written permit issued by the Board for special authorized pet shows in
designated areas. Dogs under the control of their owner by leash are excepted
from the provisions of this subsection.
   b.   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any
excreta disposed by his animal on or within park property; and no owner shall
take his animal onto park property for the purpose of allowing said animal to
defecate or urinate therein.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 13, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated by reference
into Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-30 Advertising Signs Prohibited.
   Posting, Displaying Signs. No person shall place any sign, advertisement,
circular or notice in the park without specific permission from the
Superintendent.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 14, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated by reference
into Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-31 Commercial Enterprises Prohibited; Concessioneering Without Permit.
   a.   No person shall sell or offer for sale any article, privilege or
service within or adjacent to the park without a permit from the
Superintendent.
   b.   A fee permit for authorized park service concessions will be
established by the Board and fee shall be paid, if any, by the vendor as
required by the Board.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 15, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated by reference
into Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-32 Fee Permits; Rental Facilities Authorized.
   Facilities of the park, reservable portions of the picnic areas, certain
parking areas, structures, field areas, etc., and the like may be reserved and/
or a fee use permit may be issued to persons upon their application to,
approval by, and issuance of a permit by the Superintendent or agents
designated by the Board and payment of a fee, if any, as required by the Board.
(Res. No. 88-4. § 16, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated by reference
into Ord. No. 1267, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-33 Obedience to Posted Rules and Regulations Required.
   All persons shall obey posted rules and regulations in specified areas.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 17, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated by reference
into Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-34 Board, Agents and Employees of the Board.
   None of the above rules and regulations shall apply to the Board, agents or
employees in the performance of their official duties.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 18, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated by reference
into Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-35 Penalties.
   a.   Suspension from Park and Recreation Privileges - Any person violating
the rules and regulations set forth shall be subject to immediate expulsion
from the park by any duly designated enforcement official and shall further be
suspended from all park and recreational privileges for the remainder of the
day that said violation occurs; and, further, said violation shall be
immediately reported to the Superintendent who may, upon review of the facts,
extend such suspension for a determined period not to be in excess of one (1)
year unless said violation is determined to be of such magnitude to warrant
further suspension.
   b.   Suspension Appealed.
      1.   Any person suspended from park and recreational privileges pursuant
to the provision of the foregoing paragraph may appeal to the decision of the
Superintendent of the Board of Parks and Recreation by setting forth the facts
giving rise to the suspension in writing and delivering the same to the Board's
regular meeting, not later than thirty (30) days after initial suspension.
      2.   The Board may, upon being duly advised in the premises, sustain,
reduce, modify or revise the decision of the Superintendent.
   c.   Fine - Any person violating this Division or any part hereof, or any
person doing any act which is prohibited hereunder or which is made or declared
to be unlawful hereunder, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Every day any violation of this division, rule or regulation
shall constitute a separate offense.
   d.   Penalties Imposed by Proper Authority.
      1.   The foregoing penalties shall be in addition to any other penalties
imposed by any other proper authority for acts committed constituting a
violation hereof.
      2.   The Town of Schererville Parks and Recreation Department may also
seek any other legal remedy, civil or criminal, for the redress of any wrong.
(Res. No. 88-4, § 19, 8-4-88 of the Park Bd. Res. incorporated by reference
into Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 1-26-94)
Sec. 5-36 through Sec. 5-39   Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Procedure for Requesting Use of Athletic Facilities.
Sec. 5-40 Procedures to Request Athletic Facilities Usage.
   Reservations for athletic field usage and are subject to specific approval
by the Park Superintendent. Tournament usage may require additional fees and
approval by the Park Superintendent. Tournament and organized team users must
provide a certificate of insurance naming the Town of Schererville, the
Schererville Parks and Recreation Board of Directors, and its duly authorized
agents and employees, as additional insured in an amount acceptable to the Park
Superintendent. Field usage is subject to field conditions as determined by the
Schererville Parks and Recreation Department. Users must also comply with all
other existing park rules, regulations and ordinances. Any refunds of rental
fees for athletic fields shall be at the discretion of the Park Superintendent
or Schererville Parks and Recreation Board. Any waiver or reduction of rental
fees for athletic fields shall be at the sole discretion of the Schererville
Parks and Recreation Board. (Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 2-9-94; Ord. No. 1751, § 2, 5-
13-09; Ord. No. 1948, § 2, 12-11-19)
Sec. 5-41 through Sec. 5-44   Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Fees.
Sec. 5-45 Shelter Fees.
   All fees listed below are to be non-refundable. Any waiver or refund of fees
shall be only at the discretion of the Park Board. The following rental fees
shall be as follows:
 
   Redar, Rohrman, and Stephen Park Shelters             
Amount of people Resident fee Non-resident fee In-town profit Out of town
                                                              profit
Fewer than 75    $90          $180             $45            $90
75 - 150         $180         $360             $90            $180
Over 150         $270         $540             $135           $270
 
 
   Plum Creek Shelter      
Amount of people Resident fee Non-resident fee In-town profit Out of town
                                                              profit
75 or less       $95          $180             $45            $90
(Shelter capacity is 75 people.)
 
 
   All Other Park Shelters         
Amount of people Resident fee Non-resident fee
25 or less       $30          $60
(Shelter capacity is 25 people.)
 
   a.   Groups of 25 or more individuals are required to have a shelter permit
in order to utilize the shelters listed above. Resident fees apply only to
those individuals, groups, businesses, or organizations within the Schererville
corporate limits. Residents representing non-Schererville groups, businesses,
or organizations shall pay the non-resident rate. Town of Schererville
Departments, Park and Recreation programs, Boards or Commissions are exempt
from the above-referenced fees. Any waiver or reduction of rental fees shall be
at the sole discretion of the Schererville Parks and Recreation Board.
   b.   Off-site picnic table rental fees.
      1.   Off-side picnic table rental shall be for Schererville residents,
groups, businesses or organizations only, at the following cost:
 
1 - 5 tables   $75
6 - 10 tables  $150
11 - 15 tables $225
16 - 20 tables $300
(Subject to availability and approval of the Park Superintendent.)
 
      2.   Any waiver or reduction of fees shall be at the sole discretion of
the Schererville Parks and Recreation Board.
      3.   Additional electrical panels shall be for Schererville residents,
groups, businesses or organizations only, at the following cost: $100 for each
additional electrical panel.
(Ord. No. 1172, § 1,1-9-91; Ord. No. 1270, § 1, 2-9-94; Ord. No. 1751, § 3, 5-
13-09; Ord. No. 1948, § 3, 12-11-19)
Sec. 5-46 Reserved.
Sec. 5-47 Reserved.
Sec. 5-48 Fees for Non-Lessee Users of Athletic Fields.
   a.   1.   The schedule of fees for non-lessee users of athletic fields shall
be as follows:
 
Soccer Fields
   Residents       $20 per 2 hours
                      $100 per day
   Non-residents   $30 per 2 hours
                      $150 per day
Softball/Baseball Fields
Rohrman Park:
   All users       $70 per 2 hours
                      $350 per day
   Light usage char$15 per hour
 
 
All Other Parks:
   Residents  $20 per 2 hours
                 $100 per day
   Non-residen$30 per 2 hours
                 $150 per day
Tennis, Volleyball, Basketball Courts and Miscellaneous Fields
   Residents  $10 per hour
   Non-residen$20 per hour
 
      2.   Any waiver or reduction of rental fees shall be at the sole
discretion of the Schererville Parks and Recreation Board.
   b.   Day rental deposit.
      1.   In addition to any of the above referenced fees, the renter must pay
a rental deposit of $150 per day.
      2.   Users shall be charged from their deposit for any trash not properly
disposed of, any extra materials used to prepare or restore the field, any
facility damage, and any costs associated with park personnel and/or services
related to the above.
      3.   Rental user shall be required to execute and agreement in a form
presented by the Town Parks and Recreation Board. All income shall be placed in
the Park and Recreation Fund. (Ord. No. 1270, § 2, 2-9-94; Ord. No. 1270A, §1,
2-23-94)
      4.   All revenues generated under the authority of Ordinance Nos. 1270,
1270A, 1751 and 1948 shall be placed in and accounted for in the Park Board’s
General Fund. (Ord. No. 1270A, § 2,2-23-94; Ord. No. 1751, § 4, 5-13-09; Ord.
No. 1948, § 4, 12-11-19)
Sec. 5-49 Procedures to Reserve Shelter.
   a.   The procedures for reserving shelter use shall be:
 
                         Period during which permits for requests thru April 15
Second Monday in January by Schererville residents, groups, businesses, or
                         organizations only shall be issued, on a first-come
                         first-serve basis.
April 16                 First-come first-serve basis for permits, regardless
                         of residence.
 
   b.   All appropriate rental fees and deposits must be paid in full at the
time of reservation. Residents representing non-Schererville groups,
businesses, or organizations must pay the non-resident rate and adhere to the
above timetable. The procedures for reserving shelters for a public event
requires the completion of the application process, as determined by the Park
Superintendent, and ultimate approval by the Park Board.
(Ord. No. 1270, § 3, 2-9-94; Ord. No. 1751, § 5, 5-13-09; Ord. No. 1948, § 5,
12-11-19)
Sec. 5-50 Limitations of Usage.
   a.   Usage shall be in compliance with all Town ordinances, park rules and
regulations.
   b.   The limitation on the number of persons allowed to use shelters shall
be (before a special exception is given):
 
Redar, Rohrman, Stephen Shelters 150
Plum Creek Shelter               75
All other park shelters          25
 
   c.   A variance may only be granted by the Park Superintendent or Park
Board.
(Ord. No. 1270, § 4, 2-9-94; Ord. No. 1751, § 6, 5-13-09; Ord. No. 1948, § 5,
12-11-19)
Sec. 5-51 Pavilion Rental Fees for Schools.
   Use of the pavilions by schools which are located in the Town of
Schererville shall be exempt from rental charges, so long as groups of fifty
(50) or more shall pay a deposit of ninety dollars ($90.00), which shall be
refunded to the extent the funds are not necessary to pay the Park Department's
costs of clean up after the use.
(Ord. No. 1277, § 1, 5-11-94)
Sec. 5-52 Mobile Band Shell; Policies and Procedures.
   a.   Prior to the use and lease rental of the Mobile Band Shell equipment of
the Parks and Recreation Board by any person, persons or entity, including, but
not limited to, not-for-profit corporations, an application form shall be
completed and submitted to the Town Park Department on the form and in the
manner required by the Department. The required application shall be maintained
in the records of the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town and in the records of the
Park and Recreation Board of the Town.
(Ord. No. 1481, § 1, 3-8-00)
   b.   The following fee schedule is hereby established and required to be
paid by any and all persons, groups of persons or entity, including, but not
limited to, not-for-profit corporations, seeking to use and lease the Mobile
Band Shell equipment of the Town Park and Recreation Department, namely:
      1.   In-town rental to not-for-profit corporations - minimum rental fee
of five hundred dollars ($500.00);
      2.   Out-of-town rental for not-for-profit corporations - minimum rental
fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); and
      3.   Lease rental to all other persons or groups - minimum rental fee of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   c.   The payment of a fee in accordance with the above-referenced fee
schedule shall be a condition of lease rental of the Mobile Band Shell
equipment, and no permit for such usage and lease rental shall be issued
without payment. A person, persons or entity, including, but not limited to,
any not-for-profit corporation, seeking to use and lease the Mobile Band Shell
equipment, shall be required to comply with the policies and procedures related
to the lease of the Mobile Band Shell equipment established by the Board of
Parks and Recreation of the Town, as the same are amended from time to time.
All fees collected for the usage and lease rental of the Mobile Band Shell
equipment shall be deposited into the General Fund of the Park and Recreation
Department of the Town for usage consistent therewith, as permitted by
applicable law. A copy of the duly adopted policies and procedures related to
lease of the Mobile Band Shell required to be complied with by any person,
persons or entities, including, but not limited to, not-for-profit
corporations, is attached to Ordinance 1481, passed March 8, 2000.
(Ord. No. 1481, § 2, 3-8-00)
Sec. 5-53 Activities Fee Schedule.
   a.   The Activities Fee Schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated as the
activities fee schedule for the activities and programs conducted by the Town
Department of Parks and Recreation.
   b.   The Department of Parks and Recreation, and its employees and staff are
hereby required to comply with all requirements of the State of Indiana Board
of Accounts for handling, accounting, reporting, and depositing of said
activities fees upon receipt of same. These requirements are to be overseen by
the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and shall be implemented as deemed appropriate and
necessary by the Town Clerk-Treasurer in conformance with applicable law and
administrative requirements, as the same are amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1589 §§ 1, 2, 6-11-03; Ord. No. 1605, §§ 1, 2, 1-21-04; Ord. No. 1620, §§
1, 2, 7-14-04; Ord. No. 1642, § 1, 6-13-05; Ord. No. 1669, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord.
No. 1695, § 1, 4-11-07; Ord. No. 1738, § 1, 8-13-08; Ord. No. 1762, § 1, 12-9-
09; Ord. No. 1782, § 1, 12-8-10; Ord. No. 1798, § 1, 12-14-11; Ord. No. 1834, §
1, 4-10-13; Ord. No. 1836, § 1, 7-10-13; Ord. No. 1856, § 1, 9-25-14; Ord. No.
1860, § 1, 1-21-15; Ord. No. 1866, § 1, 4-8-15; Ord. No. 1881, § 1, 4-13-16;
Ord. No. 1890, § 1, 8-10-16; Ord. No. 1903, § 1, 4-12-17; Ord. No. 1937, § 1,
4-10-19; Ord. No. 1949, § 1, 12-11-19; Res. No. 2022-01, § 1, 12-7-22; Ord. No.
1990, § 1, 12-14-22)
Sec. 5-54 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Miscellaneous.
Sec. 5-55 Funds.
   Section
2-398 of this Code addresses the special non-reverting operating fund for park
purposes.
Sec. 5-56 Lightning Prediction and Warning System Policy and Procedures.
   a.   The Town Council hereby adopts the Schererville Park Department
Lightning Prediction and Warning System Policy and Procedures, a copy of which
is attached to Ordinance No. 1643 as Exhibit A, and is incorporated herein by
reference.
   b.   In the event the Town lightning prediction system activates indicating
the threat of lightning in any park, all individuals involved in recreation
activities shall immediately cause the recreation activity to cease, and they
shall immediately move to a place of safety.
   c.   In the event an individual or supervisor of individuals fails to cause
the recreation activity to cease, or fails to cause any minor children or
adults he or she is supervising to move to a place of safety following a
lightning warning signal, the individual, supervisor, group, association or
organization shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500).
   d.   In the event an individual or supervisor of individuals returns from
the place of safety to continue the recreation activity before a subsequent
audible all-clear signal is provided, the responsible individual, supervisor,
group, association or organization shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500).
(Ord. No. 1643, §§ 1 - 4, 4-13-05)
Sec. 5-57 through Sec. 5-79 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Additional Traffic Control Regulations in Parks.  5
 
Notes
5    Editor's Note: See also §
  5-23 regarding traffic regulations.
Sec. 5-80 Signs Erected.
   The Town Council shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs
designating the provisions of this ordinance at the entrance of each park.
(Ord. No. 890, 6-9-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-7-1)
Sec. 5-81 Restrictions.
   a.   The Town authorities prohibit the use of any motor vehicles, which
include but are not limited to motorcycle, automobile, trucks, dune buggies,
go-carts, snowmobiles, etc., within the boundaries of any public park within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville, excluding specifically designated
parking areas within a park area.
   b.   The Town authorities further prohibit the use of any other means of
transportation or locomotion which the Police Department deems to be dangerous
to pedestrians or that may damage or injure any of the park landscape, fixtures
or other public property.
(Ord. No. 890, 6-9-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-7-2)
Sec. 5-82 Exceptions.
   a.   This ordinance shall not be interpreted as to exclude any town
department motorized vehicles from use within the park premises.
   b.   The town authorities prohibit any tamed or domesticated animals from
being within any park area either attended or unattended.
(Ord. No. 890, 6-9-82; Schererville Town Code, § 87-3)
Sec. 5-83 Penalties.
   a.   On the trial of any person charged with the violation of the
restrictions thus imposed; and in all civil actions oral evidence of the
location and content of such signs or markings shall be prima facie evidence of
the adoption and application of such restriction by the town authorities (Town
Council) and the validity thereof. The town authorities shall upon request by
any party in any action at law furnish under seal of the town authorities (Town
Clerk-Treasurer) a certified copy of the resolution of the Town Council
establishing the restriction in question which shall be accepted by any court
as conclusive proof of such designation or determination by the Town Council.
   b.   Every person found violating this ordinance shall for the first
conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than fifteen dollars
($15.00); for the second conviction within one (1) year thereafter such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00); upon
a third or subsequent conviction within one (1) year after the first conviction
such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars
($50.00).
(Ord. No. 890, 6-9-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-7-4)
Sec. 5-84 through Sec. 5-89 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Hours of Public Restrooms in Parks.
Sec. 5-90 Hours of Park Public Restroom Facilities.
   The public restroom facilities owned and maintained by the Park Board,
located in the parks of the Town of Schererville, shall be open to the public,
subject to maintenance and emergency conditions, during the period of April 15
through October 1 of each year from 8:00 a.m. until dusk.
(Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 4-14-93; Ord. 1751, § 7, 5-13-09)
Sec. 5-91 When Restroom Facilities Are Closed.
   At all other times, unless specifically designated at the facilities, the
facilities shall be closed and no person shall be allowed to be upon the
premises of the restroom facilities.
(Ord. No. 1237, § 2, 4-14-93)
Sec. 5-92 Role of Park Superintendent.
   The Park Superintendent may direct the facilities closed at times designated
herein as open, due to weather conditions, maintenance, or emergency, and upon
his written designation, the facilities shall be considered closed and no
person shall be allowed upon the premises without the express permission of the
Park Superintendent.
(Ord. No. 1237, § 3, 4-14-93)
Sec. 5-93 through Sec. 5-96 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Skate Park Facility.
Sec. 5-97 Rules and Regulations.
   The rules and regulations for use of the Town of Schererville Skate Park
attached to the ordinance codified herein, incorporated herein by reference and
marked as Exhibit “A” in the ordinance codified herein, are hereby approved and
adopted as the rules and regulations for use by residents and citizens of the
skate park facility under the management and oversight of the Town Department
of Parks and Recreation.
(Ord. No. 1869, § 1, 6-10-15)
Sec. 5-98 and Sec. 5-99 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 4. Park and Recreation Equitable Impact Fees.
Sec. 5-100 Limitation on Imposition of Impact Fee.
   This ordinance shall expire and become void five (5) years after its
effective date as required by Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1340, unless action is
undertaken to extend its life consistent with the provisions of said Code
section which contemplates are placement ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 11-26-97; Ord. No. 1400B § 1, 6-11-03; Ord. No. 1594 § 1,
11-21-03)
Sec. 5-101 Establishment of Infrastructure Impact Zone.
   There is established one park and recreational Infrastructure Impact Zone,
the borders of which are co-terminus with the existing corporate borders of the
Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, and as they may be extended from
time to time through annexation and over which the Town of Schererville
exercises planning and zoning jurisdiction. In this regard, the Town Council
specifically finds that there is a functional relationship between the
components of the Park and Recreation Master Plan and Infrastructure
Improvement Plan and that such park and recreational plan provides a reasonably
uniform benefit to all of the citizens throughout the impact zone as of the
adoption of this ordinance. The Town Council further finds that all areas
within the impact zone are contiguous as required in Indiana Code, § 6-7-4-
1316. Except as provided below, this ordinance shall apply uniformly to all
residential developments within the impact zone hereby established for which
the Town of Schererville may require a structural building permit and which
creates a need for new and additional park and recreational infrastructure.
This ordinance shall not apply to:
      1.   developments meeting the requirements set forth in Indiana Code, §
36-7-4-1322(g);
      2.   improvements which do not require a structural building permit;
      3.   improvements which do not create a need for new and additional
infrastructure, including the erection of a sign, construction of accessory
buildings, structures or fences or the alteration, renovation or expansion of
an improvement where the use and intensity thereof has not changed;
      4.   the replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed improvement,
provided that the replacement improvement does not create a need for new and
additional infrastructure over and above the infrastructure needed by the
original improvement prior to the destruction or partial destruction thereof;
      5.   non-residential development.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 2, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-102 Zone Improvement Plan.
   As a precondition to the adoption of this ordinance, the Town Council
undertook a comprehensive and detailed park and recreational impact analysis
through the employment for that purpose of Pflum, Klausmeier & Gehrum
Consultants. The Town Council does now find that the resulting study and data
base constitute a sufficient study to constitute a zone improvement plan. The
Town Council does hereby adopt the Infrastructure Improvement Plan prepared by
Pflum, Klausmeier & Gehrum Consultants dated according to its most recent
update on the 1 st day of May, 1997, as its Zone Improvement Plan and fords in
this regard that said Zone Improvement Plan does contained the following
elements:
      1.   Reasonable estimates relating to the nature and location of
development that is expected within the Impact Zone during the planning period
which, for the purposes of this ordinance is defined to be a period of ten (10)
years commencing with the date of adoption hereof.
      2.   A reasonable determination of the community level of service for the
Impact Zone.
      3.   A reasonable determination of the current level of services provided
within the Impact Zone.
      4.   A reasonable estimate of the nature, location, sequencing, and
timing of the park and recreational requirements and costs necessary to provide
the community level of service for the developments contemplated in sub-
paragraph (1) hereof.
      5.   A reasonable estimate of the share of the park and recreational
costs identified in subparagraph (4) hereof that will be used to:
         (a)   raise the current level of service for existing development or
provide service to existing development; or
         (b)   provide service to new development.
      6.   A reasonable estimate of revenues that:
         (a)   are from sources other than impact fees, and
         (b)   will be used to finance the cost identified in sub-paragraph (5)
(a) above.
      7.   A description of the nature and location of existing infrastructure
in the impact
zone.
      8.   A general description of the sources and amounts of money used to
pay for infrastructure during the previous five (5) years.
   In addition, the Town Council specifically adopts the Zone Improvement Plan
as an official part of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Schererville,
pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-74-500 and following.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 3, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-103 Establishment of Park and Recreational Impact Fee.
   a.   There shall be established an impact fee of two thousand one hundred
seventy dollars and thirty-three cents ($2,170.33) per dwelling unit based upon
the cost calculated to provide the new and expanded park facilities required by
development according to the established community standards, and said fee
shall take effect upon due publication pursuant to law.
   b.   The Town Council makes as a part of the record of these proceedings,
all of the data collected, the calculations made, and the conclusions reached
by Pflum, Klausmeier & Gehrum Consultants in the process of developing the Zone
Improvement Plan, and specifically instructs the employees of the Town to make
such data and other information inclusively available to anyone for review
during regular business hours. The Town Council further authorized Pflum,
Klausmeier & Gehrum Consultants to sell or otherwise distribute copies of the
Zone Improvement Plan and any of the other data collected upon which they
relied, at a cost reasonably intended to compensate them for the cost of
reproduction only.
   c.   In the event that any parcel of real estate considered in the creation
of the Zone Improvement Plan undergoes a change in use, redevelopment, or a
modification which requires a structural building permit and creates a need for
new infrastructure, an impact fee will only be assessed for the increase in the
burden on infrastructure.
   d.   Dedication of Park Lands or Payments of Fees In Lieu of Lands. As a
condition of a final plat of a subdivision or of a final plat of a planned unit
development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to dedicate land
for park and recreational purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of
the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu of actual land
dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the Town in accordance
with the following criteria and formula:
      1.   Requirements and Ratio. The ultimate density of a proposed
development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be one (1) acre for every ten (10)
acres.
      2.   Criteria for Requiring a Contribution in Lieu of Park Site. Where
the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or
when the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes,
the Town shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution
in lieu of land dedication required. The cash contributions in lieu of park and
recreation land dedication shall be held in trust by the Town, or other public
body designated by the Town, solely for the acquisition of park and recreation
land as hereinbefore classified, which will be available to serve the immediate
or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the
improvement of other existing local parks and recreation land which already
serves such needs. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and
recreation land dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth herein
within ten (10) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded to the
developer who made such contribution.
         (a)   Fair Market Value. The cash contributions in lieu of land shall
be based on the “fair market value” of the acres of land in the area improved
as specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and
recreation sites. In the event that the developer or subdivider files a written
objection to the fair market value as determined by the Town Park and
Recreation Board, then the developer shall submit an appraisal showing the fair
market value of such improved land in the area of his or her development or
other evidence thereof and a final determination of said “fair market value” of
such improved land shall be made by the Town Council based upon such
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources
which may be submitted to the Town Council by the Park and Recreation Board.
         (b)   Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Fee. There will be
situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of
land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. This
will occur when:
            (i)   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision
falling within the park location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and
a cash contribution in lieu of land thereof shall be required for any
additional land that would have to be dedicated;
            (ii)   A major part of the local park or recreation site has
previously been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site. The remaining portion shall be required by
dedication and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
      3.   Reservation of Additional Land. Where the Comprehensive Plan of the
Town calls for a larger amount of park and recreational land or school sites in
a particular proposed subdivision or planned unit development than the
developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer’s
contribution shall, if so determined by the Town Council, be reserved for
subsequent purchase by the Town provided that such acquisition is made within
one (1) year from the date of approval of the final plat.
      4.   Location. The park and recreation plan as adopted by the
Schererville Park and Recreation Board and as established by the Comprehensive
Master Plan for the Town shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A
central location which will serve equally the entire development is most
desirable. In large developments these sites can be located throughout the
development according to established standards for park area distance.
      5.   Credit for Private Open Spaces and Recreation Areas.
         (a)   When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for
recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for
local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a
portion of the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit
developments may, at the option of the Schererville Park and Recreation Board,
be provided in the form of “private” open space in lieu of dedicated “public”
open space. The extent of same shall be determined by the Schererville Park and
Recreation Board, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in
conformance to the total park and recreation land for the general area.
         (b)   In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated
parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the
installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer
as part of his or her obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the
Schererville Park and Recreation Board, and before any credit is given for
private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must guarantee that these
private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the
execution of the appropriate legal documents. When adjustment for private
recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park
land dedicated that would have been required from the subdivision or planned
unit development and then subtract the credit to be given.
      6.   Combining with Adjoining Developments. Where the subdivision or
planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, public open space which
is to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from
adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas without
hardship on a particular developer.
      7.   Topography and Grading. The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not
differ greatly from surrounding land.
      8.   Improved Sites. All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready
for full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed
drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or
acceptable provision made therefor.
      9.   Title to Sites. All sites shall be conveyed to the Town either by
warranty or trustee’s deed. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible
for conveying good, merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible
for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any
agricultural roll back taxes which might be extended or levied against such
sites, for any tax years or periods prior to the time of conveyance.
      10.   Provisions Applicable Prior to February 9, 1994.
         (a)   This division d. is applicable only to those developments with
petitions approved by the Plan Commission prior to February 9, 1994 and shall
have no effect upon pending and future petitions before the Shererville Plan
Commission. This division d. shall remain in full force and effect and shall be
enforced as to previous developments approved since February 14, 1990 up to,
but not including, February 9, 1994.
         (b)   The owners of each and every proposed development of one (1)
acre or greater for which petition to approve plat is pending before the
Schererville Plan Commission as of February 9, 1994 and as shall thereafter be
submitted shall, prior to the secondary approval of the Plan Commission, deed
to the Schererville Park Board, without restriction or encumbrance other than
easements acceptable to the Park Board, land acceptable to the Park Board
comprising at least five percent (5%) of the proposed platted area. One and two
lot subdivisions may apply to the Park Board for relief upon a showing
sufficient to satisfy the Park Board of undue hardship and the
inappropriateness of park land or equivalent in the given location and
circumstances. Land for retention/detention of storm water, floodways, drainage
ways and wetlands will not be permitted to fulfill the requirement, unless the
Park Board finds they have significant ecological and aesthetic qualities that
warrant park management and protection. The land need not be platted as lots or
improved but must be of buildable quality and location suitable to the Park
Board. The Plan Commission shall issue no secondary approval for any plat until
such time as the Park Board files before the Plan Commission, and the
Commission makes a part of its official record of consideration, confirmation
that it has been deeded the land required by this division d.10 or waiver of
the requirements of this division d.10.
         (c)   To administer and facilitate the implementation of this division
d.10, the Planning and Building Administrator will remind each developer of
their obligation at the time the developer and planning and building staff
conduct discussion of preliminary assessment of areas to be dedicated for park
purposes.
         (d)   Jointly the Park Superintendent and Planning and Building
Administrator will make a recommendation to the Park Board for its final
determination of the land to be deeded to the Park Board.
         (e)   In the event that the same owner or developer presents
subsequent petition for plat of subdivision adjacent to previously approved
plat of subdivision wherein land had been deeded, pursuant to this section, the
Park Board shall have the discretion to exchange land previously obtained in
prior plats/units for other lots in the newer proposed plat so as to have a
larger single park to serve a residential area rather than several pocket
parks.
         (f)   (i)   This division d.10 provides and allows for the donation of
labor and materials, equivalent to the value of a five percent (5%) dedication
of land for park purposes, when, and in the event, that it is determined by the
members of the Park and Recreation Board, to, in their sound discretion, be in
the best interests of the citizens of the Town of Schererville and, further,
when the developer has demonstrated an ability and interest to provide the
same.
            (ii)   The responsibility for determining such an option will be
that of the members of the Park and Recreation Board, and shall be submitted to
the Plan Commission prior to secondary approval of the proposed development.
(Ord. No. 1142, 2-14-90; Ord. No. 1269, §§ 1 - 5, 2-9-94; Ord. No. 1276, §§ 1,
2, 5-11-94; Ord. No. 1301, §§ 1, 2, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 1400, § 4, 11-26-97; Ord.
No. 1400B § 1, 6-11-03; Ord. No. 1594 § 1, 11-21-03; Ord. No. 1733, § 1, 6-11-
08; Ord. No. 1838, § 1, 7-10-13; Ord. 1926, § 1, 7-11-18)
Sec. 5-104 Credit in Lieu of Payment Exemptions.
   a.   Any person or entity obligated to pay a fee pursuant to the terms of
this ordinance may have the option of financing, constructing and dedicating
park and recreational infrastructure in the form of block parks owned and
operated by a neighborhood association for the public benefit, all as described
and defined in the park and recreation improvement plan, instead of making all
or part of any impact fee payment which may be due, so long as such financing,
construction and dedication are accomplished pursuant to the park and
recreational improvement plan of the Town, and in accordance with the park and
recreational specifications for such park and recreational infrastructure to be
improved in force within the Town's jurisdiction at the time. Such fee payer,
or other person or entity providing the infrastructure or improvement, shall be
given credit for the actual costs of planning, financing, constructing such
park and recreational improvements to the Town. Such request for credit shall
be presented prior to the issuance of the structural building permit. In the
event the actual cost of such planning, financing, and construction do not
equal the amount of the impact fee due pursuant to the calculation provided for
in the schedule set forth in Section 4 hereof, the remaining balance she be due
in accordance with the provisions stated hereafter.
   b.   Credits against impact fees otherwise due shall be allowed pursuant to
this section for all infrastructure and improvements constructed or furnished
in accordance with Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1313 and Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1335
since January 1, 1989. In addition, a fee payer or other person or entity
responsible for installing infrastructure or improvements may designate in
writing a method of allocating its credits to future fee payers who may be
successors in interest to the credits earned by the fee payer or others, as
part of the certification provided for above.
   c.   Any person or entity otherwise obligated to pay the fee established by
this ordinance whose property was totally or partially destroyed by fire, storm
or other casualty beyond their control, shall be exempt from said fee if they
repair or replace the destroyed structure without creating a burden on
infrastructure greater than the burden imposed by the destroyed structure. In
the event of such additional burden, the fee shall be calculated based only on
the increased burden created by the structure.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 5, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-105 Impact Fee Due Upon Issuance of Structural Building Permit.
   a.   The impact fee imposed pursuant to the terms of this ordinance shall be
due and payable upon the issuance of a structural building permit by the Town
of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana. In this regard, it is understood that
the structural building permit is synonymous with the term "structural building
permit" as that term is used in Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1323, in that the
issuance of a structural building permit authorizes the applicant to commence
construction activities, structural and otherwise. The entire fee, which is
calculated pursuant to the terms of this ordinance, shall be due at said time
unless the amount of the fee upon calculation is greater than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), in which case an installment plan may be requested by the
applicant in accordance with the terms set forth in Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1324
(a), (b), (c), and (d). The Schererville Impact Fee Review Board she establish
specific rules consistent with said code provisions for installment payments.
The interest rate on any installment plan or deferred payment shall be the
prejudgment rate of interest set forth in the Indiana Code as from time to time
amended.
   b.   If a fee payer requests, the amount of the impact fee shall be assessed
upon the voluntary submission of a development plan or upon the issuance of the
structural building permit, whichever is earlier. For purposes of this section,
"assessment" means the act of calculating the amount of the impact fee which
shall be due. The Town shall make such assessment within thirty (30) days of
the date of such voluntary request or at the issuance of the structural
building permit, with or without a request.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 6, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-106 Lien Rights Established.
   Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1325, the Town of Schererville acquires a
lien against the real estate which is the subject of the impact fee. Upon
adoption, this ordinance shall be recorded, and thereafter, it shall constitute
constructive notice of the lien rights of the Town. The Town may, in its
discretion, file a specific instrument setting forth its lien rights with
respect to a parcel of real estate which is the subject of an installment
payment of an impact fee, and such instrument shall constitute actual notice in
addition to the constructive notice provided for by the recording of this
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 7, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-107 Form of Receipt.
   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall issue a receipt for
any and all impact fees collected, and the form of such receipt shall be as
follows:
“Received of                                         (fee
payer)                          this                day of  , 19         , the
sum of                                                 in (full) (partial)
satisfaction of impact fees due pursuant to Ord No.        relating to
improvements to be constructed on the real estate described on Exhibit A.,
attached hereto, made part hereof, and subject to lien rights in favor of the
Town of Schererville in the event of partial payment with payments remaining
due. The remaining balance due (if any) is in the following amount:
$              . This impact fee is dedicated to the creation of the following
infrastructure element in accordance with the Zone Improvement Plan:
            
   Clerk-Treasurer
   Town of Schererville, Indiana.
Sec. 5-108 Appeals.
   a.   Any fee payer, who believes itself to be aggrieved by the calculation
of the impact fee, may appeal from such calculation to the Town of Schererville
Impact Fee Review Board, and the Town of Schererville Impact Fee Review Board
shall conduct a hearing with regard thereto. At such hearing, the fee payer
shall bear the burden of going forward with the evidence and shall present
evidence addressing either or the following propositions:
      1.   A fact assumption used in determining the amount of the impact fee
is incorrect, or
      2.   The amount of the impact fee is greater than the amount allowed
under Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1320, 1321 and 1322.
   Upon conclusion of the presentation of evidence, the Town of Schererville
Impact Fee Review Board shall make a determination, within not more than thirty
(30) days, upon the facts presented and may make such adjustments in the impact
fee as they believe are appropriate under the circumstances, if any.
   b.   An appeal under this Section must be filed not later than thirty (30)
days after the issuance of the structural building permit. The appeal shall be
initiated with the filing of a Petition for Review with the Clerk-Treasurer's
office, together with a filing fee in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). The filing fee shall be refunded in full (1) if the Petition for
Review is granted and the impact fee is eliminated, reduced or adjusted by the
Town of Schererville Impact Fee Review Board, by independent action of the
Town, or by a court having jurisdiction; and (2) if the reviewing body
determines that the amount of the fee, reductions, or credits were arbitrary or
capricious. The Petition for Review shall be in a form calculated to inform the
Town of Schererville Impact Fee Review Board of the nature of the complaint,
the parties to the action, and the relief requested. In addition, the petition
shall describe the new development on which the impact fee has been assessed,
all facts related to the assessment of the impact fee, and the reasons the
petitioner believes that the amount of the impact fee assessed is erroneous or
is greater than the amount allowed by the fee limitations set forth in the
enabling statute.
   c.   Should a party contest the amount of impact fee assessed, he may post
bond in aforesaid amount with the Town or pay the sum due and owing into an
escrow account and file appeal as set forth herein. Upon posting of the funds
set forth under the Impact Fee Ordinance, a building permit shall be issued. If
the party is successful in his appeal, then the Town shall refund any excess
amounts due to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 9, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-109 Establishment of Non-Reverting Park and Recreational Fund.
   a.   There is established the Park and Recreational Fund of the Town of
Schererville. This fund shall be a non-reverting fund and shall receive any and
all sums collected pursuant to this ordinance to be utilized in connection with
the purposes set forth herein. Said fund shall consist initially of one account
based upon the current existence of one Impact Zone. In the event, and only in
the event that an additional Impact Zone is created hereafter, a separate
account shall be maintained for each separate Impact Zone established with the
Town of Schererville. Interest earned on the fund, or any account within the
fund, shall be deposited and maintained with the fund or the separate account.
The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall maintain records of the
status of the fund or any account which may be established there and shall make
an annual report of said fund and accounts which shall be available to the
public in general and fee payers, upon request, in particular.
   b.   Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1332(e), the Clerk-Treasurer is
designated as the Town official responsible for acting upon refund requests. In
order to facilitate refunds when they may be due, the Clerk-Treasurer is
directed to identify the purpose of any impact fee paid in order that a refund,
if any, may be paid from the fund or account into which the fee was originally
deposited.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 10, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-110 Use of Impact Fees Collected.
   Any and all fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance may
be utilized for the following purposes only the Town of Schererville, acting by
and through its Town Council which, for the purpose of this ordinance, is
identified as the "infrastructure agency" contemplated by Indiana Code, § 36-7-
4-1317:
      1.   Providing funds to be utilized by the Town of Schererville for the
purpose of paying the capital costs of new park and recreational infrastructure
that is necessary to serve the new development within the corporate limits of
the Town, and that is identified in the Zone Improvement Plan;
      2.   An amount not to exceed five percent (5%) of the annual collections
of the fee to be utilized for expenses incurred by the Town for the consulting
services used to establish this ordinance;
      3.   To pay any refund due pursuant to the terms of this ordinance;
      4.   To pay the debt service cost on an obligation issued to provide new
park and recreational infrastructure described in sub-paragraph (1) above.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 11, 11-2697)
Sec. 5-111 House Enrolled Act No. 1467.
   The Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
specifically acknowledges the existence of a law adopted by the General
Assembly of the State of Indiana which regulates the imposition of impact fee
ordinances by municipal corporations with the State of Indiana. It is the
intent of the Town of Schererville to comply with such legislation, and this
ordinance shall be construed in all respects to be consistent with the Act. The
substantive and procedural requirements Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1300, et seq.,
shall control in the event of conflicts which are unintended by the Town
Council.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 12, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-112 Amendments and Review.
   The impact fee provided for herein is based upon data which, in large part,
is subject to inflation and other economic and market forces over which the
Town has no control. The Town Council shall, therefore, not less than once each
year, cause a review to be made by Town staff or consultants as may be
required, to determine the continuing validity of the Impact Fee, the Impact
Zone, and the Zone Improvement Plan. The Town Council shall consider and adopt
such amendments as are necessary to cause a substantive compliance with the
rational nexus test to continue, to insure that procedural due process is
maintained or enhanced and to insure that this ordinance meets the requirements
of the Indiana Code § 36-7-4-1300 series. To the extent required by the facts
and circumstances, this process shall include the steps necessary to update the
Zone Improvement Plan and the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. No. 1400, § 13, 11-26-97)
Sec. 5-113 through Sec. 5-119 Reserved for Future Use.
Chapter 6
Public Health and Safety Matters; Public Nuisances
Article 1. General Provisions.
   
Sec. 6-1   Town’s Authority to Regulate.
   
Sec. 6-2   Preservation of Public Peace and Order.
   
Sec. 6-3   Authority to Regulate Air and Sound.
   
Sec. 6-4   Authority to Regulate Public Gatherings.
   
Sec. 6-5   Authority to Establish a Fire Department.
   
Sec. 6-6   Control Over Animals.
   
Sec. 6-7   Offenses Against Public Health, Order and Decency.
   
Sec. 6-8   Resisting Official Action.
   
Sec. 6-9   and Sec. 6-10 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Animal Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-11   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-12   Animal Control Commission.
   
Sec. 6-13   Licensing.
   
Sec. 6-14   Permits.
   
Sec. 6-15   License and Permit Issuance and Revocation.
   
Sec. 6-16   Restraint.
   
Sec. 6-17   Impoundment and Violation Notice.
   
Sec. 6-18   Animal Care.
   
Sec. 6-19   Keeping of Wild Animals.
   
Sec. 6-20   Keeping of Animals Classified as Farm Animals.
   
Sec. 6-21   Performing Animal Exhibits.
   
Sec. 6-22   Animal Waste and Disposition.
   
Sec. 6-23   Adoption.
   
Sec. 6-24   Enforcement.
   
Sec. 6-25   Penalties.
   
Sec. 6-26   Exceptions.
   
Sec. 6-27   Conflicting Ordinances.
   
Sec. 6-28   Severability Clause.
   
Sec. 6-29   Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Alcohol Beverage Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-30   Consent.
   
Sec. 6-31   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-32   Consuming Alcohol in Vehicle Prohibited.
   
Sec. 6-33   Citations.
   
Sec. 6-34   Penalties.
   
Sec. 6-35   Signs.
   
Sec. 6-36   Riverfront District Liquor License.
   
Sec. 6-37   through Sec. 6-39 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 4. Curfew Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-40   Curfews Established for Children Ages Fifteen (15) through
Seventeen (17).
   
Sec. 6-41   Curfew Established for Children Less than Age Fifteen (15).
   
Sec. 6-42   Minor Curfew.
   
Sec. 6-43   Citations and Detainment of Minor.
   
Sec. 6-44   Fines.
   
Sec. 6-45   Appearance in Town Court.
   
Sec. 6-46   through Sec. 6-47 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 5. Burning Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-48   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-49   Open Burning Prohibited, Nuisance.
   
Sec. 6-50   Exemptions.
   
Sec. 6-51   Penalty.
   
Sec. 6-52   through Sec. 6-57 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 6. Fire Alarms and Smoke Detectors.
   
Sec. 6-58   Intent.
   
Sec. 6-59   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-60   Requirements for Installation.
   
Sec. 6-61   Inspections.
   
Sec. 6-62   Violations and Fines.
   
Sec. 6-63   Force Majeure.
   
Sec. 6-64   through Sec. 6-65 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 7. Fireworks Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-66   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-67   Special Permit.
   
Sec. 6-68   Use and Discharge, Generally.
   
Sec. 6-69   Manufacturer, Wholesaler, Importer or Distributor.
   
Sec. 6-70   Identification of Fireworks.
   
Sec. 6-71   Sales.
   
Sec. 6-72   Revocation of Special Permit.
   
Sec. 6-73   Penalty.
   
Sec. 6-74   through Sec. 6-77 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 8. Unsafe Building Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-78   Title of Ordinance.
   
Sec. 6-79   Administration and Enforcement.
   
Sec. 6-80   Adoption.
   
Sec. 6-81   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-82   Issuance of Orders in Relations to Unsafe Premises.
   
Sec. 6-83   Contents of Order.
   
Sec. 6-84   Service by Publication.
   
Sec. 6-85   Modification of Orders.
   
Sec. 6-86   Rescission of Orders.
   
Sec. 6-87   Service of Orders and Statements.
   
Sec. 6-88   Hearings: Notice and Procedure.
   
Sec. 6-89   Judicial Review.
   
Sec. 6-90   Recording of Orders, Statements and Records and Consequences
Thereof.
   
Sec. 6-91   Duties of Transfer of Unsafe Buildings - Information to be Supplied
on Transfer or Disposal of unsafe Building.
   
Sec. 6-92   Emergency Action.
   
Sec. 6-93   Receivers - Appointment and Powers.
   
Sec. 6-94   Repairs - Public Bids on Work Pursuant to Order.
   
Sec. 6-95   Liability for Costs on Work Pursuant to Order.
   
Sec. 6-96   Unsafe Buildings Fund.
   
Sec. 6-97   Inspection and Power of Enforcement.
   
Sec. 6-98   Civil Action by the Planning and Building Department.
   
Sec. 6-99   Criminal Sanctions for Violations.
   
Sec. 6-100   Change of Venue - Change of Judge.
   
Sec. 6-101   Precedence of Actions.
   
Sec. 6-102   General Statements.
   
Sec. 6-103   Supplemental Definition.
   
Sec. 6-104   Rights Already Accrued.
   
Sec. 6-105   Recondition.
   
Sec. 6-106   Construction.
   
Sec. 6-107   Severability.
   
Sec. 6-108   Amendment or Supplement.
   
Sec. 6-109   through Sec. 6-111 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 9. Refuse, Garbage and Recycling Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-112   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-113   Minimum Refuse Requirements.
   
Sec. 6-114   Dumping and Littering.
   
Sec. 6-115   Systematic Refuse Collections.
   
Sec. 6-116   Residential Garbage Collection Fee.
   
Sec. 6-117   Recycling Containers.
   
Sec. 6-118   Yard Waste Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-119   Use of Town Dumpster.
   
Sec. 6-120   Permits.
   
Sec. 6-121   Guidelines.
   
Sec. 6-122   Saturday Dumping.
   
Sec. 6-123   Fees.
   
Sec. 6-124   Revocation of Rights.
   
Sec. 6-125   Recycling Plan Requirements.
   
Sec. 6-126   Form for Right to Dispose of Refuse at Town Dumpster.
   
Sec. 6-127   Form for Dumping Permit.
   
Sec. 6-128   Fines.
   
Sec. 6-129   Reserved for Future Use.
Article 10. Weeds, Rank Vegetation and Grass.
   
Sec. 6-130   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-131   Real Estate Excluded from this Chapter.
   
Sec. 6-132   Permitting Excessive Growth of Weeds, Rank Vegetation and Grass to
be Declared a Public Nuisance.
   
Sec. 6-133   Procedures for Enforcement.
   
Sec. 6-134   Expense as a Lien Against the Property of the Owner.
   Sec. 6-135   through 6-137 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 11. Nuisances.
   
Sec. 6-138   Nuisances Declared.
   
Sec. 6-139   Specific Nuisances Highlighted.
   
Sec. 6-140   Designation of Nuisances.
   
Sec. 6-141   Written Notice - Fines.
   
Sec. 6-142   Town Action.
   
Sec. 6-143   Liens.
   
Sec. 6-144   Recording and Intent.
   
Sec. 6-145   Legal Action.
   
Sec. 6-146   and Sec. 6-147 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 12. Obscene Material.
   
Sec. 6-148   Obscene Literature, Devices and Prohibited - Fines.
   
Sec. 6-149   Preliminary Determination of Obscenity - Hearing and Notice
Requirements.
   
Sec. 6-150   Probable Cause.
   
Sec. 6-151   through Sec. 6-153 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 13. Motor Vehicles Public Safety Regulations.
Division I. Junk Motor Vehicles Declared Nuisances.
   
Sec. 6-154   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-155   Exceptions.
   
Sec. 6-156   Responsibility of Owner.
   
Sec. 6-157   Vehicles in Possession of Person Other Than Owner.
   
Sec. 6-158   Removal of Abandoned Vehicles - Notice Tag.
   
Sec. 6-159   Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles.
   
Sec. 6-160   Maximum Towing and Storage Charges.
   
Sec. 6-161   Towing Contracts.
   
Sec. 6-162   Liability for Loss or Damage.
   
Sec. 6-163   Role of Police Department.
   
Sec. 6-164   Abandoned Vehicle Fund.
   
Sec. 6-165   Severability Clause.
   
Sec. 6-166   through Sec. 6-169 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Restrictions on Traffic When Danger to Public is Declared.
   
Sec. 6-170   Declaration by Town Manager.
   
Sec. 6-171   Markings or Signs Required.
   
Sec. 6-172   Listing of Roads Affected and Alternate Routes.
   
See. 6-173   Penalties.
   
Sec. 6-174   through Sec. 6-177 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 14. Firearms Regulation.
   
Sec. 6-178   Discharge of Firearms Prohibited.
   
Sec. 6-179   through Sec. 6-185 Reserved for Future Use.
   
Sec. 6-186   Penalties.
   
Sec. 6-187   through Sec. 6-189 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 15. Miscellaneous Public Safety Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-190   Fires Prohibited in Railroad Rights-of-Way.
   
Sec. 6-191   through See. 6-229 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 16. Commencement of Construction Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-230   Commencement and Termination of Commercial or Residential
Construction.
   
Sec. 6-231   Penalties.
   
Sec. 6-232   through Sec. 6-234 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 17. Other Public Safety Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-235   Deferred Prosecution Program.
   
Sec. 6-236   Vandalism Prohibited - Penalties.
   
Sec. 6-237   Possession of Tobacco Products by Minors Prohibited - Penalty.
   
Sec. 6-238   Prohibiting the Purchase, Possession, Sale, and Offering for Sale
of Substances Containing Synthetic Cannabinoid.
   
Sec. 6-239   Reserved for Future Use.
Article 18. Noise.
   
Sec. 6-240   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-241   Restrictions.
   
Sec. 6-242   Exemptions.
   
Sec. 6-243   Violation; Evidence of Sound Level.
   
Sec. 6-244   Penalty; Payment of Fines.
   
Sec. 6-245   through Sec. 6-249 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 19. Occupancy Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-250   Occupancy Regulations.
   
Sec. 6-251   Violations.
   
Sec. 6-252   Penalty.
   
Sec. 6-253   through Sec. 6-259 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 20. Identity Theft prevention Program
   
Sec. 6-260   Purpose.
   
Sec. 6-261   Application.
   
Sec. 6-262   Definitions.
   
Sec. 6-263   Program.
   
Sec. 6-264   Administration of Program.
   
Sec. 6-265   Identification of Relevant Red Flags.
   
Sec. 6-266   Detection of Red Flags.
   
Sec. 6-267   Response.
   
Sec. 6-268   Updating the Program.
   
Sec. 6-269   Oversight of the Program.
   
Sec. 6-270   Oversight of Service Provider Arrangements.
   
Sec. 6-271   Duties Regarding Address Discrepancies.
   
Sec. 6-272   Security of Personal Identifying Information.
   
Sec. 6-273   Employee Training.
   
Sec. 6-274   Disposal of Sensitive Information.
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 6-1 Town's Authority to Regulate.  1
   The Town may regulate the conduct, or use or possession of property which
might endanger the public health, safety, or welfare of its citizens.
 
Notes
1 1   I.C., § 36-8-2-4, authorizes the regulation of conduct and property for
  reasons of public health, safety and welfare.
Sec. 6-2 Preservation of Public Peace and Order.  2
   The Town may establish, maintain, and operate a police and law enforcement
system to preserve public peace and order and may provide facilities and
equipment for that system.
 
Notes
2 2   I.C., § 36-8-2-2, sets forth the authority to preserve the public peace and
  order.
Sec. 6-3 Authority to Regulate Air and Sound.  3
   The Town may regulate the introduction of any substance or odor into the
air, or any generation of sound.
 
Notes
3 3   I.C., § 36-8-2-8, authorizes the regulation of air and sound.
Sec. 6-4 Authority to Regulate Public Gatherings.  4
   The Town may regulate public gatherings, such as shows, demonstrations,
fairs, conventions, sporting events, and exhibitions.
 
Notes
4 4   I.C., § 36-8-2-9, authorizes the regulation of public gatherings.
Sec. 6-5 Authority to Establish A Fire Department.  5
   The Town may establish, maintain, and operate a fire fighting and fire
prevention system and may provide facilities and equipments for that system.
 
Notes
5 5   I.C., § 36-8-2-3, sets forth the authority to establish a fire fighting
  system.
Sec. 6-6 Control Over Animals.  6
   A Town may regulate the control of animals and may establish animal
shelters.
 
Notes
6 6   I.C., § 36-8-2-6, authorizes a unit to control animals and to establish,
  operate, and maintain animal shelters.
Sec. 6-7 Offenses Against Public Health, Order and Decency.  7
   All offenses against public health, order or decency not addressed by this
Code shall be governed by applicable State Statute.
 
Notes
7 7   I.C., § 35-45-1-1, et seq., address such offenses.
Sec. 6-8 Resisting Official Action.  8
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to knowingly or intentionally
interfere, or attempt to impede or interfere with any Town official or employee
in the performance of their official duties.
 
Notes
8    I.C., § 35-44-3-3, addresses resisting a law enforcement officer.
Sec. 6-9 and Sec. 6-10 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Animal Regulations.
Sec. 6-11 Definitions.
   As used in this ordinance, the following terms are defined below:
   a.   Animal: Every non-human species of animal, both domestic and wild.
   b.   Animal Control Officer:  Any person designated by the Town of
Schererville who is qualified to perform such duties under the ordinance of the
town.
   c.   Animal Facility: Any facility operated by a humane society, or
municipal agency or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding
animals under the authority of this ordinance or state law for care,
confinement, return to owner, adoption, or euthanasia.
   d.   Auction: Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought,
sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this
ordinance. This section does not apply to individual sales of animals by
owners.
   e.   Breeders: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
breeding, buying, selling and boarding of animals. These animals include but
are not limited to caged birds, rodents, rabbits, ferrets, cats, dogs, and
reptiles kept and sold as pets and shall be construed and constitute a Pet
Shop.
   f.   Circus: A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.
   g.   Commercial Animal Establishment: Any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog
agency, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal
exhibition, or boarding or breeding kennel.
   h.   Domestic Animal:  Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility; an
animal of a species that has been bred and raised to live in or about the
habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter.
   i.   Grooming Shop: A commercial establishment where animals are bathed,
clipped, plucked, or otherwise groomed.
   j.   Guard Dog: Any dog that will detect and warn its handler that an
intruder is present in or near an area that is being secured.
   k.   Kennel or Cattery: Any premises wherein any person engages in the
business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee,
or selling dogs or cats. Six or more dogs and/or cats owned, harbored,
possessed, cared for or kept in custody of any person shall be construed and
constitute a kennel.
   l.   Owner: Any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping, or
harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it
is fed or sheltered for three (3) consecutive days or more.
   m.   Performing Animal Exhibition: Any spectacle, display, act or event
other than circuses, in which a performing animal is used.
   n.   Pet Shop: Any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated
separately or in connection with another business enterprise (except for a
licensed kennel), that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal.
   o.   Public Nuisance: Any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy humans,
endanger the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially
interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of
life or property. The terms public nuisance animal shall mean and include, but
is not limited to, any animal that
      1.   is repeatedly found at large;
      2.   damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
      3.   molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby;
      4.   chases vehicles;
      5.   excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to,
continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing
unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in
close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
      6.   causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable
annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the
premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
      7.   causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the
animal is kept or harbored;
      8.   is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare
by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained;
      9.   attacks other domestic animals; or
      10.   has been found by the Animal Control Commission, after notice to
its owner and a hearing, to be a public nuisance animal by virtue of being a
menace to the public health, welfare, or safety.
   p.   Restraint:  Any animal secured by a leash, fence or lead under the
control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands, or
within the real property limits of its owner.
   q.   Riding School or Stable:  Any place that has available for hire,
boarding, and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro;
or any place that regularly buys, sells, or trains the above animals, including
a racetrack, trotting track, or rodeo.
   r.   Running at Large:  It shall be unlawful for any person having charge,
care, ownership or control of any animal to let the animal run at large and
beyond the limits of his lot or property. All animals which are found
unlawfully running at large within the town may be taken into custody and
impounded at the animal shelter.
   s.   Veterinary Hospital: Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals.
   t.   Vicious Animal:  Any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human
beings or domesticated animals without adequate provocation or which, because
of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack,
bite, or injure human beings or domesticated animals.
   u.   Wild Animal:  Any living member of the animal kingdom, including those
born or raised in captivity, except the following: human beings, domestic dogs
(excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding
hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that
is part wild, and captive-bred species of common cage birds.
   v.   Zoological Park: Any facility operated by a person, partnership,
corporation, or government agency, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying
or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals.
(Ord No. 1549, § 1, 1-23-02; Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 10-13-04)
Sec. 6-12 Animal Control Commission.
   The Animal Control Commission shall be comprised of the members of the
Metropolitan Board of Police Commissioners, whose Chairman shall also be the
Chairman of the Animal Control Commission. Said Commission shall meet at the
call of the Chairman and do the following:
   a.   Recommend to the Town Council rules and regulations concerning the
operation of the animal shelter, standards for the collection, care, custody
and disposal of animals at large and public nuisance animals, and standards for
the maintenance of holding facilities for guard and sentry dogs.
   b.   Review the proposed budget of the Animal Control Bureau and make
recommendations for funding to the members of the Town Council.
   c.   Upon written complaint, conduct a public hearing to determine if an
animal or holding facility is a public nuisance animal or holding facility.
   d.   Upon written recommendation by the Animal Control Director, the Animal
Control Commission may revoke any license for violation of this ordinance.
   e.   Upon written request, the Town Council will hear and decide appeals of
licenses that have been revoked by the Animal Control Commission for violations
of this ordinance.
   f.   Recommend to the Town Council necessary changes in the ordinance
regarding the control of animals.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 2, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-13 Licensing.  9
   a.   Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of any animal
over three (3) months of age within this town must obtain a license as herein
provided. This provision may not apply to small cage birds or to aquatic and
amphibian animals kept solely as pets.
   b.   Written application for licenses, which shall include name and address
of applicant, description of the animal, the appropriate fee and rabies
certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or antirabies clinic, shall be
made to the licensing authority.
   c.   If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats shall be for
a period of one year.
   d.   Application for a license must be made within thirty (30) days after
obtaining a dog or cat over three (3) months of age; this requirement will not
apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the town for not longer than
thirty (30) days.
   e.   License fees shall not be required for certified Seeing Eye dogs,
hearing dogs, governmental police dogs, or other certified dogs that are
trained to assist the physically handicapped.
   f.   Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall issue a durable tag or identification collar, stamped with an identifying
number and the year of issuance. Tags should be designed so that they may be
conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's collar or harness.
   g.   Dogs and cats must wear identification tags or collars at all times
when off the premises of the owners.
   h.   The licensing authority shall maintain a record of the identifying
numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public.
   i.   The licensing period shall begin with the fiscal year and shall run for
one year. A license application may be made thirty (30) days prior to and up to
March 31st of the fiscal year.
   j.   Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time period
specified in this section will be subjected to a fine of $10.
   k.   A license shall be issued after payment of the following application
fee:
      Unneutered male dog   $20      Neutered male dog   $5
      Unneutered male cat   $10      Neutered male cat   $5
      Unspayed female dog   $20      Spayed female cat   $5
      Unspayed female cat   $10      Spayed female cat   $5
   l.   A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a $1.00 replacement
fee.
   m.   No person may use a license for any animal other than that the animal
for which it was issued.
   n.   Animals rented solely for the purpose of guarding a business or
residence are exempt from this subsection.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 3, 1-23-02)
 
Notes
     Editor's Note: This section is also set forth in §§
9 4-175 through
  4-185 of this Code.
Sec. 6-14 Permits.  10
   a.   No person, partnership, or corporation shall operate a commercial
animal establishment or animal shelter without first obtaining a permit in
compliance with this section.
   b.   The Town Council shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of
permits and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and other applicable laws. The
Town Council may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed desirable
for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals.
   c.   When a permit applicant has shown that he is willing and able to comply
with the regulations promulgated by the Town Council, a permit shall be issued
upon payment of the applicable fee.
   d.   The permit period shall begin with the fiscal year and shall run for
one (1) year. Renewal applications for permits shall be made thirty (30) days
prior to, and up to sixty (60) days after, the start of the fiscal year.
Application for a permit to establish a new commercial animal establishment
under the provisions of this ordinance may be made at any time.
   e.   If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment,
the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his name upon payment
of a ten dollar ($10.00) transfer fee.  11
   f.   No person shall train any dog to be used as a guard or sentry dog
without possessing a valid license. This Section shall not apply to the Town
government or any of its agencies. The application for a guard or sentry dog
training license shall state the name and address of the owner and trainer,
location of the facility and the maximum number of dogs to be housed at the
training facility.
   g.   Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee:
      Kennel authorized to house fewer than six dogs or cats   $ 150.00
      Kennel authorized to house six or more but fewer than 10 dogs or cats   $
200.00
      Kennel authorized to house 10 or more dogs or cats   $ 250.00
      Breeder permits   $ 100.00
      Pet shops   $ 200.00
      Riding stable   $ 100.00
      Auction   $ 100.00
      Zoological park   $ 200.00
      Circus   $ 200.00
      Grooming shops   $ 50.00
      Petting zoo   $ 150.00
      Guard-dog training center   $ 200.00
      Miscellaneous hunting permits   $ 5.00
   h.   Every facility regulated by this ordinance shall be considered a
separate enterprise requiring an individual permit.
   i.   No fee may be required of any veterinary hospital, animal shelter, or
government operated zoological park.
   j.   Failure to obtain a permit before opening any facility covered in this
section shall result in a fine as set forth in Section
6-24 herein.
   k.   Failure to obtain a breeders permit prior to breeding shall result in
the fine as set forth in Section
6-24 herein.
   l.   Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was
issued shall be subject to reclassification and readjustment of the permit fee.
   m.   No more than five (5) dogs and/or cats combined over the age of three
months may be kept on any residential, commercial or other premises within the
town unless the owner or owners of the animals hold a valid permit.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 4, 1-23-02; Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-13-04)
 
Notes
10    Editor's Note: This section is also set forth in §
   4-186 of this Code.
      Ord. No. 1297, passed March 8, 1995, amended paragraph (e) (formerly
11 paragraph (d)) for "calendar year 1995 only" and is therefore not included
   within this section. Said ordinance is on file in the Office of the Clerk-
   Treasurer and available for public inspection during regular business hours.
Sec. 6-15 License and Permit Issuance and Revocation.
   a.   After an application is filed, the Town Council, by its duly authorized
agent, shall inspect the facility prior to issuing the permit. The Town Council
may revoke any permit or license if the person holding the permit or license
refuses or fails to comply with this ordinance, the regulations promulgated by
the Town Council, or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals.
   b.   When a permit applicant has shown that they are willing and able to
comply with the regulations promulgated by the Town Council, a permit shall be
issued upon payment of the applicable fee.
   c.   Any person whose permit or license is revoked shall, within ten (10)
days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored. No
part of the permit or license fee shall be refunded.
   d.   It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license that
Schererville Animal Control shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the
premises where animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such
inspection is refused, revoke the permit or license of the refusing owner.
   e.   If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the
application, the licensing authority shall refuse to issue a permit or license.
   f.   No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued
a permit or license to operate a commercial animal establishment.
   g.   Any person having been denied a license or permit may not reapply for a
period of thirty days. A $10.00 fee shall accompany each reapplication.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 5, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-16 Restraint.
   a.   All dogs shall be kept under restraint.
   b.   All cats shall be kept under restraint.
   c.   No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals
to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
   d.   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into
contact with another animal except for planned breeding.
   e.   After an Animal Control Officer has determined an animal vicious, the
owner must take proper measures to restrain the animal. The vicious animal
shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure
appropriate to the weight, size and strength of the animal and it shall be
securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. All vicious
animal enclosures are subject to approval by the Animal Control Officer to
determine that the animal cannot escape and cause harm to the public.
   f.   No animals shall be permitted in any municipal parks.
   g.   Owners that elect to install an electronic fence to contain animals on
property, must follow the following criteria, effective immediately to all
residents:
      1.   All electronic fences shall be inside the owner’s property, and a
minimum of five (5) feet from sidewalks, adjacent property, or other public
walkways.
      2.   Batteries shall be checked on a regular basis.
      3.   Wireless electronic fences shall be inside the owner’s property, and
a minimum of five (5) feet from sidewalks, adjacent property, and public
walkways.
      4.   No animal that is deemed vicious shall be contained by this type of
fencing.
      5.   Owners are responsible for adequate training and restraint for this
type of fencing.
   h.   Schererville will implement an On-Leash Dog Program for all walking
trails, which program will be undertaken as follows:
      1.   Goal: the goal of this program will be to increase recreational
opportunities in the park system by enabling residents to walk or exercise
their dogs on-leash on all walking trails, including those contained within
Schererville Parks.
      2.   Program:
         (i)   Owners of on-leash dogs will be permitted to walk their licensed
dogs on the walking trails of the Town on-leash during regular park hours.
         (ii)   The Schererville Parks and Recreation Board may terminate or
suspend the program at any time in the event it is determined that termination
is in the best interest of the Town and its residents.
      3.   Rules and regulations:
         (i)   Dogs must be kept on a leash no greater than six (6') feet in
length, and under control at all times. Dog owners may walk their dogs on-leash
on the walking trails. Dogs are prohibited from being in any area of the parks
outside of the trails, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, restrooms,
picnic shelters, ball fields and tennis courts.
         (ii)   Any person whose dog is on-leash utilizing walking trails shall
be responsible for the conduct of the dog and for removing feces deposited by
such animal from the park area.
         (iii)   All dogs must be accompanied by their owner and not cause a
public nuisance, safety hazard, harass wildlife or damage landscaping.
         (iv)   Dog owners/handlers, at the first sign of aggression or
unruliness, must immediately remove their dogs from the designated areas.
         (v)   Dogs shall be prohibited from the Schererville Parks and/or
walking trails during special events, as designated by the Schererville Town
Parks and Recreation Department.
         (vi)   Nothing herein shall prevent or limit the duly authorized use
of service dogs.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 6, 1-23-02; Ord. No. 1626, § 3, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1799, § 1,
12-14-11)
Sec. 6-17 Impoundment and Violation Notice.
   a.   Unrestrained dogs, cats and nuisance animals shall be taken by the
police or Animal Control Officers and impounded in an animal shelter and there
confined in a humane manner.
   b.   If a license tag or other means can identify the owner of an impounded
animal, the animal-control officer shall immediately upon impoundment notify
the owner by telephone or certified mail.
   c.   An owner reclaiming an impounded cat shall pay a fee of ten dollars
($10.00) and five dollars ($5.00) for each day the animal has been impounded.
Subsequent impounds occurring within twelve months are charged double.
   d.   An owner reclaiming an impounded dog shall pay a fee of ten dollars
($10.00) and eight dollars ($8.00) each day the animal has been impounded.
Subsequent impounds occurring within twelve (12) months are charged double.
   e.   Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) business days
shall become the property of the Town of Schererville and the animal will then
be evaluated for adoption under the criteria in Section 23.
   f.   The owner of any impounded animal may be responsible for any damage
done to Animal Control equipment, vehicles or shelter by their animal.
   g.   In addition, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, the
Animal Control Officer or police officer may issue to the known owner of such
animal a notice of ordinance violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner
a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to twenty-five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) that may, at the discretion of the animal owner, be paid to the
Clerk within the time period specified in said notice of ordinance violation.
In the event that such penalty is not paid within the time period prescribed,
said violation shall be prosecuted in the same manner as all local ordinance
violations.
   h.   The Animal Control Commission shall review automatically all licenses
issued to animal owners against whom three or more ordinance violations have
been assessed in a twelve-month period.
   i.   The Animal Control Director shall keep complete and accurate records of
the care, feeding, veterinary treatment, and disposition of all animals
impounded at the shelter.
   j.   After a dog or cat has bitten a person or other animal, the following
action will be taken:
      1.   If the dog or cat has up-to-date shots, the dog or cat can be
confined inside the owner's residence for the required time period of ten (10)
days by state law.
      2.   If the dog or cat does not have up-to-date shots, the dog or cat
shall be quarantined for the required time period of ten (10) days at an animal
hospital or veterinary clinic with the owner paying all costs of confinement.
      3.   It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to
report to the Schererville Police Department the names and address of persons
treated for bites inflicted by animals together with such other information as
will help with rabies control. It shall also be the duty of every licensed
veterinarian to report to the Animal Control Director his diagnosis of any
animal observed by him as a rabies suspect.
      4.   Any animal that has a single documented unprovoked bite incident may
be recommended to the Animal Control Commission and/or by the Animal Control
Officer to be deemed vicious. Upon written complaint to the Animal Control
Commission and/or Animal Control Officer, a public hearing will be held to
determine the disposition of said animal. In lieu of a public hearing, the
owner of the vicious animal may voluntarily surrender the animal to
Schererville Animal Control for humane disposal at any time prior to the public
hearing. If the said animal is deemed vicious, the owner must have the animal
humanely disposed of or may remove it permanently from the Town. The owner will
be responsible for any fees incurred during the holding of said animal.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 7, 1-23-02; Ord. No. 1626, § 4, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1652, § 1,
8-10-05)
Sec. 6-18 Animal Care.
   a.   A dog, cat or ferret three (3) months of age or older must have been
vaccinated against rabies by a license and accredited veterinarian yearly.
   b.   No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient wholesome
and nutritious food, water in sufficient quantities, proper air, shelter space
and protection from weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering
and humane care and treatment.
   c.   No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork,
or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight,
cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and
humans.
   d.   No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
   e.   No person shall crop a dog’s ears or dock a dog's tail, except a
licensed veterinarian. In no event shall any person except a licensed
veterinarian perform such an operation.
   f.   Chickens, ducklings, or rabbits younger than eight (8) weeks of age may
not be sold in quantities of less than twenty-five (25) to a single purchaser.
   g.   No person shall give away any live animal, reptile, or bird as a prize
for, or as an inducement to enter any contest, game, or other competition, as
an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or as an incentive to enter into
any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting
trade.
   h.   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed
with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal,
provided that it shall be lawful for a person to expose on his own property
common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substance.
   i.   No person or persons shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in
such a manner that places it in a life or health threatening situation by
exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper
ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold. In order to protect the
health and safety of an animal, an animal control officer, law enforcement
officer, or other investigator who has probable cause to believe that this
Section is being violated shall have authority to enter such motor vehicle by
any reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort
to locate the owner or person. The animal owner shall be liable for any cost
incurred for removal of the animal.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 8, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-19 Keeping of Wild Animals.
   a.   No person shall own, possess, or have custody on his premises any wild
or vicious animal for display, training, or exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to
American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums accredited facilities.
   b.   No person shall own, possess or have custody on his premises any wild
animal including, but not limited to, hybrid dogs or cats, venomous snakes,
alligators, skunks, raccoons, prairie dogs or hedge hogs as a pet.
   c.   The Animal Control Commission shall have the power to release or order
the release of any infant wild animal under temporary permit that is deemed
capable of survival.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 9, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-20 Keeping of Animals Classified as Farm Animals.
   a.   No person shall own, possess or have custody on his premises any animal
classified as a farm animal, such as, but not limited to, horses, pigs, goats,
chickens, etc.
   b.   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any farm animal as a pet.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 10, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-21 Performing Animal Exhibitions.
   a.   No person may sponsor, promote or train a wild animal to participate
in, contribute to the involvement of a wild animal in, or attend as a spectator
any activity or event in which any wild animal engages in unnatural behavior or
is wrestled, fought, mentally or physically harassed, or displayed in such a
way that the animal is abused or stressed mentally or physically or is induced
or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical,
or manual devices in a manner that will cause or is likely to cause physical
injury or suffering. This prohibition applies to events and activities taking
place in either public or private facilities or property, and applies
regardless of the purpose of the event or activities and irrespective of
whether or not a fee is charged to spectators.
   b.   All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in
good working condition.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 11, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-22 Animal Waste and Disposition.
   a.   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any
excreta deposited by his animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas, or
private property.
   b.   The owner of any dead animal shall remove and properly dispose of the
animal within 24 hours after its death. The real property owner is responsible
for the removal of any strange carcass on such real property.
   c.   Schererville Animal Control will humanely euthanize an animal(s) for a
fee of $20.00, which includes disposal. This fee will be collected by the
Animal Control Officer and receipted at the Town Clerk’s Office under the
Donation fund. The following conditions must apply:
      1.   Animal(s) must be ill or have a severe health problem; or
      2.   Animal must be aggressive to the extent of being considered
unadoptable; and
      3.   The owner must be a resident of the Town.
   d.   Animal(s) surrendered by the owner to Schererville Animal Control for
adoption or disposal must meet the following criteria:
      1.   Owner shall be a resident of Schererville;
      2.   Animal(s) shall appear healthy with no visible signs of aggression;
      3.   Shelter must have available space to house the animal(s).
(Ord. No. 1549, § 12, 1-23-02; Ord. No. 1626, § 5, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1652, §
2, 8-10-05)
Sec. 6-23 Adoption.
   a.   Unclaimed animals will be put through the adoption program for a fee of
$65.00. This fee includes neutering or spaying, rabies vaccination, first
Distemper, Bordtella, Feline-V, heartworm test, AVID microchip, and leukemia/
AIDS test for the appropriate species. Schererville Animal Control will take
the animals to the veterinarian or will issue a certificate to the new owners
to have services performed within 30 days of adoption. No animal shall be
released for adoption without meeting the following criteria:
      1.   Paying adoption fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00), payable to the
Town.
      2.   Signing a Release of Liability and Adoption Contract.
      3.   No observable behavior problems.
      4.   No observable signs of aggression.
      5.   No documented bites on record with any Animal Control, Humane
Society, or Police Department.
   Schererville Animal Control Officers will collect the fee, issue a receipt,
and receipt of the money at the Town Clerk’s Office on a daily basis.
   Schererville Animal Control will administer AVID microchips by request for a
fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per animal to residents and nonresidents.
   b.   Animals to be considered for adoption must meet the following criteria:
      1.   No observable behavioral problems;
      2.   No observable health problems;
      3.   Should be observably tame so as not to be a threat to the public;
      4.   Have not had two (2) or more bites on record with any Animal
Control, Humane Society or Police Department; and
      5.   May be prohibited by state law or local ordinance.
   c.   All animals considered for adoption will be kept not less than 15
business days.
   d.   No animal will be euthanized without prior approval from the
appropriate Deputy Chief or Chief of Police.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 13, 1-23-02; Ord. No. 1626, § 6, 10-13-04; Ord. No. 1652, §
3, 8-10-05)
Sec. 6-24 Enforcement.
   The civil and criminal provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by
those persons or agencies designated by municipal authority. It shall be a
violation of this ordinance to interfere with an Animal Control Officer in the
performance of his duties. In the event that any costs are incurred as a result
of the information in this ordinance, such as medical expenses for the
treatment of animals, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
animal to reimburse the municipality for said expenses.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 14, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-25 Penalties.
   Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If
a violation continues, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate
violation. If any person is found guilty by a court of violating Section
6-18, his permit to own, keep, harbor, or have custody of animals shall be
deemed automatically revoked and no new permit may be issued.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 15, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-26 Exceptions.
   The provisions of the ordinance shall not apply to:
   a.   Guide dogs being used to assist the visually or physically impaired;
   b.   Animals being used by any government law enforcement agency;
   c.   Animals that are a part of a parade or show properly authorized by the
Animal Control Director.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 16, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-27 Conflicting Ordinances.
   All other ordinances of the Town of Schererville that are in conflict with
this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 17, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-28 Severability Clause.
   If any part of this ordinance shall be invalid, such part shall be deemed
severable and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of
this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1549, § 18, 1-23-02)
Sec. 6-29 Reserved For Future Use.
Article 3. Alcoholic Beverage Regulations.
Sec. 6-30 Consent.
   Consent is granted to the issuance by the Alcoholic Beverage Commission of
Indiana of liquor retailers' permits to applicants otherwise duly qualified
under the provisions of Chapter 226 of the Acts of Indiana State Legislature,
Session of 1935, in respect to premises located within said Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 78, 5-8-35)
Sec. 6-31 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
   a.   Alcoholic Beverage shall have the meaning set forth in Indiana Code, §
7.1-1-3-5;
   b.   Container shall have the meaning set forth in Indiana Code, § 7.1-1-3-
13;
   c.   Motor Vehicle shall have the meaning set forth in Indiana Code, § 9-13-
2-105(a), except that  "Motor Vehicle" as used in this Article, shall not
include any chartered passenger vehicle licensed to operate within the State of
Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1205, § 1, 5-13-92)
Sec. 6-32 Consuming Alcohol in Vehicle Prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage or
possess a container that has been opened, that has a broken seal, or from which
some of the contents had been removed while in a motor vehicle that is being
operated upon a public roadway, street or alley within the Town of
Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1205, § 2, 5-13-92)
Sec. 6-33 Citations.
   An officer of the Town of Schererville Police Department may issue a Local
Ordinance Violation Citation to a person who violates this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1205, § 3, 5-13-92)
Sec. 6-34 Penalties.
   Violations of this ordinance shall subject the violator to a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00). The fine for each subsequent violation shall not be less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. No. 1205, § 4, 5-13-92)
Sec. 6-35 Signs.
   Signs giving notice of this prohibition of open alcoholic beverage
containers shall be posted giving notice of such regulation at all locations
deemed appropriate by the Town of Schererville Police Department.
(Ord No. 1205, § 5, 5-13-92)
Sec. 6-36 Riverfront District Liquor License.
   a.   The Town Council establishes that applicants for a Riverfront District
liquor license shall pay an application fee of one thousand five hundred
($1,500.00) dollars to the town upon submission of said application.
   b.   The Town Council establishes that holders/owners of a Riverfront
District liquor license shall pay an annual Riverfront District Fund Fee to the
Town of Schererville in the amount of five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars. (Ord.
No. 2006, § 1, 2, 4-10-24)
Sec. 6-37   through Sec. 6-39 Reserved For Future Use.Article 4.
Curfew Regulations.  12
 
Notes
12    I.C., § 31-6-4-2, authorizes the establishment of curfew regulations. Ord. No.
   1363 amended Ord. No. 1219 passed on October 14, 1992.
Sec. 6-40 Curfews Established for Children Ages Fifteen (15) through Seventeen
(17).
   It is a curfew violation for a child fifteen (15), sixteen (16), or
seventeen (17) years of age to be in a public place:
   a.   Between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;
   b.   After 10:30 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday; or
   c.   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday.
(Ord. No. 1558, § 1, 6-12-02)
Sec. 6-41 Curfew Established for Children less than Age Fifteen (15).
   It is a curfew violation for a child less than fifteen (15) years of age to
be in a public place after 10:00 p.m. or before 5:30 a.m. on any day.
(Ord. No. 1558, § 2, 6-12-02)
Sec. 6-42 Minor Curfew.
   A law enforcement officer may not detain a child or take a child into
custody based on a violation of the Section unless the law enforcement officer,
after making a reasonable determination and considering the facts and
surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that:
   a.   the child has violated this Section; and
   b.   there is no legal defense to the violation.
(Ord. No. 1558, § 3, 6-12-02; Ord. No. 1621, § 1, 7-14-04)
Sec. 6-43 Citations and Detainment of Minor.
   Each member of the Police Department is directed to take into custody any
minor person violating the provisions of Section
6-40, and to take the minor person while in custody to his or her place of
residence and thereupon determine the name of the parent, guardian, or other
person having the legal custody of the said minor person. The officer, at his
discretion, shall also have the authority to transport the minor to the
Schererville Police Department where a parent, guardian, or other responsible
party will be contacted and be allowed to pick up the child. It shall be the
duty of the apprehending officer to cause a citation for violation of this
section to be issued to the offending parent, guardian, or custodian.
(Ord. No. 1343, § 4, 12-26-96)
Sec. 6-44 Fines.
   Violation of this ordinance shall subject the violator to a fine of no less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and no more than two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00).
(Ord. No. 1558, § 4, 6-12-02)
Sec. 6-45 Appearance in Town Court.
   Both the minor child and the parent, guardian, or custodian charged with a
violation shall appear in the Schererville Town Court pertaining to said
violation.
(Ord. No. 1558, § 5, 6-12-02)
Sec. 6-46 through Sec. 6-47 Reserved For Future Use.
ARTICLE 5. BURNING REGULATIONS.
Sec. 6-48 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Article the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   a.   Fire or Fires - The words shall be interchangeable, and shall mean and
refer to the visible, active phases of the chemical reaction constituting the
combustion of material, manifested in light and heat.
   b.   Material or Materials - The words shall be interchangeable, and shall
mean and refer to any kind of biodegradable and non-biodegradable substances,
including, garbage, rubbish, ashes, commercial, industrial, and institutional
waste, wood, and wood products.
   c.   Open Burning or Open Burn - The terms shall be interchangeable, and
shall mean and refer to the outdoor combustion of material.
   d.   Person or Persons - The words shall be interchangeable, and shall refer
to any natural person, corporation, association, trust, venture, partnership,
or other entity.
   e.   Wood Products - Material derived or consisting of paper, cardboard,
rags, boards, branches, brush, grass, and leaves. No processed, painted, or
treated wood material.
(Ord. No. 1709, § 1, 6-13-07)
Sec. 6-49 Open Burning Prohibited, Nuisance.
   a.   No person or persons shall open burn any material except as provided at
326 IAC 4-1-1, et seq.
   b.   Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be
deemed a person maintaining a public nuisance.
   c.   The Metropolitan Police Department shall and is hereby empowered to
enforce the provisions of this section, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1709, § 1, 6-13-07)
Sec. 6-50 Exemptions.
   a.   The following instances of open burnings shall be exempt from
restriction under this Article:
      1.   Fires celebrating school pep rallies;
      2.   Fires celebrating scouting activities;
      3.   Fires used for recreational and cooking purposes, such as camp
fires;
      4.   Fires at residences of four (4) or fewer units, where fires are
contained in a noncombustible container sufficiently vented to induce adequate
primary combustion air, with enclosed sides, a bottom, and a mesh covering with
openings no larger than one-fourth (1/4) square inch, provided, however, that
this exemption shall not include such fires at apartment complexes and mobile
home parks, which fires are prohibited;
      5.   Fires of wood products associated with nursery and farming
maintenance operations, including:
         A.   The burning of fence rows and fields, or materials derived
therefrom;
         B.   The burning of natural growth derived from clearing a drainage
ditch; and
         C.   The burning of limbs and prunings, but only if so diseased or
infected as to present a contamination problem;
      6.   Waste oil burning, where the waste oil has been collected in a
properly constructed and located pit as prescribed in 310 IAC § 7-1-37(A), as
amended from time to time, being a rule of Division of Oil and Gas, Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. Each oil pit may be burned once every two (2)
months and all oil must be completely burned within thirty (30) minutes after
ignition; and
      7.   Burning done pursuant to variance granted by the Indiana Air
Pollution Control Board pursuant to 326 IAC 4-1-1, et seq., as amended from
time to time.
   b.   All exemptions shall be subject to the following:
      1.   Only wood products shall be burned unless otherwise stated above.
      2.   Fires shall be attended at all times until completely extinguished.
      3.   If fires create an air pollution problem, a nuisance, or a fire
hazard, they shall be extinguished. The person responsible shall also be
subject to penalties per this chapter.
      4.   All residential, farm, and waste oil burning shall occur during
daylight hours during which the fires may be replenished, but only in such a
manner that nearly all of the burning material is consumed by sunset.
      5.   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable meteorological
conditions such as temperature inversions, high winds, or air stagnation.
(Ord. No. 1709, § 1, 6-13-07)
Sec. 6-51 Penalty.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this Article, as amended from time
to time, shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00).
Each day or part of day such violation exists shall constitute a separate and
continuing violation.
(Ord. No. 1709, § 1, 6-13-07)
Sec. 6-52 through Sec. 6-57 Reserved For Future Use.
Article 6. Fire Alarms and Smoke Detectors.
Sec. 6-58 Intent.
   This Article is intended to supplement Indiana Code, §§ 22-11-4-11 and 22-
11-18-1, et seq., as well as other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.
Wherever this ordinance is in conflict with other local ordinances or
resolutions, this ordinance shall supersede. Wherever this ordinance is in
conflict with any State or Federal law or regulations, that State or Federal
law shall supersede.
(Ord. No. 1139, § 1, 1-10-90)
Sec. 6-59 Definitions.
   a.   Hotels and Motels - Any building or buildings or structures kept,
maintained, used, advertised, or held out to the public as inns or places where
sleeping accommodations are furnished for hire for transient guests.
   b.   Business - As defined in citation of the Schererville Town Code.
   c.   Commercial Building - Any building or structure used as defined as
applicable to a C-1, C-2, C-3, or C-4, P.O. or P.U.D. zoning district as
defined in the Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance No. 1046 set forth in
Chapter 10 of this Code) and as it may hereafter be amended of the Town of
Schererville.
   d.   Residential Building - Any building or structure used as defined as
applicable to a R-1, R-2, R-3, P.O. or P.U.D. zoning district as defined in the
Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance No. 1046 set forth in
Chapter 10 of this Code) and as it may hereafter be amended of the Town of
Schererville.
   e.   Apartments/Condominiums - All other multifamily dwellings or structures
consisting of more than four (4) families living independently of each other.
(Ord. No. 1139, § 2,1-20-90)
Sec. 6-60 Requirements for Installation.
   a.   On and after adoptions and passages of this ordinance, all new
construction in the following described categories shall have installed
functional smoke detectors as well as such other fire alarms or fire
preventative devices required by other laws or rules or regulations. All smoke
detectors shall be hard wired into the building's electrical system. All such
devices shall be installed in conformity with manufacturer's requirements or
acceptable trades union requirements or as directed by the Town's electrical
inspector or the Town's fire chief or their designee.
   b.   These devices shall be installed at intervals in such rooms, corridors,
or other spaces within a building so that the entire building shall be secured,
protected, or covered. No occupancy permit may be issued by the Town until this
ordinance is fully complied with regardless when a building permit was issued.
   c.   The following list are the categories for which smoke detectors shall
be installed as aforementioned:
      1.   All Hotels and Motels
      2.   All Businesses
      3.   All Commercial Buildings
      4.   All Residential Buildings
      5.   All Apartments and Condominiums
   d.   All existing hotels and motels, businesses, commercial buildings,
apartments, and condominiums contracted prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance shall also have stalled smoke detectors by or before January 1, 1991.
The smoke detectors installed in existing structures may be battery operated.
If a battery operated detector is installed, it must contain a tamper resistant
cover to protect the batteries. The batteries shall be periodically replaced
and maintained so that the detector is always operational. It is the
responsibility of the owner of the real estate and the occupier of the real
estate or premises to maintain any smoke detector in workable condition.
   e.   These smoke detectors installed in already constructed buildings or
structures shall conform in every way to the requirements of smoke detectors in
new construction except they may be battery operated.
(Ord. No. 1139, § 3, 1-10-90)
Sec. 6-61 Inspections.
   a.   The Electrical Inspector or the Fire Chief of the Town of Schererville
or their designee may enter into any building, structure, office, apartment,
condominium, residence or such other place where a smoke detector is required
at any reasonable time in order to inspect the smoke detectors.
   b.   The Electrical Inspector or the Fire Chief or their designee may make
such rules and regulations and other requirements consistent with the intent of
this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1139, § 4, 1-10-90)
Sec. 6-62 Violations and Fines.
   a.   Should any inspection reveal a violation of this ordinance, whether
intentional or not, the inspector may issue a warning allowing the owner or
occupier or other responsible person sufficient time, not to exceed thirty (30)
days, to comply with this ordinance. The inspector may, in his opinion, not
grant a violator any deferment to correct the violation. Should the inspector
grant an extension, in no event, may an occupancy permit be granted, if one has
not already been issued until this ordinance has been complied with.
   b.   Any violation of this ordinance may subject the owner, occupier, or
responsible person of a building, structure, residence, business or other
premises covered by this ordinance to the following penalties.
      1.   Immediate closing and condemnation as unsafe any covered structure
and removing all persons, or not allowing any persons in or on the premises
unless or until the violation is corrected.
      2.   A fine up to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) each day of the
violation. This fine may be imposed cumulatively.
      3.   Civil action to enforce this ordinance for noncompliance with all
costs and attorneys fees of the actions to be imposed upon the violator.
(Ord. No. 1139, § 5, 1-10-90)
Sec. 6-63 Force Majeure.
   Should any portion of this ordinance be found to be unenforceable, illegal,
or unconstitutional, by any Court of competent jurisdiction, that part shall be
stricken without affecting the enforceability of the remainder of this
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1139, § 6, 1-10-90)
Sec. 6-64 and Sec. 6-65 Reserved For Future Use.
Article 7. Fireworks Regulations.  15
 
Notes
15    I.C. § 22-11-14-1, et seq., addresses “Regulation of Fireworks by Fire
   Marshal”.
Sec. 6-66 Definitions.
   a.   Consumer Fireworks include small fireworks that are defined as small
devices designed to produce an audible effect, such as whistling devices,
ground devices containing fifty (50) milligrams or less of explosive
composition, and aerial devices containing one hundred thirty (130) milligrams
or less of explosive composition. Propelling or expelling charges of a mixture
of charcoal, sulfur, and potassium nitrate are not considered as designed to
produce an audible effect. Aerial devices may include sky rockets, missile type
rockets, helicopter or aerial spinners, roman candles, mines and shells. Ground
audible devices, which include firecrackers, salutes, and chasers. Devices
containing combinations of the effects described as aerial devices and ground
audible devices and Section 8(a) Fireworks are also includable as "Consumer
Fireworks".
   b.   Section 8(a) Fireworks include dipped sticks, wire sparklers,
cylindrical fountains, cone fountains, illuminating torches, wheels, ground
spinner, flitter sparklers, snakes or glow worms, smoke devices, trick
noisemakers such as party poppers, booby traps, snappers and trick matches,
cigarette loads and auto burglar alarms.
   c.   Special Fireworks means fireworks designed primarily to produce visible
or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, including
firecrackers containing more than one hundred thirty (130) milligrams of
explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than forty (40) grams of
pyrotechnic composition and other exhibition display items that exceed the
limits for classification as consumer fireworks. A person may not possess,
transport, or deliver special fireworks, except as authorized under I.C. § 22-
11-14-2.
   d.   Fireworks Exclusions: The following items are excluded in the
definition of fireworks: model rockets, toy pistol caps, emergency signal
flares, matches, fixed ammunition for firearms, ammunition components intended
for use in firearms, muzzle loading cannons, or small arms, shells, cartridges
and primers for use in firearms, muzzle loading cannons, or small arms, indoor
pyrotechnics special effects material, M-80's, cherry bombs, silver salutes,
and any device banned by the federal government.
(Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-67 Special Permit.
   a.   The owner, occupant, or agent of an organization, business or group
that uses any type of fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects materials used
indoor or outdoor, shall apply for a special permit issued by the Town Council
at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the use of the fireworks or
pyrotechnical devices. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits
required by federal or state agencies. The permit must be made available upon
request of the Fire Chief or his designee.
   b.   The storage, use and handling of fireworks and pyrotechnics special
effects shall be in accordance with Indiana Fire Code (675 Indiana
Administrative Code 22), Article 76 and I.C. § 22-11-14 et seq., and current
edition of National Fire Protection Association standards for fireworks.
   c.   An applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) when
submitting the special permit application.
   d.   The special permit application must be approved and signed by the Town
Council and contain the following information to be valid:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of the individual person or company
doing the production or display;
      2.   Name and qualifications of the individual person or operator doing
the production or display;
      3.   Contact name, address and phone for whom the production or display
is being performed;
      4.   A detailed location where the display shall take place;
      5.   Date and time of the display;
      6.   Estimated number of fireworks or pyrotechnical devices to be used
and length of show; and
      7.   A copy of a valid certificate of insurance conditioned for damages
and/or injury to persons or property for said event in the amount of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000) shall be attached to and submitted with
each application for and shall become part of the special permit.
   e.   The above fees or requirements may be waived by the Town Council for
any public fireworks display sponsored by any state or local governmental
agency.
(Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-68 Use and Discharge, Generally.
   The new state law includes the following general provisions that provide
distinct limitations regarding the actual use of the fireworks:
   a.   Age Requirement.  Consumer Fireworks and Section 8(a) Fireworks shall
not be purchased by persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
   b.   Possession by Minors.  Children shall only possess or use any kind of
fireworks when an adult is present.
   c.   Location of Use. Consumer fireworks shall exclusively be used on:
      1.   the user's property; or
      2.   the property of someone who has consented to the use of fireworks on
the property; or
      3.   a location authorized by special permit as a special discharge
location, that is defined as a place designated for the discharge of consumer
fireworks under policies of the State Fire Marshal in effect until the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission adopts rules, as amended from time to
time.
   d.   Exemptions.  This ordinance shall not be construed to prohibit the use
of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies, the sale or use of
blank cartridges for a show, ceremonial purpose, use by military organizations,
the intrastate sale of fireworks not approved for sale in Indiana between
interstate wholesalers, use of indoor pyrotechnics special effects material and
the possession, sale or disposal of fireworks incidental to the public display
of authorized Class B fireworks.
   e.   Time of Use.  A person may utilize Consumer Fireworks and Section
6-66(a) Fireworks on the following specific days, and no other, without a
special permit as follows:
      1.   between 5:00 p.m. and two (2) hours after sunset on June 29, June
30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, and July 9;
      2.   between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on July 4; and
      3.   between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on
January 1.
   f.   Special Permit.  A person seeking to discharge fireworks, except as
permitted in subsection (e) above, must apply for and obtain a special permit
as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-69 Manufacturer, Wholesaler, Importer or Distributor.
   It shall be unlawful for a manufacturer, wholesaler, importer, or
distributor to sell at wholesale, offer to sell at wholesale, or ship or cause
to be shipped into the Town of Schererville fireworks, novelties, or trick
noisemakers unless they hold a valid certificate of compliance issued by the
Indiana State Fire Marshal. This provision applies to nonresidents and
residents of Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-70 Identification of Fireworks.
   All fireworks, novelties, and trick noisemakers shipped into the Town of
Schererville or manufactured and sold in the Town of Schererville, must have
distinctly and durably painted, stamped, printed or marked on the package, box,
or container in which the items are enclosed the exact nature and quantity of
the fireworks contained in the container.
(Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-71 Sales.
   Retailers may not sell Consumer Fireworks until the retailer has met all
permit requirements and has obtained a Certificate of Compliance from the State
Fire Marshal. A Certificate of Compliance issued to a retailer of Consumer
Fireworks is not transferable except to a subsequent owner or operator of a
business at the same location in accordance with the policies and guidelines of
the State Fire Marshal.
(Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 5-23-06)
Sec. 6-72 Revocation of special permits.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates I.C. § 22-11-14 et seq. or the
provisions herein shall be subject to applicable penalties and/or revocation of
their permit to sell fireworks. This provision shall apply to all retailers,
manufacturers, wholesalers, importers, and distributors.
(Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-73 Penalty.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance and Town Code
section shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100)
and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for the first offense; five
hundred dollars ($500) for the second offense; one thousand dollars ($1,000)
for the third offense; two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for the
fourth offense; and seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) for the fifth
and subsequent offenses during a twelve (12) month period of time. All fines
shall be payable to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town, or through the Lake
Superior Court, and payable to the Town for deposit in the Town General Fund.
Each incident that occurs shall constitute and be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1672, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 1706, § 1, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-74 through 6-77 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 8. Unsafe Building Regulations.
Sec. 6-78 Title of Ordinance.
   This ordinance shall be known as "The Unsafe Building Ordinance".
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-79 Administration and Enforcement.
   The Unsafe Building Department shall be responsible for the administration
of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-80 Adoption.
   This ordinance adopts and implements the provisions of Indiana Code, § 36-7-
9-1, et seq., as amended, insofar as such provisions are compatible with the
administrative structure of the Town of Schererville. All proceedings within
the Town of Schererville for the inspection, repair, and removal of unsafe
buildings shall be governed by the provisions of the Indiana Code as stated
herein, and the provisions of this ordinance. In the event the provisions of
this ordinance conflict with the provisions of Indiana Code, § 36-7-9-1, et
seq. , as amended, then the provisions of the Indiana Code shall control.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 3, 2-12-86).
Sec. 6-81 Definitions.
   As used in the ordinance, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   a.   Unsafe Building Department shall mean the Unsafe Building Department of
the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
   b.   Unsafe Building Administrator shall mean the chief administrative
officer of the Unsafe Building Department of the Town of Schererville, and
shall be the enforcement authority hereof.
   c.   Hearing Authority shall mean the Board composed of the following
persons duly appointed by the Town of Schererville, Town Council, namely, the
Town Building Inspector, Town Plumbing Inspector, Town Electrical Inspector,
and Town Engineer. An employee of the enforcement authority may not be
designated as the hearing authority.
   d.   Order shall mean any written directive issued by the Unsafe Building
Department in accordance with Section
6-82.
   e.   Person shall mean any entity capable of holding an interest in real
estate, including (by way of example but not limitation) individuals and
corporations.
   f.   Substantial Property Interest shall mean any right in real estate
susceptible of being affected in a substantial way be actions authorized by
this ordinance, including a fee interest, a life estate or future interest, a
present prossessory interest, or equitable interest of a contract purchaser.
   g.   Unsafe Building shall mean any Building or structure, or any part
thereof, that is in an impaired structural condition or state which renders it
unsafe or dangerous to any person or property; or is a fire hazard; or is a
hazard to public health; or is a public nuisance; or does not comply with
standards for building conditions or maintenance, the violation of which would
be dangerous to any person or property, found in an ordinance enacted by the
Town of Schererville or in a State Law.
   h.   Unsafe Premises shall mean any Unsafe building; or the tract of real
estate on which an unsafe building is located.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 4, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-82 Issuance of Orders in Relation to Unsafe Premises.
   The Unsafe Building Department may issue an order relative to any unsafe
premises to require action, including but not limited to:
   a.   Vacating of an unsafe building;
   b.   Sealing an unsafe building against intrusion by unauthorized persons in
accordance with a uniform standard established by the Town of Schererville;
   c.   Extermination of vermin in and about the unsafe premises;
   d.   Repair of an unsafe building to bring it into compliance with standards
for building condition or maintenance found in ordinances enacted by the Town
of Schererville or State laws;
   e.   Removal of a portion of an unsafe building;
   f.   Removal of an unsafe building.
   The ordered action shall be reasonably related to the condition of the
unsafe premises and the nature and use of nearby properties. The order shall
take precedence over any municipally issued permit relating to building or land
use which is obtained either before or after the order is issued.
   The forces of an order shall expire two (2) years from the day the notice of
the order is given unless one (1) or more of the following events occur within
such two (2) year period:
   a.   A complaint requesting judicial review is filed in accordance with
Section
6-89;
   b.   Work is let out at public bid to a contractor to perform action
required by an order in accordance with Section
6-94;
   c.   A civil action is filed in the Lake County Circuit or Superior Court in
accordance with Section
6-96.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 5, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-83 Contents of Order.
   Any order shall contain the following information:
   a.   The name of the person to whom the order is issued;
   b.   The legal description or address of the unsafe premises that are the
subject of the order;
   c.   The action which the order requires to be accomplished;
   d.   The period of time in which the action is required to be accomplished
measured from the time when the notice of the order is given;
   e.   A statement indicating the exact time and place of the hearing
regarding the order; and that the person to whom the order was issued has a
right to appear at the hearing with or without legal counsel and present
evidence, cross-examine opposing witnesses, and make argument;
   f.   A statement briefly indicating what action can be taken by the Unsafe
Building Department if the order is not complied with;
   g.   A statement indicating the obligation created by Section
6-91 relating to notification of subsequent interest holders and the Unsafe
Building Department;
   h.   The name, address, and telephone number of the Unsafe Building
Department.
   The order shall allow sufficient time in which to accomplish the required
action. In no case shall less than ten (10) calendar days from the day when
notice of the order is given be allowed for compliance with an order.
   In the instance where more than thirty (30) calendar days are allowed by the
order to accomplish the action, the order may require that a substantial
beginning be made in accomplishing the action within a period of thirty (30)
calendar days.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 6, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-84 Service by Publication.
   If service of the order is by publication, the publication shall include the
information required by subsections 'a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e', 'f' g' and 'h' of
Section
6-83 of this ordinance and also a statement indicating generally what action is
required by the order and that the exact terms of the order may be obtained
from the Unsafe Building Department.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 7, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-85 Modification of Orders.
   The Unsafe Building Department may issue an order to a person which has the
effect of modifying the order previously issued to that person.
   If service of the previously issued order being modified was by publication,
it shall be sufficient to serve the subsequent order by publication unless the
Unsafe Building Department has received information in writing that would
enable it to make service in accordance with Section
6-87 by a method other than publication.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 8, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-86 Rescission of Orders.
   The Unsafe Building Department may at any time rescind an order. All persons
who have been issued an order shall be notified of its rescission pursuant to
Section
6-87 by means of a written statement which shall include the following
information:
   a.   The name of the person to whom the statement of rescission of order is
issued;
   b.   The legal description or address of the unsafe premises that are the
subject of the order being rescinded;
   c.   The substance of the order being rescinded;
   d.   A statement that the order is being rescinded;
   e.   The name, address and telephone number of the Unsafe Building
Department.
   If service of the statement of rescission is by publication, the publication
shall include the information provided above.
   If service of the order being rescinded was by publication, it shall be
sufficient to serve the statement of rescission by publication unless the
Unsafe Building Department has received information in writing that would
enable it to make service in accordance with Section
6-87 by a method other than publication.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 9, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-87 Service of Orders and Statements.
   a.   Notice of Orders (including orders which have the effect of modifying a
previous order), notice of statement of rescission, notice of continued
hearings, notice of a statement that public bids are to be let, and notice of
claims for payment shall be given to all persons to whom directed by the
following manner of service, any of which may be used:
      1.   Sending a copy of the order or statement by registered or certified
mail to the residence or place of business or employment of the person to be
notified with return receipt requested; or
      2.   Delivering a copy of the order or statement personally to the person
to be notified; or
      3.   Leaving a copy of the order or statement at the dwelling house or
usual place of abode of the person to be notified.
   b.   In the event service is not obtained by a means described above after
reasonable effort, service may be made by publishing a notice of the order or
statement at least two (2) times in a newspaper authorized by law to publish
notices, which is published in Lake County. Publication may be made on
consecutive days.
   c.   When service is made by any of the means described in this Section,
except by mailing or by publication, the person making service shall make an
affidavit stating that he has made the service, the manner in which made, to
whom the order or statement was issued, the nature of the order or statement,
and the date of service. The affidavit shall be placed on file with the Unsafe
Building Department.
   d.   The time when notice of the order or statement is deemed given is as
follows:
      1.   In case of personal delivery or leaving at the dwelling house or
usual place of abode, the day when the order or statement is delivered to the
person or left at his dwelling house or usual place of abode;
      2.   In the case of mailing, the date shown on the return receipt, or if
no date is shown, the date when the return receipt is received by the Unsafe
Building Department.
      3.   In the case of publication, the date of the second day that
publication was made;
   e.   Notice of orders (including orders which have the effect of modifying a
previous order), notice of statements or rescission, notice of continued
hearings and notice of a statement that public bids are to be let, is not
required to be given to a person holding a property interest in an unsafe
premises if all of the following conditions exist:
      1.   An instrument reflecting the property interest held by the person is
not recorded in the Recorder's Office of Lake County, where the unsafe premises
is located; and
      2.   The order or statement was recorded in accordance with the
provisions of Section
6-90; and
      3.   The Unsafe Building Department has neither received written
information nor has actual notice of the identity of the person who holds a
property interest in the unsafe premises.
   A person who fails to record an instrument reflecting an interest in his
unsafe premises, is deemed to consent to action taken under this ordinance
relative to which notice would otherwise be given.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 10, 2-23-86)
Sec. 6-88 Hearings - Notice and Procedure.
   A hearing shall be held relative to each order. The hearing shall be
conducted by the Hearing Authority. The hearing shall be held on a business day
no earlier than ten (10) calendar days after notice of the order is given. The
Hearing Authority, may, however, take action at the hearing, or before the
hearing if a written request is received by the Unsafe Building Department not
later than five (5) days after notice is given, to continue the hearing
relative to the order so that it will be held on a business day not later than
fourteen (14) days after the hearing date shown on the order. Unless the
Hearing Authority takes action to have the continued hearing held on a
definite, specified date, notice of the continued hearing shall be given to the
person to whom the order was issued at least five (5) calendar days before the
continued hearing date in the manner provided by Section
6-87. If the order which is being considered at the hearing was served by
publication, it shall be sufficient to give notice of the continued hearing by
publication unless the Unsafe Building Department has received information in
writing that would enable it to make service in accordance with Section
6-87 by a method other than publication.
   The person to whom the order was issued, or any person having a substantial
property interest in the unsafe premises which are the subject of the order, or
any other person with an interest in the proceedings, may appear in person or
by counsel at the hearing. Such person shall have the opportunity at the
hearing to present evidence, cross-examine opposing witnesses, and make
argument.
   At the conclusion of any hearing at which a continuance is not granted, the
Hearing Authority may, irrespective of whether the person to whom the order was
issued does or does not appear at the hearing, make findings and take action
either to:
   a.   Affirm the order, or
   b.   Rescind the order; or
   c.   Modify the order, provided, however, that unless the person to whom the
order was issued, or counsel for such person, is present at the hearing, the
Hearing Authority shall have authority only to modify the order in such manner
as to make its terms less stringent.
   If a person to whom an order has been issued requests at a hearing an
additional period of time to accomplish action beyond that time stated in the
order, the Hearing Authority, may grant the request. However, as a condition
for modifying the order to allow the additional time period, the Hearing
Authority may require that the person post a cash performance bond to be
forfeited in the event that the ordered action is not completed within the
additional time period allowed.
   The Hearing Authority shall, at a public hearing, after having given notice
in a newspaper of general circulation in the County of the time and place of
the hearing at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing, adopt a
schedule setting forth the amount of cash performance bonds applicable to
various types of ordered action. The Hearing Authority shall use this schedule
to fix the amount of cash bond required as a condition for modifying the order
to allow additional time to complete the ordered action.
   The record of the findings made and action taken by the Hearing Authority,
at the hearing shall be available to the public upon request. No provision in
this ordinance shall be construed to require affirmative action by the Hearing
Authority or the Unsafe Building Administrator, to give notice of the findings
made and action taken by the Hearing Authority at the hearing to the person to
whom the order was issued, or any other person.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 11, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-89 Judicial Review.
   An action taken to affirm, rescind or modify an order in accordance with
Section
6-88 shall be subject to review by the Lake Circuit or Superior Court. The
review shall be initiated by a verified complaint which shall include the
findings of fact and the action taken by the Hearing Authority. Such complaint
must be filed within a period of ten (10) calendar days after the date when
such action was taken by the Hearing Authority.
   The following persons shall have the right to request judicial review:
   a.   Any person who has a substantial property interest in the unsafe
premises which were the subject of the order by the Hearing Authority.
   b.   Any person to whom the order was issued by the Hearing Authority.
   The appeal shall be an action de novo. The Court may affirm, modify or
reverse the action taken by the Hearing Authority.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 12, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-90 Recording of Orders, Statements and Records and Consequence Thereof.
   Orders issued in accordance with Sections
6-82 or
6-85, statements of rescission issued in accordance with Section
6-86, statements that public bids are to be let as provided in Section 694 and
records of action taken by the Hearing Authority in accordance with Section
6-88 shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Lake County by the
Unsafe Building Department at the fee charged by the Recorder pursuant to
Indiana Code.
   Any person who takes an interest in the unsafe premises which are the
subject of an order, shall, irrespective of whether or not a hearing has been
held, take the interest subject to the terms of the order and specifically in
such a manner that all of the requirements of this ordinance relating to the
issuance of orders, service of orders and affirmation of orders are deemed
satisfied and all of the requirements of this ordinance relating to issuance of
orders and affirmation of orders are deemed satisfied. In the instance,
however, where an interest is taken in the unsafe premises relative to which a
hearing has been held, such person shall take the interest subject to the terms
of the order as modified at the hearing and specifically in such a manner that
all of the requirements of this ordinance relating to the issuance of orders,
service of orders and modification of orders at hearing are deemed satisfied.
   A person who takes an interest in unsafe premises which are the subject of a
statement that public bids are to be let, shall take the interest subject to
the terms of such statement and specifically in such a manner that the notice
of such statements required by Section
6-94 is deemed given to such person.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 13, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-91 Duties of Transferor of Unsafe Buildings - Information to be Supplied
on Transfer or Disposal of Unsafe Buildings.
   Any person who has been issued and received notice of an order relative to
the unsafe premises, shall, if the order has not been complied with:
   a.   Supply full information regarding the order to any person who may take
or agree to take a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises. This
information shall be supplied prior to the time when there is any transfer or
agreement to transfer any substantial property interest in the unsafe premises;
   b.   Supply the following information to the Unsafe Building Department in
writing within five (5) calendar days after there is any transfer or agreement
to transfer a substantial property interest in the unsafe building;
      1.   The full name, address and telephone number of the person taking a
substantial property interest in the unsafe premises; and
      2.   A true and accurate copy of the legal instrument under which the
transfer or agreement to transfer the substantial property interest is
accomplished.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 14, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-92 Emergency Action.
   If in any instance the Unsafe Building Department shall find that it is
necessary to take emergency action with reference to unsafe premises in order
to protect life, safety, or property, the Unsafe Building Department may cause
such action as necessary to protect life, safety, or property to be performed
without issuing an order or giving notice.
   Such emergency action shall be limited to removing any immediate danger. The
cost incurred in taking or having such action taken may be recovered against
the persons who have fee interest or life estate interest in the unsafe
premises at the time the Unsafe Building Department found it necessary to take
emergency action by the filing of a civil action in Lake County Circuit or
Superior Court by the Unsafe Building Department. Costs of such justify an
action shall not be borne by either the Unsafe Building Department, any other
Department of the Town, or the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 15, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-93 Receivers - Appointment and Powers.
   In accordance with Section
6-98, a receiver may be appointed by a Court of competent jurisdiction relative
to unsafe premises subject to the following provisions:
   a.   The purpose of the receivership shall be to take possession of the
unsafe premises for a period of time sufficient to accomplish and pay for
repairs and improvements.
   b.   The receiver may not be a not-for-profit corporation whose primary
purpose is the improvement of housing conditions in Lake County, or may be any
other capable person residing in Lake County.
   c.   The receiver shall collect and use the rents and other income of the
unsafe premises despite any prior assignments thereof, to repair or remove the
defects as required by the order, and may, upon approval by the Court, make
repairs and improvements in addition to those specified in the order or
required by the applicable statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations.
   d.   The receiver shall have the power to make any contracts and do all
things necessary to accomplish the repair and improvement of the unsafe
premises.
   e.   The Court may, after hearing, authorize the receiver to obtain moneys
needed to accomplish the repairs and improvements by the issuance and sale of
notes or receiver's certificates bearing such interest as the Court may fix.
The notes or certificates shall be a first lien upon the unsafe premises and
the rents and income thereof, and shall be superior to all existing assignments
of rents, liens, mortgages or other encumbrances on the property, except taxes,
provided that within sixty (60) days following the sale or transfer for value
of the notes by the receiver, the holder thereof shall file notice in the
County Recorder's Office which shall contain the following information:
      1.   The legal description of the tract of real estate on which the
unsafe building is located;
      2.   The face amount and interest rate of the note or certificate.
      3.   The date when the note or certificate was sold or transferred by the
receiver; 4. The date of maturity.
   Upon payment to the holder of the receiver's note or certificate of the face
amount and interest, and upon filing in the County Recorder's Office of a sworn
statement of payment, the lien of such note or certificate shall be released.
Upon failure of payment, the lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose
as in the case of mechanic's liens or mortgages; however, such suit must be
commenced within two (2) years after the date of default.
   The receiver shall be entitled to the same fees, commissions, and necessary
expenses as are receivers in actions to foreclose mortgages and said fees,
commissions and expenses shall be paid out of the rents and incomes of the
property in receivership.
   The issuance of an order concerning unsafe premises is not a prerequisite to
the appointment of a receiver nor does such an order prevent the appointment of
a receiver. In the event the Unsafe Building Department requests the
appointment of a receiver, all persons having a substantial pro interest in the
unsafe premises shall be made party defendants.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 16, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-94 Repairs - Public Bids for Work Pursuant to Order.
   a.   The Unsafe Building Department may cause the action required by an
order to be performed by a contractor if the following has occurred:
      1.   An order has been issued to each person having a substantial
property interest in the unsafe premises; and
      2.   Service of an order in the manner provided by Section
6-87 has been made on each person having a substantial property interest in the
unsafe premises which are the subject of the order, and
      3.   Each of the orders has been affirmed or modified at hearing in such
manner that all persons having a substantial property interest in the unsafe
premises which are the subject of each of the orders are currently subject to
an order requiring the accomplishment of substantially identical actions; and
      4.   The order, as affirmed or modified at the hearing, has not been
complied with, or, having once been complied with, is not now being complied
with; and
      5.   The order is not being reviewed in accordance with Section
6-89.
   b.   This work may be performed in the following manner:
      1.   If the cost of this work is estimated to be less than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), the Unsafe Building Department, acting by and through its
own workmen and equipment owned or leased by it, may perform the work. Notice
that this works is to be performed shall be given to all persons with a
substantial property interest, in the manner provided in subsections 'c' and
'd' of this section at least ten (10) calendar days before the date of
performance of the work by the Unsafe Building Department. This notice shall
include a statement that an amount representing a reasonable estimate of the
cost incurred by the Unsafe Building Department in processing the matter and
performing the work, may, if not paid, be recorded after a hearing as a lien
against all persons having a fee interest or life estate interest in the unsafe
premises.
      2.   If the estimated cost of this work is five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) or more, this work shall be let out at public bid to a contractor
licensed and duly qualified under the laws of the State of Indiana and any
applicable Town ordinances. The obligation to pay costs imposed by Section
6-95 is based on the condition of the unsafe premises at the time the public
bid is accepted. Changes occurring in the condition of the unsafe premises
after public bid was accepted shall not eliminate or diminish this obligation.
   Bids may be solicited and accepted for work on more than one property if the
bid reflects an allocation of the bid amount among the various unsafe premises
in proportion to the work to be accomplished. The portion of the bid amount
attributable to each of the unsafe premises shall constitute the basis for
calculating the portion of the costs defined under Section
6-95.
   c.   All persons who have a substantial property interest in the unsafe
premises and are subject to an order of the Unsafe Building Department shall be
notified about the public bid in accordance with Section
6-87 by means of written statement, which shall include the following
information:
      1.   The name of the person to whom the order was issued;
      2.   A legal description or address of the unsafe premises that are the
subject of the order;
      3.   A statement that a contract is to be let at public bid to a licensed
contractor to accomplish work to comply with the order;
      4.   A description of work to be accomplished;
      5.   A statement that both the bid price of the licensed contractor who
accomplishes the work and an amount representing a reasonable estimate of the
cost incurred by the Unsafe Building Department in processing the matter of
unsafe premises may, if not paid, be recorded after a hearing as a lien against
all persons having a fee interest or life estate interest in the unsafe
premises;
      6.   A statement that the owner has the right to elect in writing within
a period of five (5) calendar days to retain any or all materials salvaged from
the work;
      7.   The time of the bid opening;
      8.   The place of the bid opening;
      9.   The name, address and telephone number of the Unsafe Building
Department.
   d.   If service of the notice of statement that public bids are to be let is
by publication, the publication shall include the information provided for in
Subsection `c' except that it need only include a general description of the
work to be accomplished. The publication also shall include a statement that a
copy of the statement of public bid may be obtained from the Unsafe Building
Department.
   e.   Notice of the statement that public bids are to be let shall be given
to all persons having a substantial property interest in the property and are
subject to an order of the Unsafe Building Department at least ten (10)
calendar days before the date of the public bid.
   f.   Persons having a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises
which are the subject of a statement that public bids are to be let may, as
their interest allows, within a period of five (5) calendar days after they
have received notice of such statement, elect by sending a statement in writing
to the Unsafe Building Department to retain any or all of the materials
resulting or salvaged from such work. In the absence of such statement, the
Unsafe Building Department may decide the method of disposal of such materials.
   g.   If action in accordance with this Section is being taken on the basis
of an order which was served by publication, it shall be sufficient to serve
the statement that the Unsafe Building Department, acting by and through its
agents, intends to perform the work or that public bids are to be let by
publication unless the Unsafe Building Department has received information in
writing that would enable it to make service in accordance with Section
6-87 'b' a method other than publication.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 17, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-95 Liability for Costs or Work Pursuant to Order.
   When action required by an order is performed by the Unsafe Building
Department, acting by and through its agents, or by a contractor in accordance
with Section
6-94 each person who held a fee interest or life estate interest in the unsafe
premises, from the time when the order requiring the work performed was
recorded to the time that the work was completed, shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the following costs:
   a.   The actual cost of the work performed by the Unsafe Building
Department, acting by and through its agents, or the bid price of work
accomplished by the contractor in accordance with Section
6-94.
   b.   An amount which represents a reasonable forecast of the average
processing expense which will be incurred by the Unsafe Building Department in
taking all the technical, administrative and legal actions relative to a
typical unsafe premises which are necessary under this ordinance, so that the
action required by an order may be performed by a contractor in accordance with
Section
6-94. In calculating the amount of the average processing expense, the
following costs may be considered:
      1.   The cost of obtaining reliable information about the identity and
location of persons who own a substantial property interest in the unsafe
premises;
      2.   The cost of notice of orders, notice of statements of rescission,
notice of continued hearing, and notice of statements that public bids are to
be let or that the Unsafe Building Department, acting by and through its
agents, intends to accomplish the work and notice that a hearing may be held on
the amounts indicated in the record in accordance with Section
6-87;
      3.   Salaries for employees;
      4.   The cost of supplies, equipment and office space.
   The amount of such average processing expense shall be determined by the
Unsafe Building Department at a public hearing after notice has been given in
the same manner as is required for other official action of the Unsafe Building
Department. In determining such average processing expense, it shall be
acceptable to fix the amount at a full dollar amount, which is an even multiple
of ten (10).
   c.   If all or any part of the actual costs incurred by the Unsafe Building
Department, acting by and through its agents, or the bid price and the
applicable average processing expense remain unpaid relative to any unsafe
premises, other than unsafe premises owned by a government, after a period of
fifteen (15) days has elapsed after the completion of the work, and if the
Administrator of the Unsafe Building Department, in his discretion, determines
that there is a reasonable probability of obtaining recovery, the Unsafe
Building Department shall prepare a record which shall state the following:
      1.   The name and last known address of each person who held a fee
interest or life estate interest in the unsafe premises from the time the order
requiring the work to be performed was recorded to the time that the work was
completed;
      2.   The legal description or address of the unsafe premises that were
the subject of the work;
      3.   The nature of the work that was accomplished;
      4.   The amount of the unpaid bid price of the work that was
accomplished;
      5.   The record of the unpaid average processing expense.
   This record shall be in form prescribed by or approved by the State Board of
Accounts. The Unsafe Building Administrator shall swear to the accuracy of the
record prepared before the Clerk of the Circuit Court and shall thereupon
deposit the record in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court. Notice that
the record has been filed and that a hearing on the amounts indicated in the
record may be held, shall be sent to the person or persons named in the record,
as provided in Section
6-87. If, within thirty (30) days of that notice, the Clerk of the Circuit
Court has received a written petition from the person named in the record,
objecting to the claim for payment and requesting a hearing, the Clerk of the
Circuit Court shall enter the cause on the Docket of the Circuit or Superior
Court as a civil action and a hearing on the question shall be held pursuant to
the provisions of Indiana Code, § 4-22-1 (§ 4-22-1-1-4-22-1-30). However,
issues that could have been determined pursuant to Section 12 of this ordinance
shall not be entertained at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing on
the petition, the Court shall either sustain the petition or enter a judgment
for the amounts recorded or for modified amounts against the person or persons
named in the record. If no petition is received at the end of thirty (30) days
after notice to the person or persons named in the record, the Clerk of the
Circuit Court shall enter the cause on the Docket of the Court and the Court
shall enter a judgment for the amounts stated in the record which shall
constitute a debt and be a lien on all the real and personal property of the
person named or the joint and several debt and lien on the real and personal
property of the persons named. Such lien on any real property shall be
perfected as against all creditors and purchasers when the judgment is entered
on the judgment docket of the Court. Such lien on personal property shall be
perfected by filing a lis pendens notice in the appropriate filing office as
prescribed in Trial Rule 63.1 of the Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure. Any
judgments rendered under this Section may be enforced in the same manner as all
other judgments are enforced.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 18, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-96 Unsafe Buildings Fund.
   a.   A fund designated as the "Unsafe Building Fund" shall be established in
the operating budget of the Unsafe Building Department. Any balance remaining
at the end of any fiscal year shall be carried over in the Fund for the
following year and shall not revert to the General Fund.
   b.   Money for such Fund may be received from any source, including
appropriations by municipal, state or federal legislative authority, and
donations. The following money shall be deposited in such fund:
      1.   Money received as payment for or settlement of obligations or
judgments created in accordance with this ordinance.
      2.   Money received from bonds posted in accordance with Section
6-88.
      3.   Money received in satisfaction of receivers' notes or certificates,
issued in accordance with Section
6-93, which were purchased with use of money from the Unsafe Buildings Fund.
   c.   The Unsafe Building Department may take action to transfer all or any
part of any money which may exist in the "Building Demolition, Repair and
Contingent Fund" created by Indiana Code, § 36-7-9-15, to the Unsafe Building
Fund.
   d.   Money included in the Unsafe Building Fund may be used for the purposes
directly related to carrying out any provisions of this ordinance which shall
include, by way of example and not of limitation:
      1.   The cost of obtaining reliable information about the identity and
location of persons who own a substantial property interest in unsafe premises.
      2.   The cost of an examination of an unsafe building by a registered
architect or registered engineer not employed by the Town of Schererville or
Unsafe Building Department.
      3.   The cost of surveys necessary to determine the location and
dimensions of real estate on which an unsafe building is located.
      4.   The cost of accomplishing notice of orders, notice of statements of
rescission, notice of continued hearing and, notice of statements that public
bids are to be let in accordance
with Section
6-87.
      5.   The bid price of work accomplished by a contractor in accordance
this ordinance.
      6.   The cost of accomplishing work on an emergency basis in accordance
with Section
6-92.
      7.   The cost of notes or receiver certificates issued in accordance with
Section
6-93.
   e.   Payment of money from the Unsafe Building Fund shall be made in
accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 19, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-97 Inspection and Power of Enforcement.
   a.   In those cases in which the owners or those in possession of a building
refuse inspection, an inspection officer of the Unsafe Building Department may
obtain an inspection warrant from any Court of record in Lake County in order
to determine if the building is an unsafe building. The Court shall issue the
warrant subject to the following:
      1.   The person seeking the warrant must establish that the building to
be searched or inspected is to be searched or inspected as part of a legally
authorized program of inspection which naturally includes that building or that
there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object,
activity or circumstance which legally justifies such a search or inspection of
the building;
      2.   An affidavit indicating the basis for the establishment of one of
the grounds described in subsection '1' above must be signed under oath or
affirmation by the affiant;
      3.   The issuing judicial official must examine the affiant under oath or
affirmation to verify the accuracy of the matters indicated by the statement in
the affidavit.
   b.   The warrant shall be validly issued only if it meets the following
requirements:
      1.   It must be signed by the issuing judicial official and must bear the
date and hour of its issuance above his signature with a notation that the
warrant is valid only forty-eight (48) hours following its issuance;
      2.   It must describe, either directly or by reference to the affidavit,
the building where the search or inspection is to occur and be accurate enough
in description so that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor
of the building can reasonably determine from the warrant what property it
authorizes an inspection of;
      3.   It must indicate the conditions, objects, activities or
circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal;
      4.   It must be attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to
obtain the warrant.
   c.   Any warrant issued under this Section for a search or inspection shall
be valid for only forty-eight (48) hours after its issuance, must be personally
served upon the owner or possessor of the building and must be returned within
seventy-two (72) hours.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 20, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-98 Civil Action by the Planning and Building Department.
   The Unsafe Building Department may initiate a civil action in the Circuit or
Superior Court of Lake County with regard to an unsafe premises. Costs of such
an action shall not be borne by either the Unsafe Building Department, or the
Town of Schererville. The Circuit or Superior Court may, as is appropriate,
grant one or more of the following kinds of relief in such an action:
   a.   If the following is shown, grant a mandatory or prohibitory injunction
against any person that will cause the order to be complied with:
      1.   An order was issued to the person but this order does not need to
set a hearing date;
and
      2.   The person has a property interest in the unsafe premises that is
the subject of the order that would allow the person to take the action
required by the order, and
      3.   The building which is the subject of the order is an unsafe
building; and
      4.   The order is not being reviewed in accordance with Section
6-89.
   b.   Impose a civil forfeiture not to exceed One Thousand ($1,000.00)
Dollars against any person if the provisions of Subsection (a) of this Section
are shown.
   No forfeiture shall be imposed which is substantially less than the cost of
complying with the order unless such cost exceeds One Thousand ($1,000.00)
Dollars. The effective date of such forfeiture may be postponed for a period
not to exceed thirty (30) days after which the Court may order forfeiture
reduced or stricken if it is satisfied that all work necessary to fully comply
with the order has been done.
   On request of the Unsafe Building Department, the Court shall enter a
judgment in the amount of the civil forfeiture. In any instance, where there is
more than one (1) party defendant, the civil forfeiture shall be separately
applicable to each defendant.
   The amount of any civil forfeiture which is collected shall be deposited in
the Unsafe Building Fund.
   c.   Appoint a receiver as provided in Section
6-93.
   This issuance of an order relative to such unsafe premises is not a
prerequisite to the appointment of a receiver. If an order has been issued
relative to such unsafe premises, it shall not prevent the appointment of a
receiver.
   In any case in which the Unsafe Building Department requests the appointment
of a receiver, all persons having a substantial property interest in the unsafe
premises shall be made party defendants.
   d.   If the following is shown, authorize the Unsafe Building Department to
cause the action required by the order to be performed by a contractor licensed
and qualified under applicable State law and municipal ordinances:
      1.   An order was issued to each person having a substantial property
interest in the unsafe premises; and
      2.   Each of the orders has been affirmed or modified at a hearing in
such manner that all persons having a substantial property interest in the
unsafe premises which are the subject of each of the orders are currently
subject to an order requiring the accomplishment of substantially identical
actions; and
      3.   The order, as affirmed or modified at the hearing, has not been
complied with, or, having once been complied with, is not now being complied
with; and
      4.   The building which is the subject of the order is an unsafe
building; and
      5.   The order is not being reviewed in accordance with Section
6-89.
   In any case in which the Unsafe Building Department requests authority to
cause the action required by the order to be performed by a contractor, all
persons having a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises shall be
made party defendants.
   The cost of accomplishing the work and the processing expenses incurred by
the Unsafe Building Department computed in accordance with the provisions of
Section
6-95 both may, after a hearing, be entered by the Court as a judgment against
persons having a fee interest or life estate interest in the unsafe premises.
   e.   Set a hearing to be held within ten (10) days of the filing of a
complaint alleging the existence of an unsafe premises presenting an immediate
danger to the health and safety of the surrounding community which is
sufficient to warrant emergency action. Upon a finding at the hearing in favor
of the Unsafe Building Department, the Court may either:
      1.   Authorize the Unsafe Building Department to cause the action
necessary to make the premises safe (which may include any action described
under Section
6-82) to be immediately performed by a contractor licensed and qualified under
applicable State law and municipal ordinances; or
      2.   Authorize the Unsafe Building Department to cause the action
necessary to make the premises safe (which may include any action described
under Section
6-82 to be immediately performed by a contractor licensed and qualified under
applicable State law and municipal ordinances after defendants have had a
reasonable time, as established by the Court, to make the unsafe premises safe
and have failed to accomplish completely the necessary action. In granting
relief under this Subparagraph (2), the Court shall set a date certain for the
completion of the necessary action and shall hold a hearing within ten (10)
days thereafter to determine whether the necessary action has been accomplished
completely.
   The issuance of an order relative to such unsafe premises is not a
prerequisite to the authorization by the Court to cause action to be performed
on the unsafe premises. If an order has been issued relative to such unsafe
premises, it shall not prevent the authorization by the Court to cause action
to be performed on the unsafe premises.
   In any case in which the Unsafe Building Department requests authority to
cause action on the unsafe premises to be performed by a Contractor, all
persons having a substantial property interest in the unsafe premises shall be
made party defendants.
(Ord No. 1001, § 21, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-99 Criminal Sanctions for Violations.
   A person who:
   a.   Remains in, uses, or enters any building in violation of an order made
under this ordinance;
   b.   Knowingly obstructs, damages, delays or interferes with any persons
engaged or property used in performing any work or duty pursuant to an order
made under this ordinance; or
   c.   Fails to comply with Section
6-91; commits a Class C infraction. Each day that the violation continues
constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 22, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-100 Change of Venue - Change of Judge.
   No change of venue shall be allowed in any action filed pursuant to Sections
6-89,
6-95 or
6-98, but a change of judge shall be allowed, in the same respect and manner as
provided in other civil matters.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 23, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-101 Precedence of Actions.
   Any action filed pursuant to Sections
6-89 or
6-98 takes precedence over other pending litigation, and the action shall be
tried and determined by the Court at as early a date as possible.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 24, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-102 General Statements.
   Wherever in the Building Regulations of the Town of Schererville or the Town
of Schererville Unsafe Building Ordinance, it is provided that anything must be
done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the Unsafe Building
Administrator, or any other officer of the Town of Schererville, this shall be
construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether the
rules and standards established by ordinance have been complied with; and no
such provisions shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers
as to what such regulations or standards shall be, power to require conditions
not prescribed by ordinance, or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary
or discretionary manner.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 25, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-103 Supplemental Definition.
   The definition of an unsafe building contained in Section-4 of this
6-81 is supplemented to provide minimum standards for building condition or
maintenance in the Town of Schererville, Indiana, by adding the following to
said definition:
   Any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an unsafe building, provided that
such conditions or defects exist to the extent that life, health, property, or
safety of the public or its occupants are endangered.
   a.   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, or other means of exit is not of
sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate
means of exit in case of fire or panic.
   b.   Whenever the stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (1½) times the
working stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose, or location.
   c.   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new buildings of
similar structure, purpose, or location.
   d.   Whenever any portion, member, or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
   e.   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (½) of that specified for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the
working stresses permitted for such buildings.
   f.   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled, or settled
to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction.
   g.   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of
1) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 2) faulty construction; 3) the
removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building; 4) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy
of its foundation; or 5) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely
collapse.
   h.   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
   i.   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third ( 1/3 ) of the base.
   j.   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows
thirty-three (33%) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or fifty (50%) percent damage or deterioration of its non-
supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
   k.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake, or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become
1) an attractive nuisance to children, or 2) freely accessible to persons for
the purpose of committing unlawful acts.
   l.   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this
Town, or of any law or ordinance of this State or Town relating to the
condition, location or structure of buildings.
   m.   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member, or portion less than fifty (50%) percent, or in any supporting
part, member, or portion less than sixty-six (66%) percent of the 1) strength,
2) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or 3) weather-resisting
qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed
building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location.
   n.   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangements, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Unsafe Building
Administrator to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a
condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.
   o.   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections, or hearing apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Unsafe
Building Administrator to be a fire hazard.
   p.   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after
the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so
as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 26, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-104 Rights Already Accrued.
   This ordinance shall not affect any pending litigation or rights or
obligations which have already accrued.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 27, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-105 Recordation.
   Two (2) copies of this ordinance shall be on file in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 28, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-106 Construction.
   Matters which fall within the scope of this ordinance shall be governed
exclusively by the foregoing provisions.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 29, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-107 Severability and Repealer.
   If any provisions of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this
ordinance are declared to be severable.
   Ordinance No. 938, and 992, as well as any and all other ordinances and/or
parts of ordinances specifically in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance, are repealed.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 30, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-108 Amendment or Supplement.
   All amendments or supplements to Indiana Acts of 1981, Public Law 309, or
Indiana Code, § 36-7-9 et seq., enacted by the General Assembly, and which
become law subsequent to the taking effect of this ordinance, shall be deemed
and construed insofar as applicable, as amendments and/or supplements to this
ordinance and this ordinance shall be deemed and construed as amended and
supplemented accordingly without further act, amendment or supplement of this
ordinance by the Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana. If and in
the event that any provision, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
inconsistent with any provision, clause or phrase of Indiana Acts 1981, Public
Law 309 or Indiana Code, § 36-7-9-1 et seq., as from time to time amended or
supplemented, then and in such event the provisions of such Indiana Acts and
Indiana Code and Public Law shall be controlling and this ordinance shall be
deemed and construed as amended accordingly without further act, amendment or
supplement respecting this ordinance by the Town Council of the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1001, § 31, 2-12-86)
Sec. 6-109 through Sec. 6-111 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 9. Refuse and Garbage Regulations.
Sec. 6-112 Definitions.  16
   a.   Refuse - is all putrescible and non-putrescible wastes (except human
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, recyclables, and yard waste.  17
   b.   Garbage - is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   c.   Rubbish - is limited to putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste,
both combustible and non-combustible, including paper, cardboard, bottles, tin/
steel/aluminum cans, grass clippings, small amounts of branches (Not to exceed
two (2) cubic yards) cut in four (4) foot lengths and securely bundled, glass,
bedding, rags, crockery, wood, small amounts of construction and demolition
debris (not to exceed two (2) cubic yards) cut in four (4) foot lengths and
securely bundled, and one (1) large item per week (furniture and appliances.)
   d.   Recyclables - include, but are not limited to, newspaper and all
inserts, glass bottles and jars (clear, brown, green), tin/steel/aluminum cans,
plastic containers (1-2-3 liter plastic pop containers, milk and water jugs,
any liquid laundry detergent bottles). Additional recyclables may be added as
markets develop upon the mutual agreement between both parties without
modification of the contract.
   e.   Yard Waste - is compostible organic waste resulting from the
maintenance of lawns, gardens, landscaping and trees which include grass
clippings, tree branches, and leaves (in excess of thirty-two (32) gallons).
   f.   Dwellings - is a dwelling, or a portion of a dwelling, used primarily
as a place of abode for one (1) or more persons, including apartment houses of
not more than four (4) dwelling units, but not including motels and hotels.
   g.   Dwelling Unit - is a dwelling, or portion of a dwelling, used by one
family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes. Contractors shall be entitled
to compensation accordingly; however, such service shall be limited to one (1)
collection per week of a maximum of four (4) thirty-two (32) gallon containers.
   h.   Garbage Container - is a container made of plastic or metal, equipped
with suitable handles and tight-fitting covers, and plastic garbage bags or
similar receptacles. Containers shall be watertight and of a type approved by
the Town with a capacity of not less than twenty (20) gallons and not more than
thirty-two (32) gallons. Containers shall be provided by the household and
shall be kept clean, neat, and sanitary at all times.
   i.    Recycling Container - is an eighteen (18) gallon plastic container
used for the placement of discarded recyclables.
   j.   Commercial Unit - is a building, or a part thereof, or an establishment
for the conduct of a single business. Apartment houses, motels, hotels,
schools, churches, civil and athletic centers, and all other establishments
which produce refuse, but which are not dwelling units, shall be considered as
commercial units. Private unit developments (P.U.D.) shall also be considered
as commercial units.
   k.   Town Dumpster - A container used and maintained by the Town of
Schererville for the purposes of dumping refuse as defined in Section
6-115, by residents and employees of the Town of Schererville.
   l.   Refuse Collection Center - An area designated by the Town Manager, or
other authorized person, containing one or more dumpsters to be used for the
collection and disposal of refuse.
   m.   Out of Town Generated Refuse - Refuse, as defined in Section
6-115, generated by or from sources outside the Town of Schererville.
   n.   Commercial Refuse - Refuse, as defined in Section
6-115 generated from or by commercial establishments, enterprises or businesses
operating within or without of the Town of Schererville.
   o.   Multifamily Structure - A building designed and used exclusively for
residential purposes and containing two (2) or more dwelling units separated by
a common party wall or otherwise structurally attached.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 1, 2-8-89; Ord. No. 1650, § 2, 7-13-05)
 
Notes
16    I.C., § 13-7-1-11, defines "garbage"; I.C., § 13-7-1-9, defines
   "disposal".
      Editor's Note: Definitions set forth in paragraph a through j are from
17 paragraph 2 of the "Contract for Collection of Refuse and Recyclables" dated
   April 28, 1993 which is on file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer and
   available for public inspection during regular business hours.
Sec. 6-113 Minimum Refuse Requirements.  18
   a.   All refuse to be collected and disposed of from within the Town shall
be placed in containers suitable for collection and disposal.
      1.   Garbage shall be placed in containers made of plastic or metal,
equipped with suitable handles and tight fitting covers, and plastic garbage
bags or similar receptacles. Said containers shall be watertight and of a type
approved by the Town with a capacity of not less than twenty (20) gallons and
no more than thirty-two (32) gallons. Said containers shall be provided by the
household and shall be kept clean, neat, and sanitary at all times.
      2.   Rubbish containers shall be of a kind suitable for securing and
holding rubbish and shall be convenient for collection and of such weight as to
be handled readily, when filled, by one (1) average man.
      3.   A standard eighteen (18) gallon recycling bin shall be provided by
the Town for use by the residents to contain recyclable material.
   b.   1.   All garbage refuse containers shall be placed for collection at
ground level on the owner’s property, on or adjacent to the curbing and within
the right-of-way of a street or alley to be accessible not more than six (6)
feet from the side of the street or alley from which collection is to be made.
      2.   The property owner shall not place such garbage or refuse container
or containers for collection at such collection location before 6:00 p.m. the
day before scheduled collection, and shall remove same from the collection
location before dusk on the day of collection, or as soon thereafter on said
collection date as is practical. In no event shall the property owner leave the
garbage or refuse container or containers in said collection location overnight
on the day of collection if collection has been made as scheduled.
      3.   When the garbage container is not placed for collection on said
schedules collection day, as set forth herein, the same shall be placed inside
the residential building. Alternatively, a property owner may place the garbage
container in a location behind the building line of their residential building.
In all instances, a property owner shall provide screening, fencing or covering
that effectively screens said container. It is the purpose and intention herein
to have placement of garbage containers at residential properties so as to be
unobtrusive and not creating negative impact on the residential areas of
Schererville, as well as for maintenance and preservation of property values
and quality of life in the town for all town residents.
   c.   1.   All recyclable containers shall be placed for collection at ground
level on the owner’s property, on or adjacent to the curbing and within the
right-of-way of a street or alley to be accessible not more than six (6) feet
from the side of the street or alley from which collection is to be made.
      2.   The property owner shall not place such recyclable container or
containers for collection at such collection location before 6:00 p.m. the day
before scheduled collection, and shall remove same from the collection location
before dusk on the day of collection, or as soon thereafter on said collection
date as is practical. In no event shall the property owner leave the recyclable
container or containers in said collection location overnight on the day of
collection if collection has been made as scheduled.
      3.   When the recyclable container is not places for collection on said
scheduled collection day, as set forth herein, the same shall be placed inside
the residential building. Alternatively, a property owner may place the
recyclable container in a location behind the building line of their
residential building. In all instances, a property owner shall provide
screening, fencing or covering that effectively screens said recyclable
container. It is the purpose and intention herein to have placement of
recyclable containers at residential property so as to be unobtrusive and not
creating negative impact on the residential areas of Schererville, as well as
for maintenance and preservation of property values and quality of life in the
Town for all Town residents.
   d.   If there are any requirements in this Article which conflict with this
Section, the provisions of this Section shall prevail.
   e.   Any person or property owner violating the provisions of these refuse
and recyclable garbage container regulations shall be subject to issuance of
citation for such violation and penalties consistent with the general penalty
provisions of the Town Code, as amended from time to time. If a violation
continues, each day’s violation shall be deemed a separate violation and
addressed accordingly.
(Ord. No. 1801, 2-8-12)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The provisions of §
18 6-113 are the ordinance requirements set forth in paragraph 19 of the April
   28, 1993 contract for collection of refuse and recyclables.
Sec. 6-114 Dumping and Littering.  19
   No person shall throw, place, deposit, dispose of, collect or bring any
garbage, rubbish, or other refuse as defined in Section
6-115 'a' in or upon any public or private premises, including but not limited
to easements and rights of way, within the limits of the Town of Schererville,
except as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 2-8-89)
 
Notes
19    I. C., § 35-45-3-2, addresses "littering".
Sec. 6-115 Systematic Refuse Collections.
   a.   Refuse shall be systematically collected by the Town of Schererville,
or its designee, agent, employee, or contractor, and will be removed and
disposed of only at such times designated by the Town of Schererville or its
refuse collection contractor and at such places designated by, and in
conformity with, provisions of this ordinance.
   b.   All containers for the deposit of garbage or rubbish shall be located
upon the alley line or roadway or a place to be readily accessible for removing
and emptying them in such a manner as to not interfere with the use of the
alley or roadway.
   c.   In those premises wherein the collection and removal of garbage is not
accomplished by use of an alley, the containers shall be placed adjacent to the
street in a neat, orderly, and sanitary manner on the day designated for the
collection and removal of garbage and rubbish by the Town of Schererville or
its designee.
   d.   The disposal of out of town generated refuse and commercial refuse
within the Town of Schererville is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 3, 2-8-89)
Sec. 6-116 Residential Garbage Collection Fee.
   a.   There is hereby established a garbage collection fee for residential
dwelling units, as previously defined, in the sum of twenty-eight dollars
(28.00) per month, per unit (family). (Ord. No. 1326A, § 1, 6-12-02; Ord. No.
1728, § 1, 2-13-08; Ord. No. 1749, § 1, 2-11-09; Ord. No. 1766, § 1, 2-10-10;
Ord. No. 1805, 3-14-12; Ord. No. 1955. § 1, 5-13-20; Ord. No. 2003, § 1, 4-10-
24)
   b.   Said garbage collection fee shall be billed and collected as part of
the normal water and sewer billing system of the Town of Schererville. (Ord.
No. 1326, § 2, 1-24-96)
   c.   In the event that any individual garbage collection fee is paid later
than thirty (30) days from date of billing, an additional charge in the amount
of ten percent (10%) shall be assessed. (Ord. No. 1326A, § l, 3-13-96)
Sec. 6-117 Recycling Containers.
   Recycling containers shall remain the property of the Town of Schererville.
Damaged, lost, or stolen containers shall be replaced for a fee of six dollars
($6.00) per container. Recycling containers shall remain with the dwelling unit
upon transfer of ownership of residency; however, new customers may obtain
additional containers for a fee of six dollars ($6.00) per container.
(Ord. No. 1326A, § 3, 6-12-02)
Sec. 6-118 Yard Waste Regulations.
   a.   Yard Waste is defined as compostible organic waste resulting from the
maintenance of lawns, gardens, landscaping and trees which include grass
clippings, tree branches and leaves.
(Ord. No. 1291, § 1, 10-12-94)
   b.   Commencing October 1, 1994, and thereafter, yard waste must be
collected for disposal by the Town through its waste disposal contractor only
if it is properly packaged. Proper packaging of yard waste shall be
accomplished in the following proscribed manner:
      Yard waste must not be co-mingled with other forms of garbage, refuse or
rubbish or waste product and must be packaged in one of the following
acceptable methods:
      1.   Loosely, in molded plastic or metal trash containers with a capacity
of not less than twenty (20) gallons not more than thirty-two (32) gallons; or
      2.   In biodegradable Kraft paper bags; or
      3.   If yard waste is sticks and branches, such yard waste must be
securely bundled into packages not exceeding two (2) cubic yards in size, and
cut into lengths not exceeding four (4) feet.
(Ord. No. 1291, § 2, 10-12-94)
   c.   Proper packaging of yard waste further requires that each yard waste
package must have a specially designated sticker affixed to it. The designated
stickers are available for purchase by the citizens of Schererville at a cost
of one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) each through the Town of
Schererville's Clerk-Treasurer's Office.
(Ord. No. 1291, § 3, 10-12-94)
   d.   Any yard waste not properly packaged and bearing the required sticker
will not be collected by the Town or its waste disposal contractor; such
improperly packaged yard waste shall be tagged with a red sticker by the Town's
waste disposal contractor.
      Further, that any provisions stated elsewhere in any other ordinance(s)
which are inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this ordinance as it
pertains to yard waste disposal collection and fees, are deemed null and void.
      That if any provision of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect any other provision of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1291, § 4, 10-12-94)
Sec. 6-119 Use of Town Dumpster.
   No person or entity shall throw, place, deposit, or otherwise dispose of any
refuse in a Town Dumpster without first obtaining a Permit for the use of said
Dumpster.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 4, 2-8-89)
Sec. 6-120 Permits.
   a.   Only residents of the Town of Schererville shall be issued permits for
the use of disposal of refuse in the Town Dumpster.
   b.   Any resident of the Town of Schererville employing the use of a Town
Dumpster shall, prior to the proposed disposal of any material, first obtain a
permit for the use of such Dumpster.
   c.   No more than six (6) permits may be issued in any twelve (12) month
period to any individual resident or entity of the Town of Schererville.
   d.   Permits for the disposal of refuse at the Town Dumpster may be obtained
at the
   Clerk/Treasurer's Office or at such other town department as designated by
the Board of Town Council from time to time, upon the completion, submission,
and approval of an "Application for the Disposal of Refuse" provided by the
Town of Schererville and the payment of a user fee as established by the Town
Council of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 5, 2-8-89)
Sec. 6-121 Guidelines.
   The Clerk-Treasurer or other town department shall not issue a permit for
the disposal of refuse in the Town Dumpster unless all the following criteria
are met:
   a.   The applicant must be a Schererville resident.
   b.   The applicant must complete an "Application for the Disposal of Refuse"
form.
   c.   The applicant must certify that none of the debris is hazardous wastes
or materials or that the refuse is not commercial refuse.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 6, 2-8-89)
Sec. 6-122 Saturday Dumping.
   The Town does not ordinarily provide staff nor facilities for dumping at the
town dumpster on Saturdays, however, with reasonable notice to the officials of
the Town as designated by the Town Council from time to time, a citizen may
arrange for proper and lawful dumping on a Saturday during reasonable hours or
at arranged and agreed upon hours.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 7, 2-8-89)
Sec. 6-123 Fees.
   Any resident or entity of the Town of Schererville disposing of refuse in
the Town Dumpster shall, prior to being granted a permit for the use of such
facility, complete and submit an application and no fees for such permit or
dumping will be required. Said permit shall be valid for a period of one (1)
day. The Valid Day of said permit shall be designated on the permit by the
Clerk Treasurer after his/her approval of the application.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 8, 2-8-89)
Sec. 6-124 Revocation of Rights.
   The Town of Schererville specifically reserves the right to eliminate the
use of the Town Dumpster at any time or deny permits without prior notice.
(Ord. No. 1097, § 9, 2-8-89)
Sec. 6-125 Recycling Plan Requirements.
   a.   Each person or entity applying for a building permit for a business or
multi-family structure pursuant to Section
7-50 shall provide, as part of their building permit application, a Recycling
Plan, on a Town provided form, describing how their solid waste will be
managed, including reduction, reuse and recycling steps taken to reduce their
waste stream, which solid waste plan shall be subject to approval as provided
for by Section
7-54.
   b.   Each person or entity applying for a wrecking permit shall provide a
recycling plan for demolition, on a Town provided form, describing how the
demolition material will be managed, including reduction, reuse, and recycling
steps taken to reduce its waste stream, which solid waste plan shall be subject
to approval as provided for by Section
7-54.
(Ord. No. 1650, § 3, 7-13-05)
Sec. 6-126 Form for Right to Dispose Refuse at Town Dumpster.
Application to Dispose Refuse
at the Town Dumpster
Name:                                    
Address:                                 
Telephone:                                 
Material to be disposed:
Amount of material to be disposed:
Size of material to be disposed:
   I certify that no hazardous wastes as defined in Indiana Code 13-7-1-12 and no
commercial refuse is to be disposed of in the Town Dumpster for purposes of this
permit and the foregoing information is true and accurate.
                                       
                        Signature
Date:                                
                              (Ord. No. 1097, 2-8-89)
 
Sec. 6-127 Form for Dumping Permit.
Dumping Permit
Town of Schererville Dumpster
                                                                 , of                                                                     
                           (Address)
                                                                         , is now authorized to use the Town Dumpster
for the                                                                                                                                  
               (City, State and Zip Code)
disposal of refuse for a period of one day.
            Approved:                                                                           
                        Clerk-Treasurer
Date Issued:                                                   
Valid for Dumping On:                                   
 
(Ord. No. 1079, 2-8-89)
Sec. 6-128 Fines.
   Any person who violates any section of this ordinance shall be fined not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) on the first violation, not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on the second violation, and
not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for every violation thereafter.
(Ord. No. 1650, § 4, 7-13-05)
Sec. 6-129 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 10. Weeds, Rank Vegetation and Grass.  20
 
Notes
20    I.C. § 36-7-10-3, authorized the Town to charge for the removal of weeds and
   rank vegetation, and have the same collected as taxes.
Sec. 6-130 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   a.   Weeds - Any uncultivated plant occurring naturally which has a tendency
to dominate or drive out grasses and desirable plants.
   b.   Rank Vegetation - Uncontrolled growth of any plants including but not
limited to weeds and grasses.
   c.   Grass - Any of various green plants having simple leaves, and generally
cultivated for lawns.
   d.   Developed Lot - A subdivided (or unsubdivided) and developed lot on
which a residence or dwelling house has been erected.
   e.   Special Subdivided Lot - A lot within a subdivision for which the plat
of subdivision has been on record with the Recorder of Lake County for more
than five (5) years, and upon which there is no residence or dwelling house.
   f.   Undeveloped Lot and Other Property - A parcel of real estate zoned for
residential, apartment, commercial or industrial use, on which if residential
there is no residence or dwelling house erected, and excepting a “Special
Subdivided Lot”.
   g.   Adjacent - The sharing of a common property line, common highway or
right-of-way, a common easement or common utility or transportation corridor.
To tie near or close to; in the neighborhood or vicinity of.
   h.   Owner - The person, firm, partnership, trust or corporation, including
municipal corporation, owning, leasing, or controlling real property in the
Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1525, § 1, 4-11-01)
Sec. 6-131 Real Estate Excluded from this Chapter.
   The following real estates are excluded from the provisions of this chapter:
   a.   Wooded Areas - A natural area with a high density of trees.
   b.   Wetlands - Wetlands as defined by state and federal statutes.
   c.   Legally Protected Areas - Legally preserved and protected prairies and
habitats, and other legally mandated forms of vegetation (i.e. erosion control
areas).
   d.   Certain Corridors - Unsubdivided utility and transportation corridors
which are not adjacent to residentially developed real estate.
   e.   Agricultural Property - Property under cultivation for the production
of grain and produce; property used as pastureland for the raising and feeding
of livestock.
   f.   Covenanted Property - Commercial or industrial real estate which is,
either through subdivision or site plan approval, subject to a covenant to
plant and maintain a landscaped area shall continue to be bound by the
applicable covenant so long as the covenant requirements are equal to or
greater than the provisions of this chapter.
   g.   Public Lands - Property owned by federal, state, or county governments.
(Ord. No. 1525, § 2, 4-11-01)
Sec. 6-132 Permitting Excessive Growth of Weeds, Rank Vegetation and Grass to
be Declared a Public Nuisance.
   a.   It is a public nuisance for an owner of a developed lot or a special
subdivided lot to allow weeds, rank vegetation or grass to grow to a length
exceeding six inches (6") on his property within the Town.
   b.   It is a public nuisance for an owner of an undeveloped lot or other
property to allow weeds, rank vegetation or grass to grow to a length exceeding
ten inches (10") on his property within the Town.
   c.   Nothing herein is intended to or shall prohibit the cultivation of a
garden or legally cultivated crops.
(Ord. No. 1525, § 3, 4-11-01)
Sec. 6-133 Procedures for Enforcement.
   a.   In addition to all other remedies, the Town of Schererville may proceed
to abate the public nuisance existing by reason of the excessive growth of
weeds, rank vegetation and/or grass by proceedings in any court of general
jurisdiction, including proceedings to abate, to sanction and to recover costs
from the owner, including but not limited to court costs and attorney fees.
   b.   The Town Manager, or designee, shall be responsible for the
administration of these provisions and regulations. Further, in abating any
violations of this chapter, the Town may perform the work required or may
contract with and authorize outside contractors to perform the abatement work
required.
   c.   As to the owner of property in violation of this chapter at least a
seven (7) day written notice to remove weeds, rank vegetation, and/or grass
shall be issued by the Town Manager, or designee, and shall be served upon the
owner by a Town employee or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the owner's last known mailing address as indicated in the
property records of the Lake County Auditor. The notice to the owner shall
include the following:
      1.   The address of the real property;
      2.   The date of the notice;
      3.   The address and telephone number of the Town employee issuing the
notice;
      4.   A warning that in the event that the weeds, rank vegetation, and/or
grass is not removed within a specified period of time after delivery of the
notice, the Town will abate the nuisance and seek recover of the actual costs
involved in the removal;
      5.   A warning that this notice is a "continual abatement notice";
      6.   A statement that the "continuous abatement notice" serves as notice
to the property owner that each subsequent violation during the same year for
which the initial notice of the violation was provided may be abated by the
Town, and that future notices may be posted on the property at the time of
further abatement by the Town; and
      7.   That the owner has seven (7) days to appeal the notice to the Town
Manager.
   d.   Upon the failure, refusal or declination of an owner to bring the
property into compliance within the time specified in the written notice, in
addition to all other available remedies, the town may:
      1.   Issue a citation for the violation of this chapter;
      2.   Enter upon the property and cut the weeds, rank vegetation, and/or
grass at the expense of the owner; and
      3.   Add to the expense of the removal and cutting, an administrative
cost of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   e.   In the event that the Town enters upon the property of the owner after
the written notice and cuts the weeds, rank vegetation, and/or grass, then
within thirty (30) days after doing so, or as soon thereafter as practicable,
the Town shall send the owner a bill for the actual costs incurred by the Town
in abating the nuisance violation plus the Town's administrative cost. The bill
shall require payment within thirty (30) days of the bill issuance and advise
the owner of the right to appeal the bill to the Town Manager within seven (7)
days of the bill issuance.
   f.   Upon receipt of a Notice to abate or bill, the owner may notify the
Town Manager of any objection to the Notice to abate or bill. This objection
communication shall be in writing to the Town Manager and shall specify the
street address, legal description of real property involved, and reason for
objection to the notice to abate or bill. Any such correspondence must be
received by Town Manager within the amount of time set out in the notice to
abate or bill.
   g.   Upon receipt of such objection correspondence, the Town Manager shall
cause the objection to be investigated. No further action shall be pursued
against that owner to abate the nuisance or pay the bill for abatement until
resolution of the objection thereto. The Town Manager shall notify the owner of
the final written decision on the objection by first class mail and the
decision of the Town Manager shall be final.
   h.   Upon the failure of the owner of an undeveloped lot or other property
to bring his property into compliance after receipt of the citation, in
addition to all other remedies, the Town may:
      1.   Issue additional citations and each day of violation shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter;
      2.   Enter upon the property and cut the weeds, rank vegetation or grass
at the expense of the owner; and/or
      3.   Add to the expense of removal and cutting, an administrative cost of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and reasonable attorney fees.
   i.   If the Town enters upon the property of the owner of either the
developed lot or special subdivided lot or the undeveloped lot or other
property, and cuts the weeds, rank vegetation, and/or grass, then within thirty
(30) days after doing so, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the Town shall
send the owner a bill for the costs incurred by the Town in abating the
violation, and an additional amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for
administrative costs of the proceedings of work and collection.
   j.   Within ten (10) days following the mailing of the bill, the owner may
appeal the notice of violation or the bill issued by a written notice to the
Town Manager that the owner disputes the violation or the bill, and the
specific reason or reasons therefore. If the owner files an appeal, the Town
Manager shall set the matter for an administrative hearing. The hearing shall
be conducted as an informal administrative hearing, after which the Town
Manager, or his delegate, shall provide the owner with a written decision, and
either affirm, rescind or modify the finding of a violation or the amount of
the bill.
   k.   Whenever the Town of Schererville may enter the property of an owner to
cut excessive weeds, rank vegetation and/or grass, the Town may use either its
own work forces or may contract with an outside agency to perform the work.
(Ord. No. 1525, § 4, 4-11-01; Ord. No. 1787, § 1, 6-8-11; Ord. No. 1814, 7-11-
12)
Sec. 6-134 Expense as a Lien Against the Property of the Owner.
   In the event that an owner of property fails, refuses or declines to pay a
bill issued within the time specified in the bill, the Town Manager may certify
the amount of the bill to the Lake County Auditor, plus any additional
administrative costs incurred in making the certification. Pursuant to I.C. §
36-7-10.1-4, as amended from time to time, the Lake County Auditor shall place
the total amount certified on the tax duplicate for the tax duplicate for the
property affected, and the total amount, including any accrued interest, shall
be collected as delinquent taxes are collected, and upon collections, said
amounts collected shall be disbursed to the General Fund of the Town.
(Ord. No. 1525, § 5, 4-11-01; Ord. 1787, § 2, 6-8-11)
ARTICLE 11. NUISANCES.
Sec. 6-138 Nuisances Declared.  21
   A nuisance is determined to be whatever is injurious to health, comfort,
safety or indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free
use of property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment
of life or property or the aesthetic well being of the community.
(Ord. No. 1347, § 1, 8-14-96; Ord. No. 1677, § 1, 9-13-06)
 
Notes
21    I.C., § 7.1-2-6, et seq., addresses nuisances.
Sec. 6-139 Specific Nuisances Highlighted.
   a.   The Town of Schererville has determined that the following list shall
be considered examples of nuisances that shall receive written notice prior to
issuance of a citation:
   Trash, abandoned vehicles, overgrown vegetation, inoperable vehicles,
garbage, refuse, untethered animals whether livestock or pets, sewage,
obnoxious odors, conditions that attract infestation of rodents, insects,
domestic or wild animals to create a health hazard or unsightly conditions,
which act as detriment or danger to or interferes with, or unreasonably hurts
or hinders the citizens of this community that have a right to the use and
enjoyment of their property, or encroach injuriously on the enjoyment of
others' lives or property, or to the aesthetic well being of the Town.
   b.   The Town of Schererville has determined that the following list shall
be considered examples of nuisances that shall be immediately corrected:
   No person within a residential or commercial zoning district shall make or
cause to be made any sounds or vibrations perceptible without the aid of
instruments beyond the property boundary of the sound or vibration source that
interferes with, or unreasonably hurts or hinders the residents of this Town
who have a right to the use and enjoyment of their property, or encroaches
injuriously on the enjoyment of others' lives or property.
   c.   The list of nuisances set forth in subsections a. and b. are not to be
considered limitations of any other condition which may qualify as a nuisance
pursuant to the definition set forth in Section
6-138.
(Ord. No. 1694, § 1, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-140 Designation of Nuisances.
   The Town Council, the Police Department, the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Town Manager and/or his assistant or designees may determine what condition can
be considered a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1347, § 4, 8-14-96)
Sec. 6-141 Written Notice - Fines.
   a.   Once a condition has been determined to be a nuisance pursuant to
Section
6-139, subsection a., written notice shall be given to the owner or occupier of
any parcel of real estate constituting or having upon it a nuisance condition
under this sub-paragraph. The owner or occupier shall correct the condition
within seven (7) days of receipt of this notice. An extension of time may be
applied for through the Town Manager but any granting of an extension shall be
in the sole discretion of the Town Manager. In the event that the Town Manager
declines to grant an extension, then the property owner shall be responsible to
correct said nuisance condition within the prescribed seven (7) day period of
time. In the event that the owner or occupier fails or refuses to correct the
nuisance condition within the prescribed seven (7) day time, that action shall
be deemed a violation of these nuisance regulations, as amended from time to
time, and a citation may be issued requiring the owner or occupier to appear in
the Schererville Town Court on said citation.
(Ord. No. 1347, § 5, 8-14-96)
   b.   Once a condition has been determined to be a nuisance pursuant to
Section
6-139, subsection b., notice shall be given to the owner or occupier of any
real estate constituting or having upon it a nuisance condition under this sub-
paragraph. The owner or occupier shall immediately correct the condition. In
the event that the owner or occupier fails or refuses to correct the nuisance
condition immediately, that action shall be deemed in violation of these
nuisance regulations, as amended from time to time, and a citation may be
issued and served requiring the owner or occupier to appear in the Schererville
Town Court on said citation.
   c.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense; five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the second offense; one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
the third offense; two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the fourth
offense; seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for the fifth and
subsequent offenses during a twelve (12) month period of time. All fines shall
be payable to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town, or through the Town Court and
payable to the Town of Schererville, and deposited to the Town General Fund.
   d.   Each incident that occurs shall constitute and be deemed a separate
offense.
   e.   In the event that a violation persists, in addition to the assessment
and imposition of fines and penalties, the Town, through its Town Attorney, may
proceed to seek injunctive relief to enjoin the nuisance, pursuant to the
applicable provisions of I.C. § 36-1-6-4, as amended from time to time, and all
other applicable law.
   f.   The Schererville Town Court shall be the court of proper venue and
jurisdiction for the enforcement of this ordinance, except for any injunctive
relief, which shall be sought through the Lake Circuit Court or Lake Superior
Courts.
(Ord. No. 1694, § 2, 5-23-07)
Sec. 6-142 Town Action.
   If the owner or occupier fails or refuses to correct the condition
considered a nuisance within the prescribed time allowed, the Town may elect to
correct the condition by use of town employees or outside contractors.
(Ord. No. 1347, § 7, 8-14-96)
Sec. 6-143 Liens.
   The cost of such correction shall be the responsibility of the owner or
occupier and said cost shall become a lien upon the real estate in issue.
(Ord. No. 1347, § 8, 8-14-96)
Sec. 6-144 Recording and Interest.
   The Town shall protect its right to a lien by recording a written instrument
indicating that it is a lien under this ordinance and stating the amount due
the Town. The amount due the Town shall accumulate interest on any unpaid
balance at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the date of recordation
of the lien.
(Ord. No. 1347, § 9, 8-14-96)
Sec. 6-145 Legal Action.
   A copy of said lien shall be delivered to the owner or occupier of the real
estate. Failure or refusal to pay said amount within thirty (30) days of its
receipt will subject said owner or occupier to legal action by the Town's
attorney to collect said amount due together with accrued interest, court
costs, costs of collection including reasonable attorney fees, and any other
costs or expense that the Court may allow.
(Ord. No. 1347, § 10, 8-14-96)
Sec. 6-146 and Sec. 6-147 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 12. OBSCENE MATERIAL.  22
 
Notes
22    I.C., § 35-49-2-1, et seq., addresses obscene matters or performances, and
   applies "contemporary community standards".
Sec. 6-148 Obscene Literature, Devices and Shows.
   a.   Any persons in the Town of Schererville, Indiana, who shall directly or
indirectly sell or lend, or offer to sell or lend, or give away, or offer to
give away, or in any manner exhibit with or without intent to sell, lend or
give away, any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, lithograph, engraving,
picture, motion picture, daguerreotype, photograph, stereoscopic picture,
model, cast, instrument or article which is obscene, or write or print any
circular, handbill, card, book, pamphlet, advertisement or notice of any kind
stating when, how, where, or of whom any of the obscene articles or things
hereinbefore mentioned can be purchased, borrowed, presented, or otherwise
obtained, or are manufactured or whoever knowingly manufactures, displays to
the public, or draws with intent to sell or have sold or prints such articles
or things shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not exceeding
three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   b.   For purposes of this section, obscene items as listed herein, are
defined as those items listed herein which depict or describe sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, in a patently offensive way and taken
as a whole, appeal to the prurient interest in sex lacking serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value, which sexual conduct shall include but
not be limited to fornication, cunnilingus, sodomy, fellatio, sadism,
masochism, bestiality, excretory functions, masturbation and lewd exhibition of
the genitals.
(Ord. No. 624, § 1, 11-13-74)
Sec. 6-149 Preliminary Determination of Obscenity - Hearing and Notice
Requirements.
   When an affidavit filed against a person charging him with the violation of
any of the provisions of this act, the court or judge thereof shall examine
said affidavit to determine if the material alleged to be obscene referred to
in said affidavit is sufficient to justify further proceedings in the
prosecution thereof. If the judge determines that said alleged harmful material
is not, on its face, unlawful he shall dismiss the affidavit. If the judge
determines that said alleged obscene material set out in the affidavit does, on
its face, constitute sufficient cause to proceed with the prosecution, the
judge shall fix a time and place for a hearing to determine whether probable
cause exists for the issuance of a warrant of arrest and the court shall direct
the Clerk of the court to issue notice immediately with a copy of the affidavit
attached to the person against whom the affidavit is filed giving said person
at least five (5) days notice of said hearing and that said person may subpoena
witnesses and present evidence at said hearing. The hearing shall, in no event,
be held later than ten (10) days following the issuance of said notice.
(Ord. No. 624, § 2, 11-13-74)
Sec. 6-150 Probable Cause.
   If after hearing evidence the court finds that probable cause exists for the
issuance of a warrant of arrest, he shall direct the clerk to issue immediately
a warrant of arrest returnable forthwith. If the court finds after hearing
evidence that no probable cause exists for the issuance of a warrant of arrest
he shall enter such finding of record and dismiss the said affidavit. It is the
purpose of this section to provide any person charged with the commission of an
offense under this Act a prior adversary hearing before the issuance of a
warranty for the arrest of said person and the seizure of evidence incidental
to such arrest.
(Ord. No. 624, § 2, 11-13-74)
Sec. 6-151 through Sec. 6-153 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 13. Motor Vehicle Public Safety Regulations.
Division I. Junk Motor Vehicle Declared Nuisances.  23
 
Notes
23    I. C., § 9-22-1-1, et seq., addresses abandoned, salvaged and scrap
   vehicles.
Sec. 6-154 Definitions.  24
   As used in this Division, the following have the following meanings unless
otherwise designated:
   a.   Abandoned vehicle means:
      1.   a vehicle located on public property illegally;
      2.   a vehicle left on public property continuously without being moved
for three (3) days;
      3.   a vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of that property for more than forty-eight
(48) hours;
      4.   a vehicle from which there has been removed the engine,
transmission, or differential or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable and left on public property;
      5.   a vehicle that has been removed by an authorized towing service upon
request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance other than this chapter
if the vehicle once impounded is not claimed or redeemed by the owner or his
agent within fifteen days of its removal; or
   b.   Authorized towing service means a business that engages in moving or
removing disabled vehicles, and, once removed, to store or impound vehicles,
and that has been requested by the Schererville Police Department to tow
vehicles.
   c.   Automobile scrapyard means a business organized for the purpose of
scrap metal processing, automobile wrecking, or operating a junkyard.
   d.   Bureau refers to the bureau of motor vehicles.
   e.   Officer means a member of the city police department.
   f.   Owner means the last known record titleholder of a vehicle according to
the records of the bureau under Indiana Code, § 9-17-2-1, et seq.
   g.   Parts refers to all components of vehicle that as assembled do not
constitute a complete vehicle.
   h.   Private property means all property other than public property.
   i.   Public property means a public right-of-way, street, highway, alley,
park, or other state, county, or municipal property.
   j.   Vehicle refers to an automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semi-
trailer, tractor, bus, school bus, recreational vehicle, or motorized bicycle.
(Ord. No. 897, § 2, 7-14-82)
 
Notes
24    I. C., § 9-13-2-1, defines "abandoned vehicles"; I. C., § 9-13-2-179,
   defines "Towing Service"; and I.C., § 9-13-2-196, defines "vehicle".
Sec. 6-155 Exceptions.  25
   This Division does not apply to:
   a.   a vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed for
operation on privately owned raceways;
   b.   a vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of the
United States who is on active duty assignment;
   c.   a vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot or at a commercial vehicle
servicing facility;
   d.   a vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an automobile
scrapyard, or,
   e.   a vehicle registered and licensed under Indiana Code, § 9-18-12 as an
antique vehicle.
(Ord. No. 897, § 3, 7-14-87)
 
Notes
25    I. C., § 9-22-1-1, sets forth exceptions.
Sec. 6-156 Responsibility of Owner.
   The owner of an abandoned vehicle is responsible for the abandonment and is
liable, to the extent of the market value of the vehicle, for all or the costs
incidental to the removal, storage, and disposal of the vehicle or its parts.
(Ord. No. 897, § 4, 7-14-82)
Sec. 6-157 Vehicles in Possession of Person other than Owner.
   a.   When an officer discovers a vehicle in the possession of a person other
than the owner and the person cannot establish his right to the possession of
that vehicle, the vehicle shall be taken to and stored in a suitable place. The
bureau shall be notified within seventy-two (72) hours of the location and
description of the vehicle. Upon receipt of notification, the bureau shall
cause a search to be made to determine and notify the owner.
   b.   If the owner of the vehicle cannot be determined, the bureau shall
declare the vehicle abandoned and provide for its disposal in accordance with
this Division.
   c.   If the properly identified owner or lienholder appears at the site of
storage before disposal of the vehicle or parts and pays all proper costs
incurred against it at that time, then the vehicle or parts shall be released.
A copy of the release of all vehicles or parts shall be sent to the bureau. The
release must contain the owner or lienholder’s signature, name, address,
vehicle or parts description, costs, and date of release.
   d.   If the vehicle is not released to the owner or lienholder, the bureau
shall declare the vehicle abandoned and provide for disposal in accordance with
this Division.
(Ord. No. 897, § 5, 7-14-82)
Sec. 6-158 Removal of Abandoned Vehicles.  26
   a.   An officer who finds a vehicle or parts believed to be abandoned shall
attach in a prominent place a notice tag containing the following information:
      1.   The date, time, officer's name, city police department, and address
and telephone number to contact for information.
      2.   That the vehicle or parts are considered abandoned.
      3.   That the vehicle or parts will be removed after seventy-two hours.
      4.   That the owner will be held responsible for all costs incidental to
the removal, storage, and disposal, and if not paid the owner’s registration
privileges will be suspended on that car.
      5.   That the owner may avoid costs by removal of the vehicle or parts
within seventy-two (72) hours.
   b.   If the tagged vehicle or parts are not removed within that seventy-two
(72) hour period, the officer shall prepare a written abandoned vehicle report
of the vehicle or parts including information on the condition, missing parts,
and other facts that might substantiate that the market value is less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Photographs shall be taken to describe the condition
of the vehicle or parts.
   c.   If, in the opinion of the officer, the market value of the abandoned
vehicle or parts is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), the officer shall
immediately dispose of the vehicle to an automobile scrapyard. A copy of the
abandoned vehicle report and photographs relating to the abandoned vehicle
shall be forwarded to the bureau. The police department shall retain the
original records and photographs for at least two (2) years.
   d.   If, in the opinion of the officer, the market value of the abandoned
vehicle or parts is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, the officer, before
placing a notice tag on the vehicle or parts, shall make a reasonable effort to
ascertain the owner or person who may be in control of the vehicle or parts.
After seventy-two (72) hours, the officer shall require the vehicle or parts to
be towed to a storage area.
(Ord. No. 897, § 6, 7-14-82)
 
Notes
26    I. C., § 9-22-1-11, addresses tagging of abandoned vehicles or parts; and
   I. C., §§ 39-22-12-12 and 9-22-1-13 address duties of the Police Officer.
Sec. 6-159 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles.  27
   a.   Within seventy-two (72) hours after removal of an abandoned vehicle to
a storage area under this chapter, the Police Department shall prepare and
forward to the bureau an abandoned vehicle report containing a description of
the vehicle including the make, model, engine number, if any, identification
number, and the number of the license plate, and request that the bureau advise
the Police Department of the name and most recent mailing address of the owner
and any lienholder.
   b.   The bureau shall dispose of abandoned vehicles in accordance with
Indiana Code, § 9-22-1, et seq.  
(Ord. No. 897, § 7, 7-14-82)
 
Notes
27    I.C., §§ 9-22-1-21 and 9-22-1-22, address disposal procedures.
Sec. 6-160 Maximum Towing and Storage Charges.
   a.   An authorized towing service may charge for towing or removing a
vehicle under this Chapter as follows:
Call-Out                       Current Rate       New Rate
Daytime Tow                    $90.00             $100.00
Nighttime Tow                  $100.00            $110.00
Daytime Winch and Tow          $65.00             Up to $50.00 (In Addition to
                                                  Tow)
Nighttime Winch and Tow        $75.00             $100.00
Daytime Winch Only             $65.00             $70.00
Nighttime Winch Only           $75.00             $85.00
Flatbed (Daytime or Nighttime) Owner’s DiscretioOwner’s Discretion
Disconnect Linkage (No Keys)   Not Listed         $20.00
 
 
Storage Per Day:
Outside $15.00 $25.00
Inside  $20.00 $35.00
 
(Ord. No. 1 , § l, 4-8-92; Ord. No. 1487, § 1, 5-10-00; Ord. No. 1636, § 1, 1-
19-05; Ord. No. 1687, § 1, 12-13-06)
   2.   That Ordinance No. 1059 is further amended by adding the following
language:
      a.   If two (2) or more trucks are used, the charge shall be based on two
(2) callouts.
      b.   The rates set forth above are the maximum allowed, and applied to
passenger cars and other vehicles up to one (1) ton. The cost of towing of
vehicles heavier than one (1) ton are to be charged at the discretion of the
individual towing firms.
Sec. 6-161 Towing Contracts.
   To facilitate the removal of abandoned vehicles or parts or vehicles
declared public nuisances, the police department may enter into towing
contracts or agreements for the removal and storage of abandoned vehicles and
parts.
(Ord. No. 897, § 9, 7-14-82)
Sec. 6-162 Liability for Loss or Damage.  28
   Neither the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property from which an
abandoned vehicle or parts are removed nor the police department, authorized
towing service, or automobile scrapyard is liable for loss or damage to the
vehicle or parts occurring during its removal, storage, or disposition.
(Ord. No. 897, § 10, 7-14-82)
 
Notes
      I.C., § 9-22-1-32, addresses liability. Editor's Note: §§
28 6-170 -
   6-173 deleted "Administrative" and inserted "Manager".
Sec. 6-163 Role of Police Department.
   The Police Department is given the responsibility for removal, storage, and
disposal of abandoned vehicles and parts thereof.
(Ord. No. 897, § 11, 7-14-82)
Sec. 6-164 Abandoned Vehicle Fund.
   Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 9-22-1-30, an "Abandoned Vehicle Fund" is
established for the purpose of this Division at applicable state law.
Sec. 6-165 Severability Clause.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or
constitutionality of the remaining portions of this ordinance; it is being
expressly declared that this ordinance and each section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause and phrase would have been adopted regardless of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. No. 897, § 12, 7-14-82)
Sec. 6-166 through Sec. 6-169 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Restrictions on Traffic When Danger to Public is Declared.
Sec. 6-170 Declaration by Town Manager.
   The Town Manager shall declare that the conduct, use, possession or flow of
traffic upon any street, road, highway, alley or other public thoroughfare
poses or might pose a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. No prior
notice is necessary for such declaration.
(Ord. No. 882, § 1, 2-15-82)
Sec. 6-171 Markings on Signs Required.
   The Town Manager may restrict or prohibit the conduct, use, possession, or
flow of traffic upon such streets or roads and notify the police department or
other town departments to assist in erecting signs, barricades, barriers,
markings, lights or other implements to effect the purpose of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 882, § 2, 2-15-82)
Sec. 6-172 Listing of Roads Affected and Alternate Routes.
   a.   The Town Manager shall designate, in writing, which street, road,
alley, highway or public thoroughfare with reasonable particularity he declares
are a danger to the public health and also declare with reasonable
particularity the time in which the restricted use or closing of said street or
road shall take effect and when said restricted use or closing may be removed,
is possible.
   b.   Suitable and convenient alternate routes may be provided for traffic so
diverted and appropriately marked.
(Ord. No. 882, § 3, 2-15-82)
Sec. 6-173 Penalties.
   Any person violating the restrictions imposed by this ordinance shall be
guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and in all civil actions and criminal actions,
oral evidence of the location and content of such signs, barricades, barriers,
markings, lights or other implements shall be prima facie evidence of the
adoption and application of such restriction or closing by the Town Manager and
the validity thereof. The town authorities shall upon request by any party in
any action at law furnish, under seal of the Town Clerk-Treasurer's certified
copy of the resolution or declaration by the Town Manager establishing the
restriction or closing in question which shall be accepted by any court as
conclusive proof of such designation by the Town Manager.
(Ord. No. 882, § 5, 2-15-82)
Sec. 6-174 through Sec. 6-177 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 14. Firearms Regulation.  29
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Senate Enrolled Act No. 410 which will become effective July 1,
29 1994, does not affect firearm ordinances which were legally in effect before
   January 1, 1994.
Sec. 6-178 Discharge of Firearms Prohibited.
   After the legal passage, adoption, and publication of this ordinance, it
shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to discharge or fire, or
to suffer, permit, or allow to be discharged or fired, any pistol, gun, rifle,
shotgun, air rifle, BB gun, or any other firearm whatsoever, including bows and
arrows, within the municipal limits of the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana, except as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 418, § 1, 12-8-65 and Ord. No. 438, § 1, 1-11-67)
Sec. 6-179 through Sec. 6-185 Reserved for Future Use.
Sec. 6-186 Penalties.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this ordinance, shall for each and every violation thereof be guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined Twenty-Five Dollars
($25.00) for each offense. Each day that a violator permits a violation to
exist shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. No. 418, § 8, 12-8-65; Ord. No. 438, § 3, 1-11-67; Ord. No. 24, § 5,
________)
Sec. 6-187 through Sec. 6-189 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 15. Miscellaneous Public Safety Regulations.
Sec. 6-190 Fires Prohibited in Railroad Rights-of-Way.
   a.   From and after the legal passage, adoption and publication of this
ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause to
be ignited or initiated any fire whatsoever upon any railroad right-of-way
within the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, for which adequate
measures have not been taken prior to igniting or starting said fire to insure
that said fire will not spread through or to adjacent or contiguous real
property or improvements thereto or foliage growing or situated thereon or
cause any damage to personal property of any nature whatsoever located on
adjacent or contiguous real property.
(Ord. No. 437, § 1, 1-11-67)
   b.   For the purposes of this ordinance, the term "adequate measures" shall
be defined as and only deemed to include the appropriate and necessary
placement and situation of necessary personnel and fire fighting equipment by
the person, firm or corporation starting or igniting such fire to prevent the
spread of the same.
(Ord. No. 437, § 2, 1-11-67)
   c.   From and after the legal passage, adoption and publication of this
ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit
or allow any fire whatsoever ignited or started upon any railroad right-of-way
within the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana to spread or extend to
any adjacent or contiguous real property or improvements thereto or foliage
growing or situated thereon or to any personal property of any nature
whatsoever located on said adjacent or contiguous real property.
(Ord. No. 437, § 3, 1-11-67)
   d.   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this ordinance shall, for each and every violation thereof, be guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one dollar
($1.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violator permits a violation to exist shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.
(Ord. No. 437, § 4, 1-11-67)
Sec. 6-191 through Sec. 6-229 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 16. Commencement of Construction Regulations.
Sec. 6-230 Commencement and Termination of Commercial or Residential
Construction.  31
   No person, firm, corporation or organization shall keep, maintain or operate
any item or piece of machinery or equipment or mechanism in any location in the
Town of Schererville, Indiana, zoned for commercial or residential use, which
item or piece of machinery, equipment or mechanism produces a noise which is
audible to the human ear, outside of any building or enclosure on such
commercially or residentially zoned property during the hours between 6:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., prevailing legal time, in the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1316, § 1, 11-8-95)
 
Notes
31    Ord. No. 1316 repealed Or. No. 555 which was passed on July 12, 1972.
Sec. 6-231 Penalties.
   Any violation of the provisions of this Article shall constitute an
infraction and any person violating this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of
said infraction and subject to a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) and
no more than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day the violation of
this Ordinance occurs and continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1316, § 2, 11-8-95)
Sec. 6-232 through Sec. 6-234 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 17. Other Public Safety Regulations.
Sec. 6-235 Deferred Prosecution Program.
   a.   In any action to enforce an ordinance brought in the name of the Town
of Schererville, Indiana, the Town Attorney, or Special Prosecuting Attorney,
(hereinafter referred to as "Town Attorney"), at his discretion, may defer
prosecution of said matter subject to the following terms and conditions:
      1.   The defendant in the action agrees to the conditions of a deferral
program offered by the attorney for the Town of Schererville, Indiana; and
      2.   The defendant in the action agrees to pay to the Clerk of the
Schererville Town Court an initial user's fee of fifty-two dollars ($52.00) and
a monthly user's fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per month for six (6) continuous
months, or the number of months the defendant is a participant in the deferral
prosecution program; and
      3.   The terms of the agreement are recorded in an instrument signed by
the defendant, his legal counsel, if any, and the Town Attorney; and
      4.   The defendant in the action shall pay additional court costs in the
amount of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars if the action involves a moving traffic
offense as defined in I.C., § 9-13-2-110; and
      5.   The agreement is filed with, and approved by, the Schererville Town
Court.
(Ord. No. 1339, § 1, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 5-10-00)
   b.   The agreement set forth in paragraph a., may include any additional
provisions deemed appropriate by the Town Attorney; however, the provisions set
forth in subparagraphs (1) through (5) are minimal requirements to be contained
in any deferred prosecution agreement.
(Ord. No. 1339, § 2, 6-10-96)
Sec. 6-236 Vandalism Prohibited - Penalties.
   a.   Any individual committing an intentional act which results in damage or
defacement to personal property in the Town of Schererville, Indiana, without
consent of the owner of said property, shall be deemed to have committed the
act of vandalism.
(Ord. No. 1338, § 1, 6-10-96)
   b.   Upon a finding by a preponderance of the evidence that an individual
has committed an act of vandalism, said individual shall be subject to a
minimum fine of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars to a maximum of five hundred
($500.00) dollars.
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 6-10-96)
   c.   Each and every act of vandalism committed by an individual, as defined
above, may constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1338, § 3, 6-10-96)
   d.   All applicable court costs shall be assessed and paid.
(Ord. No. 1338, § 4, 6-10-96)
Sec. 6-237 Possession of Tobacco Products by Minors Prohibited - Penalty.  32
   a.   A minor is a person considered to be less than eighteen (18) years of
age.
   b.   Any minor within the town boundaries of Schererville, Indiana, shall be
prohibited from possessing tobacco or tobacco products, including but not
limited to: cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, and any other
derivative from the tobacco plant.
   c.   It shall not be a defense to this ordinance that the person who
possessed the tobacco did not smoke, chew, or otherwise consume the tobacco.
   d.   It shall not be a defense to this ordinance that the tobacco product
possessed by the minor is the property of an adult.
   e.   The Schererville Police Department shall be authorized to issue a
citation for violation of this ordinance in the name of the minor and/or in the
name of the minor's custodial parent and/or guardian.
   f.   Both the minor and custodial parent and/or guardian shall be
responsible for any fine imposed by the court in enforcing this statute, and
furthermore shall be responsible for court costs.
   g.   Violation of this ordinance is punishable by a minimum fine of twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) and a maximum fine of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
(Ord. No. 1364, §§ 1-7, 12-26-96)
 
Notes
32    I.C., § 35-46-1-10 prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco products to
   minors.
Sec. 6-238 Prohibiting the Purchase, Possession, Sale, and Offering for Sale of
Substances Containing Synthetic Cannabinoid.
   a.   To the extent there is no lawful preemption of authority or
jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville on these matters and products, it is
unlawful for any person to purchase, possess, sell, and offer for sale within
the town products containing synthetic cannabinoids, or similar products that
contain one or more of the following chemical compounds:
      1.   (6aR,10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a)7,10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol, also known as HU-210;
      2.   1-Pentyl-3-(l-naphythoyl) indole, also known as JWH-018;
      3.   1-Butyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole, also known as JWH-073;
      4.   All parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia
divinorum, whether growing or not, any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or its extracts;
      5.   TFMPP, a substance also known as l-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl)
piperazine; or
      6.   Cannabicyclohexanol, a substance also know as 2-[(1R,3S)-3-
hydroxyxyclohexy] -5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl) phenol; and
      7.   Any other relevant compound or derivative.
(hereinafter, “products”)
   b.   To the extent there is no lawful preemption of authority or
jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville on these matters and products, it is
unlawful for any person to burn, incinerate, or ignite in any public place, or
on any property owned, leased, or controlled by the town, the products or any
other product containing synthetic cannabinoids.
   c.   To the extent there is no lawful preemption of authority or
jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville on these matters and products, it is
unlawful for any person, entity or retail/business establishment to sell,
publicly display for sale, or attempt to sell, give, or barter the Products or
any other synthetic cannabinoids, or synthetic equivalents of substances
contained in the plant described as Cannabis, or in the resinous extractives of
Cannabis, or synthetic substances, derivatives, or their isomers with similar
chemical structure and pharmacological activity, or any substance that claims
such properties even if in actuality it does not. Because the nomenclature of
these substances and products are not internationally standardized, compounds
of these structures, regardless of the numerical designation of atomic
position, are similarly prohibited.
   d.   To the extent there is no lawful preemption of authority or
jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville on these matters and products, persons
violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00), plus court costs and attorney fees, to the extent
permitted by applicable law, associated with the enforcement of this section.
Each day of the existence of any violation of this section shall be considered
a separate offense.
   e.   To the extent there is no lawful preemption of authority or
jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville on these matters and products,
entities, including businesses and retail establishments, violating the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and not more than seven thousand five hundred
dollars ($7,500.00), plus court costs and attorney fees, to the extent
permitted by applicable law, associated with the enforcement of this section.
Each day of the existence of any violation of this section shall be considered
a separate offense. A second conviction under this section shall result in the
business license being revoked, in addition to the above-mentioned civil fees.
   f,   To the extent there is no lawful preemption of authority or
jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville on these matters and products, if any
of the aforementioned substances or products is found in the possession of any
person or entity, such may be confiscated and destroyed by any law enforcement
official as provided by law, and any aforementioned substances or products
reasonably suspected to be described herein may be photographed as evidence
pending adjudication of the alleged violation.
   g.   It is not an offense if an individual or business was acting at the
direction of an authorized law enforcement agent to enforce or ensure
compliance with this section prohibiting the aforementioned substance.
   h.   To the extent there is no lawful preemption of authority or
jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville on these matters and products, this
section does not apply to any individual or business that commits any act
described in this section pursuant to the direction or prescription of a
licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. This
section likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical
or dental purpose.
   i.   The Town Attorney shall have the authority to seek an injunction and
all appropriate equitable relief to prevent the selling or offering to sell the
products prohibited herein in violation of this section by any business that
refuses or fails to comply with this section.
   j.   After review and consideration of the most current information
concerning the above-mentioned synthetic cannabinoid and products, as defined
herein, or similar in nature and type, issued by the FDA (United States
Department of Agriculture), the Town Council concurs and agrees that this
section is adopted strictly for the purposes of protecting health, safety, and
welfare of its residents, and to preserve the peace, order, and safety of the
community to the extent it can be enforced.
(Ord. No. 1783, §§ 1-10, 12-8-10)
Sec. 6-239 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 18. Noise.
Sec. 6-240 Definitions.
   For purposes of this subchapter, all definitions and terminology used in
this subchapter shall be defined as follows:
   a.   Commercial Zone. The C-l, C-2, C-3, C-4, and Commercial Planned Unit
District zoning districts, as established by this subchapter, as amended from
time to time.
   b.   Daytime Hours. Any continuous period between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
local time Sunday through Thursday and any continuous period between 7:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday.
   c.   Decibel (dB). Is a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
micronewtons per square meter).
   d.   Frequency. An objective way to describe the pitch of sound.
   e.   Impulsive Sound. Is a sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive
sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.
   f.   Industrial Zone. The Light Industrial (L.I.) and General Industrial
(G.I.) zoning districts, as established by this subchapter, as amended from
time to time.
   g.   Light Motor Vehicles. Any motorized vehicle, including, but not limited
to, automobiles, vans, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motor scooters, dune
buggies, snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, go carts, minibikes, and trucks
with a gross vehicular weight of less than 8,000 pounds.
   h.   Modified and Defective Exhaust Systems. An exhaust system, in which,
the original noise abatement devices have been physically altered, causing them
to be less effective in reducing noise than the original device such that the
noise levels are increased.
   i.   Nighttime Hours. Any time period which is not part of the continuous
daytime hours.
   j.   Person. Any individual, association, partnership, firm, corporation,
company, entity, or organization of any kind.
   k.   Plainly Audible. Sound for which the information content is
unambiguously communicated to the listener, including, but not limited to,
understandable spoken speech comprehension of whether a voice is raised
(agitated) or normal/comprehensible musical rhythms.
   l.   Prominent Discrete Tone. Any sound that can be distinctly heard as a
single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of this regulation, a
prominent discrete tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure
level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound
pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by 5 dB for center
frequencies of 500 Hz and above and by 8 dB for center frequencies between 160
and 400 Hz and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.
   m.   Property-Line Noise Source. Any source of sound that elevates the level
experienced at the property line above ambient levels. The sound source is
determined to be in violation when the audible sound at the property line
exceeds the limits defined in this subchapter, as amended from time to time.
   n.   Residential Zone. The R-l, R-2, R-3, and Residential Planned Unit
Development zoning districts, as established in this subchapter, as amended
from time to time.
   o.   Sound Level Monitoring System. A town approved instrument which
includes, but is not limited, possessing the following functions: a data
logging of 1/1 octave band measurements in a time record with a resolution of
no fewer than one per minute; tamper-resistance and weather protection; the
ability to self-test with malfunction alert; periodic calibration capability;
and an ability to adopt algorithms to reflect the values agreed upon in this
subchapter, including the detection of “prominent discrete tones” as defined
within this section. Such instrument shall be used for measurement of the
intensity of sound, calibrated in decibels, and readings made on the dB scale.
   p.   Sound. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with the internal forces that
causes compression and rarefaction of the medium. The description of sound may
include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and
frequency.
   q.   Sound Pressure. The instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as
produced by sound energy.
   r.   Sound Pressure Level. Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of the
ratio of the square root of the time averaged square of the sound pressure to
the reference pressure of 20 micropascals.
   s.   Table of Values. Except as elsewhere provided within this subchapter,
no person shall cause or allow the emission of sound during daytime and/or
nighttime hours from any property-line sound source located on any Residential,
Commercial or Industrial land to any receiving Residential, Industrial or
Commercial land which exceeds any allowable sound pressure level specified in
the following table, when measured at any point within such receiving
Residential or Commercial land. The following Table of Values are not based
upon A-weighted, rather unweighted sound levels.
                                Receiving Land (Residential or Commercial)
Octave Band Center Frequency Daytime                 Nighttime
                             (dB-Linear, Unweighted) (dB-Linear, Unweighted)
                                Receiving Land (Residential or Commercial)
Octave Band Center Frequency Daytime                 Nighttime
                             (dB-Linear, Unweighted) (dB-Linear, Unweighted)
31.5                         72                      63
63                           71                      61
125                          65                      55
250                          57                      47
500                          51                      40
1000                         45                      35
2000                         39                      30
4000                         34                      25
8000                         32                      25
 
   t.   Traffic Sound. Sound made by a motor vehicle operated either on the
public right-of-way or on private property.
(Ord. No. 1557A, § 1, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 2-13-19)
Sec. 6-241 Restrictions.
   a.   No person shall make or cause to be made any sound that unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace,
safety or welfare of any person, or precludes their employment of property or
affects their property values where the sound generated therefrom exceeds the
sound pressure level table as identified in Section
6-240(s).
   b.   No person shall play, use or operate any machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound, including, but not limited to, loudspeakers,
radios, CD players, television sets, musical instruments, phonographs and
cassette players, nor any other machine or tool that produces sound, if such
machine or tool exceeds the sound pressure level table as identified in Section
6-240(s).
   c.   No person shall keep any animal, other than a service animal (awfully
used by a handicapped person to accommodate his/her handicap, which causes
frequent or long-continuing sound that exceeds the sound pressure level table
as identified in Section
6-240(s).
   d.   No person shall cause or allow the emission of any prominent discrete
tone from any property-tine sound source located on any Residential,
Commercial, or Industrial Zone to any receiving Residential, Commercial or
Industrial Zone.
   e.   This rule shall not apply to prominent discrete tones having a one-
third sound pressure level 10 or more dB below the allowable sound pressure
level specified above.
   f.   It shall unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the
corporate limits of the Town in the following manner:
      1.   For any person to cause the sound pressure level of the sound
emitted during the operation of a light motor vehicle which exceeds the sound
pressure level table as identified in Section
6-240(s).
      2.   To operate a light motor vehicle, which causes excessive sound as a
result of either: a defective or modified exhaust system, an unnecessary rapid
acceleration, deceleration, engine revving, or tire squealing with any of the
aforementioned which exceeds the sound pressure level table as identified in
Section
6-240(s).
      3.   Except when a higher limit is expressly allowed by Federal or state
law, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause the sound pressure level of
the sound emitted during the operation of any motor vehicle which exceeds the
sound pressure level table as identified in Section
6-240(s). This section shall apply to all motor vehicles, regardless of whether
the motor vehicle generating the sound is located on public real property
(including but not limited to a public road or highway) or on private property.
(Ord. No. 1557A, § 2, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 1935, § 2, 2-13-19)
Sec. 6-242 Exemptions.
   The provisions of this subchapter, as amended from time to time, shall not
apply to the following:
   a.   Sounds emitted from authorized emergency vehicles.
   b.   1.   Lawn mowers, snow blowers, weed blowers, garden tractors,
construction and repair equipment, go-carts and power tools, between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in all zoning districts except Business Park,
General Industry, Institutional and Commercial.
      2.   Lawn mowers, weed blowers, garden tractors, construction and repair
equipment, go carts and power tools, between the hours of sunrise and 10:00
p.m. in Business Park, General Industry, Institutional and Commercial zoning
districts that do not abut up to or are at least 500 feet from a Residential
district.
   c.   Burglar alarms and other warning devices when properly installed,
providing the cause for such alarm or warning device sound is investigated and
turned off within a reasonable period of time.
   d.   Parades, festivals, carnivals, fairs, celebrations, concert
performances, band and drum corps performances, and artistic performances, as
well as any rehearsals for same, and all other events authorized by the
permitting authority of the town.
   e.   Attendant sound connected with the actual performance of athletic or
sporting events and practices related thereto.
   f.   The emission of sound for the purposes of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency, or for the performance of emergency construction,
repair or other work.
   g.   Rubbish collection utilizing any mechanical equipment between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. only.
   h.   Subject to the other provisions of this section, and any other
applicable law, rule or regulation, those sounds associated with motor vehicles
lawfully operating on town streets.
   i.   Sounds associated with equipment or animals lawfully utilized by
handicapped persons to accommodate their handicap.
   j.   Sounds associated with the operation of snow removal equipment.
   k.   To any existing industry existing in the town for at least one year
prior to the passage of this subchapter and located in an area zoned
Industrial. (Ord. No. 1557A, § 3, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 1935, § 3, 2-13-19)
Sec. 6-243 Violation, Evidence of Sound Level.
   a.   That any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $25, and not more than $250 for the first
offense; $250 for a second offense; $500 for a third offense; and $2,500 for a
fourth and any subsequent offenses during a 12-month period of time (calendar
year-January through December, inclusive). All fines shall be payable to the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town and deposited into the Town General Fund.
   b.   Each incident that occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   c.   During any trial concerning the regulations and provisions established
by this subchapter, as amended, the Schererville Town Court may admit evidence
of the sound pressure level as tested by a sound level monitoring system.
   d.   In the event that a sound violation persists, in lieu of the town
assessing a fine for each day the sound continues, the Town Council, through
its Town Attorney, may proceed to seek injunctive relief to enjoin the sound
nuisance, pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-1-6-4, and all other applicable
law, as such is amended from time to time.
   e.   In the event that a sound violation persists, in lieu of the town
assessing a fine for each day the violative sound continues, the Schererville
Town Court, shall have the option to require the owner or operator of a
business that generates sound reasonably expected to exceed the limits set
forth within this subchapter to conduct measurements and self-monitor with use
of a town approved sound level monitoring system.
   f.   The Schererville Town Court shall be the court of proper venue and
jurisdiction for the enforcement of this subchapter, as amended hereafter from
time to time, except for any injunctive relief, which shall be filed and
prosecuted in the Lake Circuit Court or Lake Superior Courts. (Ord. No. 1557A,
§ 5, 9-12-07; Ord. No. 1935, § 5, 2-13-19)
Sec. 6-244 Penalty; Payment of Fines.
   a.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of an infraction, punishable by a fine of no less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) and not more than: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
offense; two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second offense; five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense; and two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for the fourth and subsequent offenses during a twelve (12)
month period of time. All fines shall be payable to the Clerk-Treasurer of the
Town and deposited to the General Fund.
   b.   Each incident that occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   c.   During any trial concerning the provisions of this ordinance, the
Schererville Town Court may admit evidence of the sound pressure level as
tested by a sound level monitoring system.
   d.   In the event that a sound violation persists, in lieu of the Town
assessing a fine for each day the sound continues, the Town Council, through
its Town Attorney, may proceed to seek injunctive relief to enjoin the sound
nuisance, pursuant to I.C. § 36-1-6-4 and all other applicable law.
   e.   In the event that a sound violation persists, in lieu of the Town
assessing a fine for each day the sound continues, the Schererville Town Court,
shall have the option to require the owner or operator of a business that
generates sound reasonably expected to exceed the limits set forth within this
ordinance to conduct measurements and self-monitor with use of a Town approved
sound level monitoring system.
   f.   The Schererville Town Court shall be the court of proper venue and
jurisdiction for the enforcement of this ordinance, except for any injunctive
relief, which shall be sought through the Lake Circuit Court or Lake Superior
Courts.
(Ord. No. 1557A, § 5, 9-12-07)
Sec. 6-245 through 6-249 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 19. Occupancy Regulations.
Sec. 6-250 Occupancy Regulations.
   a.   It is recognized by this Ordinance that current applicable State law
prohibits the occupancy of buildings over the posted maximum occupancy number.
In the event that Indiana state law is enacted or amended, it is anticipated
that all appropriate enforcement upon prohibited acts will be undertaken by the
jurisdictional law enforcement agencies or entities responsible for the same
identified in State law.
   b.   The property owner where a commercial business establishment is located
shall not allow more persons to occupy the business establishment than as
stated on the posted maximum occupancy sign. Any property owner or business
occupant of said commercial business establishment who allows more persons to
occupy the business than is allowed or permitted by the posted maximum
occupancy sign shall be in violation of this Ordinance.
   c.   The property owner and business occupant of said commercial business
establishment where a commercial business establishment is located shall post
the maximum occupancy sign in a clearly visible location. Any property owner
who fails to post the maximum occupancy sign shall be in violation of this
Ordinance.
   d.   Upon complaint or random inspection, the Schererville Fire Chief, or
designee, or the Schererville Town Police Chief or designee, are authorized to
inspect commercial business establishments and businesses to ensure compliance
with this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1612, § 1, 4-14-04)
Sec. 6-251 Violations.
   a.   After proper inspection, the Schererville Town Fire Chief, or designee,
or the Schererville Town Police Chief, or designee, are authorized to order the
temporary closing of any commercial business establishment that is violating
the maximum occupancy limit for the remainder of the normal business hours.
   b.   The Schererville Metropolitan Police Department is authorized to cite
any and all violations of this Article with an Ordinance violation.
(Ord. No. 1612, § 2, 4-14-04)
Sec. 6-252 Penalty.
   a.   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
Ordinance and Town Code Section as amended from time to time, for exceeding the
posted maximum commercial business establishment occupancy limit shall, upon
finding of liable, be fined in an amount not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), and not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
for each violation.
   b.   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
Ordinance and Town Code section, as amended from time to time, for failure to
post the maximum commercial establishment occupancy sign shall, upon finding of
liable, be fined in an amount not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and
not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation.
(Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 4-14-04)
Sec. 6-253 through 6-259 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 20. Identity Theft Prevention Program.
Sec. 6-260 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish an Identity Theft Prevention
Program designed to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection
with the opening of a covered account or an existing covered account and to
provide for continued administration of the Program in compliance with Part 681
of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations implementing Sections 114 and
315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 (commonly known as
“FACTA,” Public Law 108-159).
(Ord. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-261 Application.
   This Program shall apply to the utilities of the Town for the protection of
its customers against identity theft.
(Ord. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-262 Definitions.
   a.   The following words and terms as used in this Program shall have the
following meanings:
      1.   Act means the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003
(Public Law 1 OS-159), as amended from time to time, and including Part 681 of
Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations implementing Section 114 and 315
thereof.
      2.   Clerk-Treasurer means the duly elected Clerk-Treasurer of the Town
of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
      3.   Covered account means (i) an account that a financial institution or
creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household
purposes that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or
transactions. Covered accounts include credit card accounts, mortgage loans,
automobile loans, margin accounts, cell phone accounts, utility accounts,
checking accounts and savings accounts; and (ii) any other account that the
financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the
financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial,
operational,, compliance, reputation or litigation risks.
      4.   Identify Theft means a fraud committed or attempted using the
identifying information of another person without authority.
      5.   Program means this Identity Theft Prevention Program, as amended
from time to time.
      6.   Red Flag means a pattern, practice or specific activity that
indicates the possible existence of identity theft. Red Flags include, but are
not limited to, any of the following;
         (i)   A fraud alert included with a consumer report;
         (ii)   Notice of a credit freeze in response to a request for a
consumer report;
         (iii)   Consumer reporting agency providing a notice of address
discrepancy;
         (iv)   Unusual credit activity, such as an increased number of
accounts or inquiries;
         (v)   Documents provided for identification appearing altered or
forged;
         (vi)   Photograph on identification inconsistent with appearance of
customer presenting the information;
         (vii)   Information on identification inconsistent with information
provided by person opening account;
         (viii)   Information on identification, such as signature,
inconsistent with information on file at utilities (such as a signature card or
recent check);
         (ix)   Application appearing forged or altered or destroyed and
reassembled;
         (x)   Information on identification not matching any address in the
consumer report;
         (xi)   Lack of correlation between social security number range and
date of birth;
         (xii)   Personal identifying information associated with known fraud
activity;
         (xiii)   Suspicious addresses supplied, such as a mail drop, or phone
numbers associated with pagers or answering service;
         (xiv)   Social security number provided matching that submitted by
another person opening an account or other customers;
         (xv)   An address or phone number matching that supplied by a large
number of applicants;
         (xvi)   The person opening the account unable to supply identifying
information in response to notification that the application is incomplete;
         (xvii)   Personal information inconsistent with information already on
file at utilities;
         (xviii)   Person opening account or customer unable to correctly
answer challenge questions;
         (xix)   Shortly after change of address, utilities receiving request
for additional users of account;
         (xx)   Customer fails to make first payment;
         (xxi)   Drastic change in payment patterns;
         (xxii)   An account that has been inactive for a lengthy time suddenly
exhibiting unusual activity;
         (xxiii)   Mail sent to customer repeatedly returned as undeliverable
despite ongoing transactions on active account;
         (xxiv)   Utilities notified that customer is not receiving paper
account statements;
         (xxv)   Utilities notified of unauthorized charges or transactions on
customer’s account;
         (xxvi)   Utilities notified that they have opened a fraudulent account
for a person engaged in identity theft.
      7.   Town means the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
      8.   Town Council means the duly elected Legislative and Fiscal Body of
the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
      9.   Town Manager means the responsible and identified head
administrative employee for the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
      10.   Utilities means the sewer and water utilities owned, operated and
managed by the Town pursuant to the provisions of Indiana Code, 8-1.5 et seq.
and Indiana Code, 36-9-23 et seq., respectively, and all other applicable laws.
   b.   Unless defined above or otherwise indicated by the context in which
they are used, the words and phrases in this Program shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in the Act.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-263 Program.
   a.   The Town hereby establishes, solely in connection with the ownership,
management and operation of its utilities, an Identity Theft Prevention Program
to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft. This Program hereby includes
reasonable policies and procedures to:
      1.   Identify - Identify relevant red flags for covered accounts the Town
offers or maintains in connection with the ownership, management and operation
of its utilities and incorporate those red flags into this Program;
      2.   Detect - Detect red flags that have been incorporated into this
Program;
      3.   Respond - Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected
to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and
      4.   Update - Ensure this Program is updated periodically to reflect
changes in risks to utility customers and to the safety and soundness of the
utilities of the Town, as the creditor, from identity theft.
   b.   This Program shall, as appropriate, incorporate existing policies and
procedures of the Town and the utilities that control reasonably foreseeable
risks.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-264 Administration of Program.
   The Town Council shall be responsible for the overall development,
implementation, oversight and continued administration of this Program. The
Town Manager and Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for the day-to-day
activities concerning said development, implementation, oversight and
administration of this Program. The Town Manager and Clerk-Treasurer, with the
oversight of the Town Council, shall coordinate the training of utilities
staff, as necessary, to effectively implement this Program. The Town Council,
in carrying out this Program, shall exercise appropriate and effective
oversight of any service provider arrangements.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-265 Identification of Relevant Red Flags.
   a.   This Program includes relevant red flags from the following categories
as appropriate:
      1.   Alerts - Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from
consumer reporting agencies or service providers, such as fraud detection
services (see items (i) thru (iv) under the definition of Red Flag);
      2.   Suspicious Documents - The presentation of suspicious documents (see
items (v) thru (ix) under the definition of Red Flag);
      3.   Suspicious Identification - The presentation of suspicious personal
identifying information when compared against external information sources used
by the utilities, such as suspicious address (see items x thru xviii under the
definition of Red Flag);
      4.   Suspicious Activity - The unusual use of, or other suspicious
activity related to, a covered account (see items xix thru xxvi under the
definition of Red Flag); and
      5.   Notice - Notice from customers, victims of identity theft, law
enforcement authorities, or other persons regarding possible identity theft in
connection with covered accounts.
   b.   This Program shall consider the following risk factors in identifying
relevant red flags for covered accounts as appropriate:
      1.   Types of Covered Accounts - The types of covered accounts offered or
maintained in connection with the utilities;
      2.   Methods to Open - The methods provided by the utilities to open
covered accounts;
      3.   Methods to Access - The methods provided by the utilities to access
covered accounts; and
      4.   Previous History - The prior history and experience of the utilities
and the Town with identity theft.
   c.   This Program incorporates relevant red flags from sources such as:
      1.   Prior Incidents - Incidents of identity theft previously experienced
by the utilities and the Town;
      2.   Changes in Risk - Methods of identity theft that reflect changes in
risk; and
      3.   Supervision - Applicable supervisory guidance.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-266 Detection of Red Flags.
   This Program addresses the detection of red flags in connection with the
opening of covered accounts and existing covered accounts, such as by:
   1.   Identifying Information - Obtaining identifying information about, and
verifying the identity of, a person opening a covered account; and
   2.   Verification - Authenticating customers, monitoring transactions, and
verifying the validity of change of address requests in the case of existing
covered accounts.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-267 Response.
   a.   This Program provides for appropriate responses to detected red flags
to prevent and mitigate identity theft. The response shall be commensurate with
the degree of risk posed. Appropriate responses include:
      1.   Monitoring - Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity
theft;
      2.   Customer Contact - Contacting the customer (contact may be made by
e-mail, certified mail or telephone to the affected customer);
      3.   Change Passcodes - Changing any passwords, security codes or other
security devices that permit access to a covered account;
      4.   New Account Number - Reopening a covered account with a new account
number;
      5.   Not Open - Not opening a new covered account;
      6.   Close - Closing an existing covered account;
      7.   Notify Law Enforcement - Notifying the Town’s Police Department and
any other necessary law enforcement personnel; or
      8.   Not Respond - Determining that no response is warranted under the
particular circumstances.
   b.   Any utilities staff employee who becomes aware of a suspected or actual
fraudulent use of a customer or potential customer’s identity must first and
immediately notify the Town Manager and Clerk-Treasurer. The Town Manager and
Clerk-Treasurer will then determine the appropriate response in accordance with
one (1) or more of the options above.
   c.   In the event notification to a customer is necessary, such notification
shall include relevant information related to the incident including (i) the
type of identifying information involved; (ii) the telephone number that the
person can call for further information and assistance; (iii) local law
enforcement contact information; and (iv) Federal Trade Commission contact
information (877-438-4338 or www.consumer.gov/idtheft).
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-268 Updating the Program.
   The Town Council shall update this Program periodically to reflect changes
in risks to customers of the utilities or to the safety and soundness of the
utilities and its customers from identity theft based on factors such as:
   1.   Experience - The experiences of the utilities and Town with identity
theft;
   2.   Changes in Methods - Changes in methods of identity theft and in
methods to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft;
   3.   Changes in Accounts - Changes in the types of accounts that the
utilities offer or maintain;
   4.   Changes in Business - Changes in the business arrangements of the
utilities, including acquisitions, alliances and service provider arrangements.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-269 Oversight of the Program.
   a.   The oversight of this Program shall be undertaken by the Town Manager
and Clerk-Treasurer. Such oversight shall include:
      1.   Staffing - Assignment of specific responsibility for implementation
of the Program to appropriate utility staff. The Town Manager and Clerk-
Treasurer shall be responsible for the day to day administration of this
Program and shall report directly to the Town Council in connection with any
matters relating to this Program;
      2.   Review of Reports - Review of reports prepared by staff regarding
compliance, such reports to be presented by the Town Manager and Clerk-
Treasurer to the Town Council; and
      3.   Approval of Program Changes - Approval of material changes to this
Program as necessary to address changing risks of identity theft.
   b.   Reports shall be prepared as follows:
      1.   Annual Report - The Town Manager and Clerk-Treasurer, responsible
for the day to day development, implementation and administration of the
Program, shall report to the Town Council at least annually on compliance by
the utilities with the Program.
      2.   Content of Report - The report shall address material matters
related to this Program and evaluate issues such as:
         (a)   Effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the
risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and
with respect to existing covered accounts;
         (b)   Service provider agreements;
         (c)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management’s
response; and
         (d)   Recommendations for material changes to this Program.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-270 Oversight of Service Provider Arrangements.
   The utilities shall take steps to ensure that the activity of a service
provider is conducted in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures
designed to detect, prevent and mitigate the risk of identity theft whenever
the utility or utilities engage(s) a service provider to perform an activity in
connection with one or more covered accounts. For example, if the utilities
determine to outsource business functions such as payroll, web hosting,
customer call center operations, data process, or the like, the outsourcing
company’s data security practices will be compared with the utilities to assure
adequate security measures are in place to detect, prevent and mitigate
identity theft. Service providers shall be required to notify the utilities of
any security incidents they experience which might result in or create a risk
of identity theft of any of the utilities’ customers.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-271 Duties Regarding Address Discrepancies.
   a.   The utilities shall develop policies and procedures designed to enable
the utilities to form a reasonable belief that a credit report relates to the
customer for whom it was requested if the utilities receive a notice of address
discrepancy from a nationwide consumer reporting agency indicating the address
given by the customer differs from the address contained in the consumer
report. The utilities may reasonably confirm that an address is accurate by any
of the following means:
      1.   Verification with Customer - Verification of the address with the
customer;
      2.   Record Review - Review of the utilities’ records;
      3.   Third-Party Verification - Verification of the address through
third-party sources; or
      4.   Other Means - Other reasonable means.
   b.   If an accurate address is confirmed, the utilities shall furnish the
address of the customer to the nationwide consumer reporting agency from which
it received the notice of address discrepancy if:
      1.   Customer Relationship - The utility establishes a continuing
relationship with the customer; and
      2.   Information - The utility regularly and in the ordinary course of
business furnishes information to the consumer reporting agency.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-272 Security of Personal Identifying Information.
   All paper documents or files, as well as CDs, floppy disks, zip drives,
tapes, and backups containing personally identifiable customer information
(such as name, social security number, date of birth, driver’s license number,
alien registration number, passport number, employer tax identification number,
and the like) will be stored in a locked file cabinet or cabinets. File
cabinets containing personally identifiable customer information will be stored
in a locked room. The Town Manager and Clerk-Treasurer will control keys to the
file cabinet and room and will only distribute keys to those employees of the
utilities with a legitimate need for such customer information.
   Personal identifying customer information will be kept in locked file
cabinets except when an employee is working on the file. Employees are not to
leave such information on their desks in plain view when they are away from
their workstations. At the end of the day, employees will put files containing
personally identifiable customer information away in locked file cabinets. To
the extent the utilities maintain personal identifying customer information in
offsite storage facilities, access to such facilities will be limited to
employees needing access to such information and visits to such facilities
shall be documented.
   Visitors who visit the utilities’ offices and who must enter areas where
personally identifiable customer information or other sensitive information is
kept shall be escorted by an employee of the utilities.
   The utilities shall take appropriate measures to assure that personal
identifying customer information contained on computers in the utilities’
offices or on laptops of the utilities will be reasonably protected (e.g.,
passwords, encryption, firewalls and the like).
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-273 Employee Training.
   The Town Manager and Clerk-Treasurer shall periodically explain and train
the staff of the utilities as to the contents of this Program and the need to
spot security vulnerabilities. New employees of the utilities shall be required
to review this Program as part of their initial training. Access to a
customer’s personal identifying customer information will be limited to
employees with a “need to know.” Employees who leave employment of the
utilities shall no longer have access to personal identifying customer
information. The Town Manager and Clerk-Treasurer shall instruct employees to
immediately notify him or her of any potential security breaches. Employees who
violate the security policies of the utilities, including this Program, shall
be subject to discipline up to and including dismissal.
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Sec. 6-674 Disposal of Sensitive Information.
   Sensitive information such as personal identifying customer information that
is no longer needed by the utilities shall be disposed of in a manner to assure
the safeguarding of such information (e.g., shredding, incineration, permanent
deletion).
(Ord. No. 1752, § 1, 4-22-09)
Chapter 7
Building and Construction Regulations
Article 1. Regulations Governing Building Contractors, Subcontractors and Those
Engaged in the Construction Business.
   
Sec. 7-1   Registration Required.
   
Sec. 7-2   Contractor Defined.
   
Sec. 7-3   Exclusions.
   
Sec. 7-4   Unlawful Activities.
   
Sec. 7-5   Application and Application Fees.
   
Sec. 7-6   Annual Registration Fee and Liability Insurance.
   
Sec. 7-7   Collection of Fees and Role of Supervisors.
   
Sec. 7-8   Indemnity Bond.
   
Sec. 7-9   Board of Licensing and Registration - Penalties and Exceptions.
   
Sec. 7-10   Proof of Insurance Required.
   
Sec. 7-11   Penalties.
   
Sec. 7-12   Exemptions from Application Fee.
   
Sec. 7-13   Severability.
   
Sec. 7-14   through Sec. 7-17 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Permit Fees.
Division I. Background Information.
   
Sec. 7-18   Payment Required.
   
Sec. 7-19   Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Schedule A.
   
Sec. 7-20   Fees and Charges Established.
   
Sec. 7-21   Building, Plumbing and Zoning Fees.
   
Sec. 7-22   Plumbing Fees.
   
Sec. 7-23   Electrical and Mechanical Electrical Fees.
   
Sec. 7-24   Zone Application Fees.
   
Sec. 7-25   Severability.
   
Sec. 7-26   Permits and the Role of the Public Works Director.
   
Sec. 7-27   Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Responsible Bidders Regulations.
   
Sec. 7-28   Establishment.
   
Sec. 7-29   Pre-Bid Submission Requirements for Contractors.
   
Sec. 7-30   Post-Bid Submission Requirements for Subcontractors.
   
Sec. 7-31   Validity of Pre-Qualification Designation.
   
Sec. 7-32   Incomplete Pre-Bid Submissions by Contractors.
   
Sec. 7-33   Responsive and Responsible Bidder Determination.
   
Sec. 7-34   Certified Payroll.
   
Sec. 7-34.1   Public Records.
   
Sec. 7-34.2   Penalties for False, Deceptive, or Fraudulent Statements/
Information.
Article 4. Sidewalks And Driveways.
   
Sec. 7-35   Responsibility for Repair and Maintenance of Abutting Sidewalks and
Driveways.
   
Sec. 7-36   Notice of Order to Repair.
   
Sec. 7-37   Insurance and Service of Notice to Repair.
   
Sec. 7-38   Contract for Repair.
   
Sec. 7-39   Assessments.
   
Sec. 7-40   Penalty.
   
Sec. 7-41   Maintenance Contribution Fund.
   
Sec. 7-42   through Sec. 7-44 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 5. Building Code.
   
Sec. 7-45   Title.
   
Sec. 7-46   Purpose.
   
Sec. 7-47   Authority.
   
Sec. 7-48   Scope.
   
Sec. 7-49   Adoption of Building Rules, Codes and Standards by Reference.
   
Sec. 7-50   Application for Permits.
   
Sec. 7-51   Permit Required.
   
Sec. 7-52   Other Ordinances.
   
Sec. 7-53   Fees and Required Inspections.
   
Sec. 7-54   Review of Application.
   
Sec. 7-55   Inspections.
   
Sec. 7-56   Entry.
   
Sec. 7-57   Stop Order.
   
Sec. 7-58   Certificate of Occupancy.
   
Sec. 7-59   Standards.
   
Sec. 7-60   Violations.
   
Sec. 7-61   Right of Appeal.
   
Sec. 7-62   Remedies.
   
Sec. 7-63   Penalties.
   
Sec. 7-64   Severability and Rules of Construction.
   
Sec. 7-65   Effective Date.
   
Sec. 7-66   through Sec. 7-69 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 6. Street Numbers.
   
Sec. 7-70   Display of Street Numbers Required.
   
Sec. 7-71   Special Exceptions for Distant Property.
   
Sec. 7-72   Minimum Size of Numbers.
   
Sec. 7-73   Violations and Penalties.
   
Sec. 7-74   Written Notification of Non-Compliance.
   
Sec. 7-75   through Sec. 7-77 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 7. Manufactured Housing.
Division I. Permitted Placement.
   
Sec. 7-78   Definitions.
Division II. Applicability.
   
Sec. 7-79   Location Out of Parks.
   
Sec. 7-80   Year of Manufacture.
   
Sec. 7-81   Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Standards.
   
Sec. 7-82   Permitted Placement.
   
Sec. 7-83   Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Exterior Appearance Standards.
   
Sec. 7-84   Requirements.
   
Sec. 7-85   Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Installation Standards.
   
Sec. 7-86   Perimeter Retaining Wall.
   
Sec. 7-87   Foundations.
   
Sec. 7-88   Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Permits.
   
Sec. 7-89   Improvement Location Permits.
   
Sec. 7-90   Certificate of Occupancy.
   
Sec. 7-91   Appeal.
   
Sec. 7-92   Penalty for Violation.
   
Sec. 7-93   through Sec. 7-97 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 8. Condominium Conversion Regulations.
   
Sec. 7-98   Construction.
   
Sec. 7-99   Severability.
   
Sec. 7-100   Applicability.
   
Sec. 7-101   Definitions.
   
Sec. 7-102   Creation of a Condominium.
   
Sec. 7-103   Protection of Purchasers.
   
Sec. 7-104   Protection of Tenants.
   
Sec. 7-105   Violations and Penalties.
   
Sec. 7-106   through Sec. 7-109 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 9. Fire Prevention Code.
   
Sec. 7-110   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
   
Sec. 7-111   Establishment and Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   
Sec. 7-112   Definitions.
   
Sec. 7-113   Modifications.
   
Sec. 7-114   Appeals.
   
Sec. 7-115   New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May Require Permits.
   
Sec. 7-116   Penalties.
   
Sec. 7-117   Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances.
   
Sec. 7-118   Amendments and Modifications of Fire Prevention Code.
   
Sec. 7-119   Validity.
   
Sec. 7-120   through Sec. 7-124 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 10. Excavations, Easements and Rights of-Way.
Division I. Excavations.
   
Sec. 7-125   Permit Required.
   
Sec. 7-126   Application.
   
Sec. 7-127   Bond Requirements.
   
Sec. 7-128   Additional Bonds.
   
Sec. 7-129   Compliance With Warning Barrier Regulations.
   
Sec. 7-130   Notification to Public Works Director.
   
Sec. 7-131   Funds to be Created.
   
Sec. 7-132   Enforcement.
   
Sec. 7-133   Backfill Regulations.
   
Sec. 7-134   Maintenance.
   
Sec. 7-135   Violations.
   
Sec. 7-136   Penalties.
   
Sec. 7-137   Severability.
   
Sec. 7-138   through Sec. 7-139 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Easements and Right-of-Ways.
   
Sec. 7-140   Construction Prohibited Upon Easements and Rights-of-Way.
   
Sec. 7-141   Penalties.
   
Sec. 7-142   through Sec. 7-147 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 1. Regulations Governing Building Contractors, Subcontractors and Those
Engaged in the Construction Business.
Sec. 7-1 Registration Required.
   No person, firm, corporation, business trust, or combination of the same,
shall furnish any labor or supervision in the Town of Schererville, Indiana,
for the erection, construction, altering, repairing or removal of any private
or public house, mill, manufacture or other building, bridge, reservoir, system
of waterworks or other structures or for construction, altering, repairing or
removing any walk or sidewalk, whether such walk or sidewalk be on the land or
bordering thereon, stile, well, drain, drainage ditch, sewer or cistern or any
other earthmoving operation, unless and until such person, firm, corporation,
business trust, or combination thereof, shall have been duly registered in the
manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 1,9-9-92)
Sec. 7-2 Contractor Defined.  1
   When used in this Article, the term "Contractor" shall be construed and
understood to mean and include, in addition to the description set forth in
Section
7-1, any person, firm, corporation, business trust, or combination of same,
taking contracts or agreement, written or oral, express or implied, to furnish
labor or supervision while engaged in the business of, or holding themselves
out to the public as engaged in the business of, installing or repairing
electric, plumbing or sanitation installation, wires, pipes, conductors,
apparatus or fixtures, or any carpentry, masonry, concrete, sheet metal or
other sheet goods, plaster or drywall material, earthmoving or grading or
heating, air conditioning or ventilation equipment used or for use in any
private or public house, mill, manufactory, or other building, bridge,
reservoir, system of waterworks or other structures or for construction,
altering, repairing or removing any walk or sidewalk, whether such walk or
sidewalk be on the land or bordering thereon, stile, well, drain, drainage
ditch, sewer or cistern, or any other earthmoving operation. In addition to the
foregoing definitions in Section
7-1 and the foregoing portion of Section
7-2 hereof, the term "Contractor" when used in this Article, shall be construed
and understood to mean and include any person, firm, corporation, business
trust, or combination thereof, as principal, who, for a fixed sum, price, fee,
percentage, or other compensation shall, as contractor or subcontractor, bill,
construct, alter, repair, add to or erect any building or other structure
within the Town of Schererville, Indiana, or who shall undertake to perform any
of said acts. Finally, the term "Contractor" shall be construed and understood
to mean and include any person, firm, corporation, business trust or
combination of the same, taking contracts or agreements written or oral,
express or implied, to furnish labor or supervision while engaged in the
business of landscaping, lawn maintenance, installation of underground
sprinkler systems and the like, and the construction and installation of
swimming pools.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 2, 9-9-92)
 
Notes
1    I.C., § 22-11-3.1-1, defines "contractor".
Sec. 7-3 Exclusions.
   The provisions of this Article shall not apply to, and the term "Contractor"
when used in this Article, shall not be construed to mean or include any of the
following:
   a.   Any regular, full or part-time employee of any "Contractor" registered
and licensed under the provisions of this ordinance who is directly engaged in
work for their employer.
   b.   Any elected or appointed official of the Town of Schererville, Indiana,
or regular or part-time employee of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, while
engaged in the performance of duties for the Town.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 3, 9-9-92)
Sec. 7-4 Unlawful Activities.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, business trust, or
combination thereof, to furnish any labor or supervision as a "Contractor", as
hereinabove defined, in the Town of Schererville, Indiana, without first having
complied with the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 4, 9-9-92)
Sec. 7-5 Application and Application Fee.  2
   Each Contractor, as defined herein, desiring to be registered by the Town
under the terms and provisions of this Article and the rules and regulations of
said Town, shall make application for said registration on a form to be
furnished by the Town. Said application shall be deemed filed by delivering the
same to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, together with
the application fee in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. No. 1212, § 5, 9-9-92)
 
Notes
2    I.C., § 22-11-3.1-3, provides that one hundred dollars ($100.00) is the
  maximum amount which can be charged for the initial license fee.
Sec. 7-6 Annual Registration Fee and Liability Insurance.  3
   The registration certificate, as set forth in Section
7-5 herein, shall be on a form prescribed by the Clerk-Treasurer and approved,
if necessary, by the State Board of Accounts. Said registration shall be on an
annual basis, commencing the 1st Day of January of the year of application and
ending on the 31st day of December of said year, unless sooner revoked,
terminated or canceled due to violation of any Building Code of the Town of
Schererville or any provisions of applicable ordinances. After initial
registration, the Contractor shall pay an annual registration renewal fee in
the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), due on the 2nd day of January of each
calendar year, and payable no later than the 1st day of March of each calendar
year to the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
Failure to so register by said date, or failure to maintain proper liability
insurance coverage set forth in Section
7-10 herein, shall result in the revocation of registration.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 6, 9-9-92; Ord. No. 1212A, 6-9-93)
 
Notes
3    I.C., § 22-11-2.1-3, sets fifty dollars ($50.00) as the maximum amount
  which can be charged for renewal fees.
Sec. 7-7 Collection of Fees and Role of Supervisors.
   All fees paid and collected under the provisions of this ordinance shall be
deposited and become a part of the General Fund of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana In the case of an applicant, which is a firm, partnership or
corporation, it shall be sufficient that one (1) duly authorized person
(hereinafter called supervisor) of such firm, partnership or corporation, shall
be registered, and such registration shall be issued to such firm, partnership,
or corporation hereinafter called the holder of said license, along with the
name of such supervisor; provided, however, that such license shall only be
valid when the supervisor is still connected with such firm, partnership or
corporation as the case may be. Said supervisor may only represent one (1)
holder.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 7, 9-9-92)
Sec. 7-8 Indemnity Bond.
   Any applicant (holder) having qualified for registration as a Contractor
hereunder shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer an indemnity bond having been
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Lake County, if required by state
statute, and payable to the County of Lake, or any and all cities and towns of
Lake County, Indiana, for any person damaged, in the penal sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), such bond to be conditioned that the applicant shall not
violate any of the terms or conditions of this Ordinance, or any other
applicable ordinances of the Town of Schererville, or any Building Code of the
Town of Schererville. Such applicant (holder) shall maintain such bond as long
as he, she or it continues in business in the Town of Schererville, Indiana. In
the event a holder of the registration for a Contractor is an agent, as set
forth in Section
7-7 herein, and the employment relationship between the agent and corporation
terminates, for whatever reason, said Contractor shall immediately notify the
Town and said registration shall immediately terminate, expire and become null
and void. Said applicant shall immediately designate a new supervisor to make
re-application for registration as holder thereof.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 8, 9-9-92)
Sec. 7-9 Board of Licensing and Registration - Penalties and Exceptions.
   a.   The Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
shall have general charge and responsibility of administering this ordinance,
and said administration responsibility is delegated to the Board's designee,
the Building Commissioner.
   b.   Duties and Policies. It shall be the duty and policy of the Board or
its designee to:
      1.   Prescribe the form of registrations and issue same, provided that
all such registrations while in force, shall be under the supervision and
control of the Board, by and through its designee, the Building Commissioner.
      2.   Issue registrations as contractors to any person who qualifies and
complies with the provisions of this ordinance and pays the required
registration fee.
      3.   It shall be the responsibility of the Board or its designee, to
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct of its business
consistent with the guidelines and provisions of this ordinance and do all
things necessary to effect the provisions of this ordinance.
      4.   Whenever any contractor's registration issued under the provisions
of this Ordinance is revoked by the Board or its designee, shall deliver the
bond of the offending registrant to the Town Attorney who shall institute
proceedings to forfeit the bond.
      5.   Upon receipt of an application for renewal by an applicant, who
during the proceeding registration period, has violated any of the provisions
of this Ordinance or any rules promulgated by the Board of its designee, the
Board or its designee, shall make such investigation as it deems necessary to
determine the fitness of the applicant for renewal of his registration. In the
event the Board or its designee, determines after said investigation, that a
questions exists as to whether the application hereunder consideration should
be renewed, they or he shall so advise the applicant and he shall thereafter,
within thirty (30) days, show cause to the Board or its designee, determines
that said registration should not be renewed, they or he shall notify the
applicant and said applicant thereafter may seek remedies under the laws of the
State of Indiana.
      6.   No registration shall be renewed during any period a registrant is
under citation by the Board or its designee, for violation of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance or any rules promulgated by the Board or its
designee;however, the Board or its designee, in their or his discretion, may
temporarily extend the applicant's current registration for a period or periods
of time not to exceed thirty (30) days, or until the act complained of shall be
heard by the Board or its designee, and during any period of appeal provided
for by this Ordinance.
      7.   In the event a registrant shall have been convicted in this state or
any other state of obtaining money under false pretenses, extortion, forgery,
embezzlement, or criminal conspiracy to defraud, or other like offenses, and a
duly certified or exemplified copy of the record int he proceeding is filed
with the Board or its designee, the Board or its designee, shall revoke the
registration issued to the registrant In the event of the revocation or
suspension of the registration issued to any member of a co-partnership,
association, or corporation, or an employee thereof, the registration issued to
the other co-partner, member or members of the firm, association, or
corporation, shall be revoked unless, within the time fixed by the Board or its
designee, where a co-partnership or association, the connection of the member
or employee whose registration has been suspended (or revoked), shall be
severed and his interest in the co-partnership or association, or his
employment thereby in the case of any employee, be terminated, and his share in
its activities brought to an end, or where a corporation, the offending officer
or employee shall be discharged and shall have no further participation in the
corporation activities.
   c.   Violation and Enforcement Procedures. The Board or its designee may,
upon their own motion, and shall, upon the verified complaint in writing of any
person setting forth specifically the wrongful act or acts complained, of
investigate any action or business transaction of any registrant and shall have
the power to suspend, or revoke, a registration issued by the Board or its
designee, under the provisions of this Ordinance, if, after due proceedings, as
set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, it shall
find the holder to have been guilty of the performance or attempt to perform
any of the following prohibited acts or conduct:
      1.   Negligent or deliberate disregard or the applicable construction
codes and ordinances of the Town of Schererville, State of Indiana, or any
rules promulgated pursuant thereto;
      2.   Aiding or abetting any unregistered person to evade the provisions
of this Ordinance or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto;
      3.   Knowingly combining or conspiring with unregistered persons with the
intent to evade the provisions of this Ordinance or the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto;
      4.   Acting the capacity of a contractor under any registration issued
hereunder except in the name of the registrant as set forth on the issued
registration;
      5.   Diversion of funds or property received from prosecution or
completion of a specified construction project or operation, whereas a result
of the diversion, the contractor is or will be unable to complete or fulfill
the terms of his obligation to contract;
      6.   In the case of a contractor being adjudicated a bankrupt, or the
making by a contractor of a composition with creditors or the anointment of a
receiver for the registrant's business;
      7.   Paying compensation in money or other valuable consideration to any
person other than a registered contractor for rendering services or doing any
act required by this Ordinance to be performed by a registered contractor
holding a registration;
      8.   No violation of any provisions of this Ordinance by an agent or
employee of any registered contractor shall be grounds for the suspension or
revocation of the registration of the employer. For the purpose of the
preceding sentence, a course of dealing shown to have been consistently
followed by an employee shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on
the part of the employer;
      9    Any person aggrieved by any action by the Board or its designee, in
suspending, revoking, or failing to renew a license may seek judicial review
thereof;
      10.   The record of the Board or is designee, or a duly certified copy
thereof, shall be admissible in any proceedings at law or in equity in any
court of competent jurisdiction in this or any other state in which the
applicant or registrant charged or under investigation is a party, and where
the issues involved in the proceedings are pertinent to the inquiry before the
Board or its designee, and the verdict or judgment of the court in any action
at law or the decree of the court in any proceeding in equity shall be prima
facie evidence of the facts at issue in the proceedings and necessarily
adjudicated therein;
      11.   The verdict any prosecution in a court of record of this or any
state in which the applicant registrant charged shall have been the defendant,
shall be conclusive as to the facts charged and at issue in such prosecution;
      12.   After the revocation of any registration, no new registration shall
be issued to the same registrant within a period of a least one (1) year
subsequent to the date of the revocation;
      13.   Whenever a new registration is issued by the Board or its designee,
to any person whose registration has been previously revoked, the issuance
shall be treated as an initial issuance and the applicant shall be required to
pay the fees, and in the case of contractors, shall be required to submit to
the examination required of all other initial applicants;
      14.   Any person who acts as a contractor, without first obtaining a
registration from the Board or its designee, as provided herein, or any person
who continues to act as a contractor after his registration has been suspended
or revoked, shall be deemed to have violated this Ordinance and shall be fined
in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); and
      15.   Any person who fails to renew his registration and continues to act
as a contractor after the same has expired shall be deemed to have violated
this Ordinance and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   d.   Exceptions and Exclusions. This Ordinance does not apply to:
      1.   An authorized employee of the United States, the State of Indiana,
County of Lake, or any political subdivision thereof, so long as the employee
does not hold himself out for hire and is acting within the scope of his
employment;
      2.   Public utilities, where construction, maintenance, and development
work is performed by their own forces and incidental to their business;
      3.   The owner occupant of a dwelling of a two (2) or less residential
unit when said owner occupant is installing, altering or repairing said
residential unit;
      4.   Any construction, alteration, improvement, or repair of improvements
located on any site and project where state and federal law supersedes this
article; and
      5.   Any individual who is employed or acts as a maintenance man at his
place of employment.
   e.   Legal Proceedings. Where in any proceeding before the Board of its
designee, any contractor or witness shall fail or refuse to attend a request
issued by the Board of its designee, or appearing shall refuse to testify or
shall refuse to provide any information or data, the production of which is
called for by the Board or its designee, shall constitute legal action to be
taken by the Board or its designee, and shall be enforced by any court of this
state.
   f.   Authorization. The Board or its designee, is authorized and empowered
to adopt, fix and establish all rules and regulations necessary for the proper
administration of the provisions of this Ordinance.
   g.   Effective Date. The effective date of this Ordinance is January 1,
1997, and shall become and be effective upon that date upon its passage,
approval, and publication in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. No. 1212B, § 2, 12-11-96)
Sec. 7-10 Proof of Insurance Required.
   All Contractors registered under this Article shall be required to obtain
and to file with the Clerk-Treasurer a Certificate issued by a duly authorized
officer of a responsible insurance company or companies authorized to do
business in the State of Indiana, showing that the licensee has, in full force
and effect:
   a.   Worker's Compensation Insurance covering all employees on any work done
within the Town of Schererville, Indiana, in such amounts as is required by
law;
   b.   Public liability in the amount of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for one person or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
one accident;
   c.   Property damage in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00);
   d.   Said Worker's Compensation and public liability insurance shall be kept
in full force and effect during the entire course of registration;
   e.   The Contractor registering shall also comply with all of the provisions
of the Worker's Compensation Act of the State of Indiana, as amended from time
to time.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 10, 9-9-92)
   f.   Pursuant to I.C., § 22-3-2-2, this Section does not apply to Sole
Proprietors and Partnerships that do not have employees and have on file with
the Planning and Building Department of the Town of Schererville, a State
approved, certified Contractor's Affidavit of Exemption.
(Ord. No. 1212B, § 1, 12-11-96)
Sec. 7-11 Penalties.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Article, shall be
guilty of an infraction, the punishment for which shall be scheduled as
follows:
   a.   The violator shall be punished for the first offense by a fine of not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00);
   b.   For the second offense, by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00);
   c.   For the third and each subsequent event, by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and each day of violation of the provisions of this Article shall constitute a
distinct and separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as
preventing enforcement of this by injunction or other legal or equitable
remedy.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 11,9-9-92)
Sec. 7-12 Exemptions From Application Fee.
   Any person, firm, corporation, business trust or combination of the same,
who has been actively engaged as a Contractor in the Town of Schererville at
the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from an application
fee, but shall comply with all other rules and regulations as set forth in this
Article.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 12, 9-9-92)
Sec. 7-13 Severability.
   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Article shall be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not effect any other section, clause, provision or portion of
this Article.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 13, 9-9-92)
Sec. 7-14 through Sec. 7-17 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Permit Fees.
Division 1. Background Information.
Sec. 7-18 Payment Required.
   Permits required by this Article shall be issued upon prior payment of
permit and inspection fees according to the following schedules:
   a.   Building Permit Fees (See Schedule A) - For the purpose of determining
the amount of the Building Permit Fee, the Total Valuation shall be based on
the current square footage cost data published by a recognized construction
data service, e.g. Means Service, multiplied by the number of square feet of
total square footage of the structure (overall outside dimensions).
   b.   Inspection Fees (See Schedule A)
   c.   Wrecking Permit Fees (See Schedule A)
   d.   Moving Permit Fees (See Schedule A)
   e.   Electrical Permit Fees (See Schedule A)
   f.   Plumbing Permit Fees (See Schedule A)
(Ord. No. 1202, § 1, 3-11-92; Ord. No. 1744, § 2, 11-12-08)
Sec. 7-19 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Schedule A.
Sec. 7-20 Fees and Charges Established.
   Schedule A, Fees and Charges, is made a part of the Ordinances of the Town
of Schererville and shall read as follows.
(Ord. No. 1202, § 2, 3-11-92)
Sec. 7-21 Building, Planning and Zoning Fees.
   The Building, Planning and Zoning Fees shall be as follows:
Type of Permit Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Type of Permit                   Existing Fee                      Proposed Fee
Moving Permits
(Fee plus all direct costs to    $75.00                            $100.00
the Town)
Occupancy Permits -
   Temporary                  $25.00                            $50.00
   Final                      $35.00                            $50.00
Building Fees (New, Remodel,
Maintenance & Addition) -        $20.00/                           $10.00
Industrial Bldg. (Per $1,000.00  $6.00
valuation or fraction thereof)
Other building and fences $20.00 $2,000.00                         $1,000.00
for the first
And for each additional
increment of $1,000.00 or        $6.00                             $10.00
fraction thereof
Re-inspection
   Red Tag                    $25.00                            $50.00
Refund of Fees                   75% of cost                       (no change)
Renewal of Permits               50% of original cost              (no change)
                                 $15.00                            $50.00
                                 (1,000 sq. ft. or less)           (flat fee)
Wrecking Permits                 $15.00
                                 (1,001 sq. ft. to 9,999 sq. ft. - $50.00
                                 per 1,000 sq. ft. or increment    (flat fee)
                                 thereof)
 
Type of Permit Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Type of Permit             Existing Fee                       Proposed Fee
                           $2.00
Wrecking Permits (Cont'd)  (10,000 sq. ft. or more or portion $100.00
                           thereof)                           (flat fee)
                           (per 1,000 sq. ft.)
(Fees plus all direct costs to the Town)
Driveway Permits -         $50.00                             (no change)
Residential and Commercial
                           $30.00
Swimming Pools             (for first $1,000.00 or portion    $50.00
                           thereof)
                           $6.00
                           (for every $1,000.00 or portion of $10.00
                           thereafter)
Plumbing and Electrical Permit Inspection Fees are additional to the costs
set forth above.
Building Inspection Fees   $75.00                             $100.00
(Code-compliance)
Re-Inspections (all)       $25.00                             $50.00
Extra Inspections          -0-                                $50.00
 
(Ord. No. 1202, § 2, (1), 3-11-92; Ord. No. 1736, § 1, 8-13-08; Ord. No. 1744,
§ 2, 11-12-08)
Sec. 7-22 Plumbing Fees.
 
Type of Permit                                       Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Minimum plumbing permit                              $30.00       $50.00
Extra plumbing inspection                            $15.00       $50.00
Re-inspection (Red Tag)                              $15.00       $50.00
For each plumbing fixture and each discharging
device, including water circulating air conditioning $6.00        $10.00
and refrigeration units, add:
 
Type of Permit Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Type of Permit                                        Existing Fee Proposed Fee
For each water heater                                 $6.00        $10.00
For each storage tank                                 $6.00        $10.00
For each inside downspout                             $6.00        $10.00
For each inside water service                         $6.00        $10.00
Public swimming pool (same as Building fees)          -0-          (no change)
Automatic lawn sprinkling system inspection fee       $30.00       $50.00
For each sprinkler head                               $.50         $1.00
Automatic fire sprinkling systems flat fee + per head $50.00       $100.00
fee (1-100 heads)
For each head over 100                                $.40         $1.00
Septic tanks                                          $150.00      $200.00
Septic tank bypass (same as minimum plumbing permit)  $30.00       $50.00
 
(Ord. No. 1202, § 2, (2), 3-11-92; Ord. No. 1744, § 2, 11-12-08)
Sec. 7-23 Electrical and Mechanical Electrical Fees.
 
Type of Permit                                   Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Flat fee (new construction or new service panel) $50.00       (no change)
+ single phase per AMP                           $.65         $.80
+ three phase current per AMP                    $.65         $.80
Flat fee (remodel or addition)                   $30.00       $50.00
Single phase current per AMP (sub-panel)         $.50         $1.10
 
 
Type of Permit                            Existing Fee Proposed Fee
+ three phase current per AMP (sub-panel) $.50         $1.10
Extra Inspection fee                      $25.00       $50.00
Re-inspection (Red Tag)                   $25.00       $50.00
Temporary Pole                            $25.00       $50.00
 
MECHANICAL
 
Type of Permit                                        Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Flat fee (new construction only)                      $30.00       $50.00
For the installation or relocation of each forced-air
or gravity-type furnace or burner, including ducts    $15.00       $40.00
and vents attached to such appliance, up to and
including 100,000 Btu/h, add
Installation or relocation of each forced-air or
gravity-type furnace or burner, including ducts and   $20.00       $50.00
vents attached to such appliance over 100,000 Btu/h,
add
Installation, relocation or replacement of each
appliance vent installed and not included in an       $4.50        $15.00
appliance permit, add
Repair of, alteration of, or addition to each heating
appliance, refrigeration unit, cooling unit,          $15.00       $40.00
absorption or evaporative cooling system, including
installation of controls regulated by this code, add
Installation or relocation of each boiler or
compressor to and including three horsepower, or each $15.00       $50.00
absorption system to and including 100,000 Btu/h, add
 
Type of Permit Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Type of Permit                                        Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Installation or relocation of each boiler or
compressor over three horsepower to and including 15  $20.00       $50.00
horsepower, or each absorption system over 100,000
Btu/h and including 500,000 Btu/h, add
Installation or relocation of each boiler or
compressor over 15 horsepower to and including 30     $30.00       $60.00
horsepower, or each absorption system over 500,000
Btu/h to and including 1,000,000 Btu/h, add
Installation or relocation of each boiler or
compressor over 30 horsepower to and including 50     $60.00       $110.00
horsepower or for each absorption system over
1,000,000 Btu/h to and including 1,750,000 Btu/h, add
Installation or relocation of each boiler or
refrigeration compressor over 50 horsepower or each   $75.00       $140.00
absorption system over 1,750,000 Btu/h, add
Each air-handling unit over 10,000 cfm, add           $15.00       $50.00
Each evaporative cooler other than portable type, add $9.00        $20.00
Each ventilation fan connected to a single duct, add  $5.00        $10.00
Each ventilation system which is not a portion of any
heating or air-conditioning system authorized by a    $9.00        $20.00
permit, add
Installation of each hood which is served by
mechanical exhaust, including the ducts for such      $9.00        $100.00
hood, add
 
 
Type of Permit                                                       Existing Proposed
                                                                     Fee      Fee
Each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by this code but not
classed in other appliance categories, or for which no other fee is  $9.00    $50.00
listed in this code, add
   For each gas-piping system of one to four outlets, add         $3.00    $6.00
   For each gas-piping system of five or more outlets, per outlet $.75     $2.00
add
 
(Ord. No. 1202, § 2, (3), 3-11-92; Ord. No. 1744, § 2, 11-12-08)
Sec. 7-24 Zone Application Fees.
Type of Permit Existing Fee Proposed Fee
Type of Permit                                        Existing Fee Proposed Fee
l or 2 family-dwelling detached                       $50.00       $100.00
Apartments, townhouses, hotels and motels - each unit $25.00       $50.00
Business, commercial and public                       $100.00      $150.00
Business or commercial tenant space (after initial    $50.00       $100.00
development)
Educational, institutional, and church                $100.00      $200.00
Industrial, warehouse and bulk storage                $100.00      $200.00
Temporary structures                                  $50.00       $100.00
Accessory buildings                                   $25.00       $50.00
Additions/alterations (all occupancies)               $25.00       $50.00
Swimming pools                                        $25.00       $50.00
Fence permit                                          $25.00       $50.00
Sign permits                                          $25.00       $100.00
 
 
Type of Permit                                     Existing Fee Proposed Fee
The following shall be the costs assessed by the Town of Schererville for
items incidental to the fees and permits set forth above in conducting Plan
Review:
1 or 2 family dwelling                             $50.00       $100.00
Additions/alterations                              $20.00       $40.00
Commercial construction not subject to appropriate $100.00      $200.00
State of Indiana agency review
 
(Ord. No. 1202, § 2, (4), 3-11-92; Ord. No. 1744, § 2, 11-12-08)
Sec. 7-25 Severability.
   If any section, clause, or provision of this Article shall be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect any other sections, clause, or provision of this
Article.
(Ord. No. 1212, § 2 (4), 3-11-92)
Sec. 7-26 Permits and the Role of the Public Works Director.  4
   a.   All applications or requests for a permit of whatsoever nature and
purpose required by said Town shall be submitted to the Planning and Building
Administrator of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, for filing and
review. Such applications and permits shall include, but are not limited to the
following:
      1.   Electrical permit
      2.   Plumbing permit
      3.   Change of use permit
      4.   Zone permit
      5.   Building permit
      6.   Issuance of certificate of occupancy
      7.   Zone change application
      8.   Subdivision application
      9.   Special exception application
      10.   Variance application
      11.   Contractor's licensing
      12.   Street excavation
      13.   Permits and applications relating in any manner to park and
recreation
      14.   Permits and applications relating in any manner to streets,
utilities, water, sewers, and sanitation.
   b.   Upon the filing of said application or request, the Planning and
Building Administrator shall immediately forward such request or application to
the proper official or secretary of the proper Town body for consideration. The
Public Works Director or Town body to act upon the application or request shall
review the application or request and determine whether the application or
request should be approved or rejected and, if approved what conditions, if
any, should attach to that approval. The Public Works Director in conjunction
with the Planning and Building Administrator of the Town Administration shall
determine the proper fee to be paid to the Town for such application or request
and upon payment of the proper fee to the Town Clerk-Treasurer and satisfaction
of all conditions attached to said approval, if any, the Public Works Director
shall issue the appropriate permit.
   c.   The Public Works Director may delegate his power to review, act upon
and issue any particular type of permit to any official or appropriate employee
of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, which official or employee shall have the
authority and power to act upon all permits of that type to the extent
designated by the Public Works Director in conjunction with the Planning and
Building Administrator and the Town Administrator.
   d.   All other ordinances, resolutions, laws, rules or regulations which
require the filing of an application or request for a permit with an official
or employee of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, are amended and modified to
conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
   e.   Building permit minimum mandatory conditions. In addition to any other
conditions that may be required in connection with the issuance of building
permits, each building permit issued in connection with the construction,
reconstruction, installation, demolition, maintenance, or repair of any
commercial building estimated to cost not less than two hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($250,000.00), or in connection with a residential building with five
(5) or more units, shall be subject to, and shall include the following set of
mandatory permit conditions, namely:
      If any person or entity that is subject to the foregoing fails to comply
with any of the qualifications and conditions with respect to work on the
project, this permit shall be deemed temporarily suspended and all construction
work on the entire project shall cease immediately upon issuance of a stop work
order by the Building Commissioner, or his/her designee, until further notice
by him/her.
      It shall be a material condition of a building permit issued hereunder
that any construction manager, general contractor, or other lead or prime
contractor, or any entity functioning in any such capacity, and any other
contractor or subcontractor of any tier or other person or entity that is
engaged to perform the construction work on the property that is the subject of
this permit (hereinafter, collectively and individually, referred to as the
"contractor") shall comply with the following qualifications and conditions at
all times during their performance of work pursuant to said issued building
permit on the project, namely:
      1.   The contractor has not been barred or suspended from performing
construction work by any federal, state, or local government agency or
authority in the past three (3) years;
      2.   The contractor had not been found within the past three (3) years by
a court or governmental agency in violation of any law relating to providing
workers compensation insurance coverage, misclassification of employees as
independent contractors, payment of employer payroll taxes, employee income tax
withholding, wage and hour laws, prompt payment law, or prevailing wage laws;
      3.   The contractor shall maintain appropriate worker's compensation
insurance as required by the provisions of I.C., § 22-3-5, et seq., as amended,
and provide documentary proof of such coverage to the Building Commissioner, to
be maintained as a public record;
      4.   The contractor must properly classify employees as employees rather
than independent contractors and treat them accordingly for purposes of minimum
wages and overtime, worker's compensation insurance coverage, unemployment
taxes, social security taxes, and state and federal income tax withholding;
      5.   The contractor must maintain detailed payroll records and provide
the records, upon request, to the Building Commissioner, or his/her designee,
within five (5) days of the request;
      6.   The contractor must comply with the provisions of I.C., § 22-2 et
seq., as amended, with respect to the payment of wages; and
      7.   The contractor must pay contributions to the unemployment insurance
benefit fund established by the provisions of I.C., § 22-4-26-1, as amended.
   f.   In the event that the permit is issued, the applicant for the building
permit shall be responsible for ensuring that all contractors performing
construction work on the property comply with the building permit minimum
mandatory conditions required by this section, as amended from time to time,
for the duration of work on the project. If any person or entity that is
subject to those building permit minimum mandatory conditions fails to comply
with any of the qualifications and conditions with respect to work on the
project and this law, and in addition to any other penalties or consequences
provided by applicable law, the Building Commissioner, or his/her designee, may
issue a stop work order of all construction work on the entire project until
the violation is remedied. Once the Building Commissioner, or his/her designee,
determines that the violation has been remedied, he/she will withdraw the stop
work order, and construction on the project may proceed, or resume.
   g.   In the event that a complaint is filed and/or brought to the attention
of the Town's Building Department or Building Commissioner, may conduct an
investigation of the required building permit minimum mandatory conditions. All
documents requested will be required to be provided to the Building Department
of the Town no later than five (5) business days from date of notice. In the
event that a violation is found, the contractor may be subject to fines and/or
loss of contractor license issued by the Town. All documents will be recorded
and retained as public documents and, as deemed appropriate, will be turned
over to local, county and state prosecuting attorneys for further investigation
and/or prosecution.
   h.   In the event that the contractor applying for a building permit has
been found guilty or violative of any local, state or federal violations of
applicable law, or said building permit minimum mandatory conditions, the
Building Commissioner may not issue a permit to the contractor and may deny a
building permit application; after a period of five (5) years elapses from the
date of the violations, and at the approval of the Building Commissioner, the
Building Commissioner may consider and approve building permits for an
applicant contractor which had previously violated these and all related laws
based upon verification of compliance with said laws and the building permit
minimum mandatory conditions set forth herein, including verified compliance
with the mandatory reporting of all payroll documents, including pay stubs, to
all employees and minimum wages and overtime, worker's compensation insurance
coverage, unemployment taxes, social security taxes and state and federal
income tax withholding and certification of current workers compensation
insurance coverage for the proper amount of employees on a weekly basis for the
duration of the building permit. This verification shall be documented as a
public record in the Town records. (Ord. No. 770, § 1-4, 12-27-78; Ord. No.
1950 § 1, 1-15-20)
 
Notes
4    Editor's Note: The provisions of Ord. No. 770 are also set forth in Section
  2-138 of this Code.
Sec. 7-27 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Responsible Bidders Regulations.
Sec. 7-28 Establishment.
   The Town of Schererville hereby adopts and establishes the within
Responsible Bidders Regulations Ordinance for the Town.
(Ord. No. 1900, § 1, 4-12-17)
Sec. 7-29 Pre-Bid Submission Requirements for Contractors.
   Contractors proposing to submit bids on any Town of Schererville public
works project estimated to cost at least two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00), or more, must, prior to the opening of bids, submit a statement
made under oath and subject to perjury laws, on a form designated by the Town
and must include the following:
   a.   A copy of a print-out of the Indiana Secretary of State's on-line
record for the bidder dated within sixty (60) days of the submission of said
document showing that the bidder is in existence, current with the Indiana
Secretary of State's Business Entity Reports, and eligible for a certificate of
good standing. If the bidder is an individual, sole proprietor or partnership,
this subsection shall not apply;
   b.   A list identifying all former business names;
   c.   Any determinations by a Court or Government agency for violations of
federal, state, or local laws including, but not limited to, violations of
contracting or antitrust laws, tax or licensing laws, environmental laws, the
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), or federal Davis-Bacon, and related
Acts;
   d.   A statement on staffing capabilities, including labor sources;
   e.   Evidence of participation in apprenticeship and training programs
applicable to the work to be performed on the project which are approved by and
registered with the United States Department of Labor's Office of
Apprenticeship, or its successor organization. The required evidence includes a
copy of all applicable apprenticeship certificates or standards for these
training programs;
   f.   A copy of a written plan for employee drug testing that (I) covers all
employees of the bidder who will perform work on the public works project; and
(ii) meets, or exceeds, the requirements set forth in I.C., § 4-13-18-5 or
I.C., § 4-13-18-6;
   g.   The name and description of the management experience of each of the
bidder's project managers and superintendents that bidder intends to assign to
work on the project;
   h.   Proof of any professional or trade license required by law for any
trade or specialty area in which the bidder is seeking a contract award; and
disclosure of any suspension or revocation within the previous five (5) years
of any professional or trade license held by the company, or of any director,
office or manager employed by the bidder;
   i.   Evidence that the contractor is utilizing a surety company which is on
the United States Department of Treasury's Listing Approved Sureties;
   j.   A written statement of any federal, state or local tax liens or tax
delinquencies owed to. any federal, state or local taxing body in the last five
(5) years;
   k.   A statement that individuals who will perform work on the public works
project on behalf of the bidder will be properly classified as either (I) an
employee or (ii) an independent contractor under all applicable state and
federal laws and local ordinances; and
   l.   A list of projects of similar size and scope of work that the bidder
has performed in the State of Indiana within three (3) years prior to the date
on which the bid is due.
The Town reserves the right to demand supplemental information from the bidder,
additional verification of any information provided by the bidder, and may also
conduct random inquiries of the bidder's current and prior customers.
(Ord. 1900, § 2, 4-12-17)
Sec. 7-30 Post-Bid Submission Requirements for Subcontractors.
   Upon request, the Town may require all bidders to provide a written list
that discloses the name, address, and type of work for each first-tier
subcontractor from whom the bidder has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on
any part of the public work project, including individuals performing work as
independent contractors, within five (5) business days after the date the bids
are due.
   In addition, each listed first-tier subcontractor shall be required to
adhere to the requirements of this Ordinance as though it were bidding directly
to the Town, except that first-tier subcontractors shall submit the required
information (including the name, address, and type of work for each of their
first-tier subcontractors) to the successful bidder no later than (5) business
days after the subcontractor's first day of work on the public work project and
the bidders shall immediately forward said information to the Town. Payment
shall be withheld from any first-tier subcontractor who fails to timely submit
said information until such information is submitted and approved by the Town.
   The Town may require any second and lower-tier subcontractors to provide the
required information (including name, address, type of work on the project and
the name of the higher-tier subcontractor) within ten (10) calendar days.
Payments shall be withheld from any second or low-tier contractor who fails to
timely submit this information until this information is submitted and approved
by the Town. Additionally, the Town may require the successful bidder and
relevant subcontractor to remove the second or lower-tier subcontractor from
the project and replace it with the responsive and responsible subcontractor.
   Failure of a subcontractor to submit the required information shall not
disqualify the successful bidder from performing work on the project and shall
not constitute a contractual default and/or breach by the successful bidder.
However, the Town may withhold all payments otherwise due for work performed by
a subcontractor until the subcontractor submits the required information and
the Town approved such information. The Town may also require that successful
bidder to remove the subcontractor from the project and replace it with a
responsive and responsible subcontractor.
   The disclosure of a subcontractor ("disclosed subcontractor") by a bidder or
a subcontractor shall not create any rights in the disclosed subcontractor.
Thus, a bidder and/or subcontractor may substitute another subcontractor
("substitute subcontractor") for a disclosed subcontractor by giving the Town
written notice of the name, address and type of work of the substitute
subcontractor. The substitute subcontractor is subject to all of the
obligations of a subcontractor under this Ordinance, as amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 1900, § 3, 4-12-17)
Sec. 7-31 Validity of Pre-Qualification Designation.
   Upon determination by the Town that a contractor's or subcontractor's
submission in anticipation of a bid is complete and timely, and upon any
further consideration deemed necessary by the Town, the contractor or
subcontractor may be designated as pre-qualified for future Town public works
projects. A contractor's designation as pre-qualified shall exempt the
contractor or sub-contractor from the comprehensive submission requirements
contained herein for a period of twelve (12) months. Thereafter, contractors or
subcontractors who are pre-qualified must submit a complete application for
continued or pre-qualified standing, on a form provided by the Town, (also
referred to as the "short form") by December 31st for the upcoming calendar
year. Failure by any pre-qualified standing shall result in automatic removal
of the designation effective January 21 of the upcoming year. However, the
"removed" contractor or subcontractor shall still be permitted to bid on Town
public works project.
   Any material changes to the contractor's status at any time must be reported
in writing by the contractor within ten (10) days of its occurrence to the
Town. The pre-qualification designation is solely within the discretion of the
Town and the Town specifically reserves the right to change or revoke the
designation for a stated written reason(s).
   Denial of pre-qualification shall be in writing and shall be forwarded to
the contractor within seven (7) working days of such decision. Any contractor
denied or losing pre-qualification status may request reconsideration of the
decision by submitting such request in writing to the Town within five (5)
business days of receipt of notice of denial.
(Ord. 1900, § 4, 4-12-17)
Sec. 7-32 Incomplete Pre-Bid Submissions by Contractors.
   It is the sole responsibility of the potential bidder to comply with all
pre-bid submission requirements applicable to the bidder in Section
7-29 above by no later than the public bid opening. Post-bid submissions must
be submitted in accordance with Section 7-30 above. Submissions deemed
inadequate, incomplete or untimely by the Town may result in the
disqualification of the bid.
(Ord. 1900, § 6, 4-12-17)
Sec. 7-33 Responsive and Responsible Bidder Determination.
   The Town, after review of complete and timely submissions, shall, in its
sole discretion, after taking into account all information in the submission
requirement, determine whether a bidder is responsive and responsible. In
making this determination, the Town specifically reserves the right to utilize
all information provided in the contractor or subcontractor's submission or any
information obtained by the Town through its own independent verification of
the information provided by the contractor.
(Ord. 1900, § 7, 4-12-17)
Sec. 7-34 Certified Payroll.
   For projects in which the cost is at least two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00), the successful bidder and all subcontractors working on a public
works projects, upon request by the Town, shall submit a certified payroll
report utilizing the federal form now known as WH-347 which must be prepared on
a weekly basis and submitted to the Town within ten (10) calendar days after
the end of each week in which the bidder or subcontractor performed its work on
the public work project. These certified payroll reports shall identify the job
title and craft of each employee on the project, e.g., journeyman electrician
or apprentice electrician. In the event that any contractor or subcontractor
uses independent contractors to perform work on the project, such individual
must be identified on the WH-347 form with the same information as is required
for employees.
   The Town may withhold payment due for work performed by a bidder if the
bidder fails to timely submit its certified payroll reports until such time as
such certified payroll reports are submitted. The Town may also withhold
payment due for work performed by a subcontractor if the subcontractor fails to
timely submit its certified payroll reports until such time as certified
payroll reports are submitted. The Town shall not withhold payment to a bidder
for work performed by the bidder or for work performed by subcontractors who
have submitted their certified payroll reports, because one (1) or more other
subcontractors failed to timely submit their certified payroll reports.
(Ord. 1900, § 8, 4-12-17)
Sec. 7-34.1 Public Records.
   All information submitted by a bidder or subcontractor pursuant to this
Ordinance, including certified payrolls, are public records subject to
inspection and copying pursuant to the Indiana Access to Public Records Law
(I.C., § 5-14-3), subject to exclusions listed in I.C., § 5-14-3-4.
(Ord. 1900, § 9, 4-12-17)
Sec. 7-34.2 Penalties for False, Deceptive, or Fraudulent Statements/
Information.
   Any bidder that willfully makes, or willfully causes to be made, a false,
deceptive or fraudulent statement, or willfully submits false, deceptive or
fraudulent information in connection with any submission made to the Town shall
be disqualified from bidding on all Town public works projects for a period of
three (3) years. Thereafter, the disqualified bidder shall comply with all
requirements of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time, and the Town
thereafter by its Town Council, shall determine in its sole discretion, whether
the bidder entity, is again a qualified bidder for Town public works projects.
(Ord. 1900, § 10, 4-12-17)
Article 4. Sidewalks And Driveways.  5
 
Notes
5    I.C., § 36-9-18-9, requires owners of abutting property to construct or
  repair sidewalks and curbs.
Sec. 7-35 Responsibility for Repair and Maintenance of Abutting Sidewalks and
Driveways.
   a.   The responsibility for the repair and maintenance of sidewalks and
driveways within the Town of Schererville is hereby deemed to be that of
abutting property owners.
   b.   Said property owners shall be responsible for maintaining the abutting
sidewalk in a reasonably safe condition, and shall repair and maintain the
abutting sidewalk at their own expense as and when needed in the opinion of the
Code Enforcement Officers of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1150, Art. II, § 1, 6-13-90)
Sec. 7-36 Notice of Order to Repair.
   Should a property owner fail to maintain his or her abutting sidewalk and/or
driveway in a reasonably safe condition, then, in the interest of the health,
safety and general welfare of the public, the Town, in its sole discretion, may
issue a notice of an order to repair said sidewalk and/or driveway to the
responsible property owner.
(Ord. No. 1150, Art. II, § 2, 6-13-90)
Sec. 7-37 Issuance and Service of Notice to Repair.
   a.   The notice of an order to repair or improve any sidewalk and/or
driveway within the Town shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or
other duly designated administrative official of the Town to the responsible
property owner. The notice shall be addressed to the common address of the
property in question and also to the address of the owner of the offending
property, if known, and shall be sent by certified mail.
   b.   The property owner shall perform the requested repairs or improvements
to the sidewalk and/or driveway within the time period set forth in the order.
(Ord. No. 1150, Art. II, § 3, 6-13-90)
Sec. 7-38 Contract for Repair.
   In the event any property owner fails to comply with the order to repair or
improve any sidewalk or driveway within the Town issued by the duly designated
administrative official of the Town, the Town Council, in its sole discretion,
may have the sidewalk or driveway constructed or repaired. In causing the
sidewalk or driveway to be constructed or repaired, the Town Council may let a
general contract for the making or repairing of all sidewalks or driveways
subject to the issued order. The letting of any contract under the provisions
of this Ordinance shall be governed by the laws of the State of Indiana
regulating contractual authority of the Town Council for such matters, as they
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1150, Art. II, § 4, 6-13-90)
Sec. 7-39 Assessments.
   Assessments for the construction or repair of sidewalks or driveways shall
be levied and collected pursuant to the terms of Indiana Code, § 36-9-18-1, et
seq., as amended from time to time. The entire cost of the sidewalk or driveway
improvements or repairs made shall be assessed and apportioned against such lot
or parcel of property abutting upon the improvement in the proportion that the
improved lineal front footage of each lot or parcel of Property bears to the
entire length of the improvement.
(Ord. No. 1150, Art. II, § 5,6-13-90)
Sec. 7-40 Penalty.
   In addition to any assessments provided for under Section
7-39 of this Article, any person or property owner who refuses to maintain and
keep sidewalks or driveways abutting their property in proper repair and
condition, after notice as required by this Article, shall be charged with an
infraction and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that an unreasonable
condition exists after notice is given is deemed to be a separate violation,
and shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1150, Art. II, § 6, 6-13-90)
Sec. 7-41 Maintenance Contribution Fund.
   a.   The Town Council, in its sole discretion, may authorize the Town to
contribute a sum, up to, but not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost to
repair or replace a declared dangerous or defective sidewalk and/or driveway.
This contribution may take the form of an outright grant or a loan under the
terms and conditions as determined by the Town Council in their sound
discretion provided they comply with Indiana law.
   b.   The Town Council may in its discretion appropriate and spend up to ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) each year in a fund designated for the
maintenance and repair of sidewalks and driveways in the Town of Schererville.
This amount is intended to encompass any form of contribution, whether it take
the form of a grant, a loan, or any other type of contribution.
(Ord. No. 1150, Art. II, § 7, 6-13-90)
Sec. 7-42 through Sec. 7-44 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 5. Building Code.
Sec. 7-45 Title.
   This Article, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto, shall be
known as the "Building Code of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana",
may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this Code".
(Ord. No. 1039, § 1,10-14-89)
Sec. 7-46 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum standards for the protection
of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare, and for the
conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and
structures.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 2,10-14-89)
Sec. 7-47 Authority.
   The Building Inspector, or duly designated representative, is authorized and
directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this Code. Whenever
in this Code, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the Building Inspector or any other duly designated
official of the Town, this shall be construed to give such officer only the
discretion of determining whether this Code has been complied with. No such
provision shall be construed as giving any Town official discretionary powers
as to what this Code shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by
Ordinances or to enforce this Code in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 3,10-14-89)
Sec. 7-48 Scope.
   The provisions of this Code apply to the construction, alteration, repair,
use, occupancy, maintenance and additions to all buildings and structures,
other than fences, in the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 4,10-14-89)
Sec. 7-49 Adoption of Building Rules, Codes, and Standards by Reference.
   a.   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission as set out in the following articles of Title 675 of the Indiana
Administrative Code are incorporated by reference in this ordinance and shall
include later amendments to those Articles as the same are published in the
Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as
fixed therein:
      1.   Article 13 - Building Codes
         a)    Fire and Building Safety Standards
         b)    Indiana Building Code
         c)    Indiana Building Code Standards
         d)    Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code
      2.   Article 14 - One and Two Family Dwelling Codes
         a)    Council of American Building Officials One and Two Family
Dwelling Code
         b)    CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code
         c)    Standard for Permanent Installation of Manufactured Homes
      3.   Article 16 - Plumbing Codes - Indiana Plumbing Code
      4.   Article 17-ElectricalCodes
         a)    Indiana Electrical Code
         b)    Safety Code for Health Care Facilities
      5.   Article 18 - Mechanical Codes - Indiana Mechanical Code
      6.   Article 19 - Energy Conservation Codes
         a)    Indiana Energy Conservation Code
         b)    Modifications to the Model Energy Codes
      7.   Article 20 - Swimming Pool Codes - Indiana Swimming Pool Code
   b.   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on file in
the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 5, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-50 Application for Permits.
   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes, unless the
application for a permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the proposed
location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications showing the
work to be done. In addition, a copy of a Design Release, issued by the State
Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Indiana Code, §
22-15-3-1, shall be provided to the Building Inspector, or duly designated
representative, before issuance of a permit for construction covered by such
Design Release.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 6, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-51 Permit Required.
   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration or
repair of any building or structure, using forms furnished by the Building
Inspector, or duly designated representative, and all fees required by this
Code shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 7, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-52 Other Ordinances.
   All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance with all other
ordinances of the Town pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for
permits, there shall be paid the fees prescribed in such ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 8, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-53 Fees and Required Inspections.
   Permits required by Section
7-51 shall be issued upon prior payment of inspection fees according to the
following schedule:
Type of Construction Required Inspections Single Inspection Fee Permit Fee
Type of Construction      Required Inspections Single Inspection Fee Permit Fee
1 or 2 Family Dwellings,  4                    $20.00                $80.00
detached
Apartments, Hotels,       3                    20.00                 60.00
Motels/per unit
Business, Commercial,     6                    20.00                 120.00
Public
Educational,              6                    20.00                 120.00
Institutional, Church
Industrial, Warehouse,    4                    20.00                 80.00
Bulk Storage
Mobile Homes, Temporary   1                    20.00                 20.00
Structures
Accessory Bldgs/          1                    20.00                 20.00
residential use
Additions/Alterations/all 2                    20.00                 40.00
occupancies
 
   The minimum permit fee for any permit shall be Twenty Dollars ($20.00).
(Ord. No. 1039, § 9, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-54 Review of Application.
   The Building Inspector, or duly designated representative, shall:
   a.   Review all building permit applications to determine full compliance
with the provisions of this Code;
   b.   Review all building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements;
   c.   Review building permit applications for major repairs within the flood
plain area having special flood hazards;
   d.   Review building permit applications for new construction or substantial
improvements within the flood plain area having special flood hazards.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 10,10-14-89)
Sec. 7-55 Inspections.
   After the issuance of any building permit, the building Inspector, or duly
designated representative, shall make, or shall cause to be made, such
inspections of the work being done as are necessary.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 11, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-56 Entry.
   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Inspector, or duly
authorized representative, may enter at reasonable times any building,
structure or premises in the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, to
perform any duty imposed upon him by this Code.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 12, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-57 Stop Order.
   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the
Building Inspector, or duly designated representative, may order the work
stopped.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 13, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-58 Certificate of Occupancy.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered
or repaired after the adoption of this Ordinance shall be issued unless such
building or structure was erected, altered or repaired in compliance with the
provisions of this Article.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 14,10-14-89)
Sec. 7-59 Standards.
   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to
accepted standards and practices in the trade.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 15, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-60 Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner,
lessee, sublessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building
or structure, other than fences, in the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of
the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 16, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-61 Right of Appeal.
   All persons shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Building
Inspector, or duly designated representative, first through the Town of
Schererville, and then to the Fire Prevention and building Safety Commission of
Indiana in accordance with the provisions of Indiana Code, §§ 22-13-2-7 and 4-
21.5-3-7, as applicable.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 17,10-14-89)
Sec. 7-62 Remedies.
   The Building Inspector, or duly designated representative, shall, in the
name of the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, bring actions in the
Circuit or Superior Courts of Lake County, Indiana, for mandatory and
injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order
or orders made by the Building Inspector, or duly designated representative,
and any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an
action to recover the penalties provided for in this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 18, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-63 Penalties.
   In the event any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the
provisions of this ordinance, or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall
fail to perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the
Building Inspector, or duly designated representative, or shall fail, neglect
or refuse to obey any lawful order given by the Building Inspector, or duly
designated representative, in connection with the provisions of this ordinance
for each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm or corporation
shall be fined in an amount not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor
more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day of such
unlawful activity as is prohibited by the first sentence of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 19, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-64 Severability and Rules of Construction.
   a.   Any provisions stated elsewhere in any other ordinances of the Town
which are inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this Article are deemed
null and void.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 20, 10-14-89)
   b.   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance shall be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not effect any other section, clause, provision or portion
of this Article.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 21, 10-14-89)
   c.   Any and all other ordinances and/or parts of ordinances specifically in
conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are repealed.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 22, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-65 Effective Date.
   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
adoption, approval by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of
Indiana, and publication, as required by law.
(Ord. No. 1039, § 23, 10-14-89)
Sec. 7-66 through Sec. 7-69 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 6. Street Numbers.
Sec. 7-70 Display of Street Numbers Required.
   Each building, house, or other structure on a parcel of real estate which is
or has been assigned a street number by the Plan Commission, shall have
displayed, and properly maintained thereon, the assigned street number on a
portion of the structure on or near the main entrance, which is plainly and
readily visible by the naked eye from the street or other public way which
adjoins said parcel.
(Ord. No. 949, § 1,4-11-84)
Sec. 7-71 Special Exceptions for Distant Property.
   Ever building, house, or other structure which has been so assigned a street
number by the Plan Commission, but which is so distant from the street or other
public way which adjoins it as to be impractical to comply with the
requirements of Section
7-70 of this ordinance, shall instead display the assigned street number on a
light post, mailbox, fence or other structure near the entrance to said parcel,
which is plainly and readily visible by the naked eye from the street or public
way which adjoins the same.
(Ord. No. 949, § 2, 4-11-84)
Sec. 7-72 Minimum Size of Numbers.
   The assigned street number display shall employ arabic numerals of a minimum
of three inches (3") in height, the color of which must clearly contrast with
the background upon which they are placed.
(Ord. No. 949, § 3, 4-11-84)
Sec. 7-73 Violations and Penalties.
   An owner or occupant of a building, house or structure on a parcel of real
estate which has been or is so assigned a street number, and who fails to erect
or to properly maintain the numerical display required by this ordinance, shall
be liable for a fine of not more than ten dollars ($10.00). Each day a
violation of this ordinance exists shall be deemed a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 949, § 4, 4-11-84)
Sec. 7-74 Written Notification of Noncompliance.
   Any person who violates this ordinance shall have thirty (30) days following
written notification of noncompliance in which to comply without fine or other
penalty.
(Ord No. 949, § 5,4-11-84)
Sec. 7-75 through Sec. 7-77 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 7. Manufactured Housing.
Division I. Permitted Placement.
Sec. 7-78 Definitions.
   a.   A Manufactured Home - A manufactured home for the purpose of this
ordinance, shall mean a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing
facility for installation or assembly at the building site and bearing a seal
certifying that it is built in compliance with the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code and complying with the Uniform
Building Code for One-and Two-Family Homes of the State of Indiana. Such
manufactured homes shall contain a minimum of nine hundred fifty (950) square
feet of occupied space and exceed a minimum width of twenty three (23 )feet.
(See Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-1106)
   b.   Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code - Title IV
of the 1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et. seq.)
as amended (previously known as the federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Act), rules and regulations adopted thereunder, which include H.U.D. approved
information supplied by the home manufacturer, and regulations and
interpretations of said code by the Indiana Administrative Building Council.
   c.   One and Two Family Dwelling Code, Indiana - The mandatory statewide
building code adopted by the Indiana Administrative Building Council for one
and two family residential dwellings.
(Ord. No. 896,1, 7-14-82)
Division II. Applicability.
Sec. 7-79 Location Out of Parks.
   This ordinance shall apply only to manufactured housing located outside of
manufactured housing parks.
(Ord. No. 896, II [a], 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-80 Year of Manufacture.
   For the purposes of Public Law 312, Acts of 1981, Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-
1106, of this chapter shall apply only to manufactured homes constructed after
January 1, 1981.
(Ord. No. 896,11 [b], 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-81 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Standards.
Sec. 7-82 Permitted Placement.
   The establishment, location and use of manufactured homes as permanent
residences approved individually, by specific materials, or by design, shall be
permitted in any zone permitting installation of a dwelling unit, subject to
requirements and limitations applying generally to such residential use in the
district or subdivision, and provided such homes shall meet the following
requirements and limitations:
   a.   The dwelling shall meet the appropriate exterior appearance standards
as hereinafter set forth in Section
7-84.
   b.   The dwelling shall be located in a district where such use is permitted
in the Schedule of Uses as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Schererville, and
   c.   The dwelling shall receive all required permits and conform with the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Schererville, Building Codes, and
all other ordinances of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 896, III [a]-[c], 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-83 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Exterior Appearance Standards.
Sec. 7-84 Requirements.
   A manufactured home shall:
   a.   Conform to the minimum square footage requirements of appropriate
zoning classification in the Town of Schererville Zoning Ordinance for
residential construction, and any restrictions or covenants of record.
   b.   Shall be placed on a foundation meeting all the requirements of a
conventional single family home foundation.
   c.   Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with approved manufactured
home installation standards.
   d.   Have wheels, axles, and hitch mechanisms removed.
   e.   Meet appropriate utility connection standards, in accordance with
approved home installation standards.
   f.   Have siding material of a type customarily used on site-constructed
residences.
   g.   Have roofing materials of a type customarily used on site-constructed
residences, with a minimum of three inch (3") pitch for each foot of horizontal
travel.
   h.   Be placed onto a permanent exterior perimeter retaining wall, in
accordance with the approval manufactured home installation standards.
(Ord. No. 896, IV, 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-85 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Installation Standards.
Sec. 7-86 Perimeter Retaining Wall.
   Those manufactured homes designated in the zoning ordinance as requiring
perimeter retaining walls constructed in accordance with the terms of the One
and Two Family Dwelling Code. The space between the floor joists of the home
and the excavated underfloor grade shall be completely enclosed with the
permanent perimeter retaining wall. The wall shall be composed of solid
masonry, which shall extend below the frost line. The design by a registered
professional engineer or architect shall safely support those loads, as
determined by the character of the soil.
(Ord. No. 896, V [A], 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-87 Foundations.
   All manufactured housing shall be installed on foundations in accordance
with the requirements of the One and Two Dwelling Code of the State of Indiana.
(Ord. No. 896, V [B], 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-88 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Permits.
Sec. 7-89 Improvement Location Permit.
   a.   Requirements - Prior to the location, relocation, or establishment of
any manufactured home, the home owner or authorized representative shall secure
from the Building Commissioner a "Zoning Permit" which states that the building
and its location conform with the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Schererville. In addition to complying with all requirements as set forth in
said Ordinance of the Town of Schererville, each application for a "Zoning
Permit" shall be accompanied by the following items:
      1.   A plot plan as required for all dwelling units, but which at a
minimum include elevations, roof materials, exterior dimensions, perimeter
retaining wall treatment, foundation construction and materials, exterior
finishes and the like;
      2.   Sewer and water tap-on permits;
      3.   A copy of the approved instructions, which will be used for
installation purposes, where applicable;
      4.   Such other information, as may be required by the Building
Commissioner for the proper enforcement of this ordinance; and
      5.   An agreement signed by the homeowner or authorized representative
pledging compliance with the terms set by the Building Commissioner in the
"Zoning Permit".
   b.   Issuance of Permit - After the receipt of the information required for
a "Zoning Permit", the Building Commissioner shall review the standards set in
this ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Schererville and other
Building Codes for the Town of Schererville. If the applicant has met all
required standards, then the "Zoning Permit" shall be issued by the Building
Commissioner.
   c.   Denial of Permit - If the Building Commissioner determines that an
application does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance and the
ordinances of the Town of Schererville, then, the Commissioner shall deny said
application in writing, stating the reasons therefore.
(Ord. No. 896, V [A], 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-90 Certificate of Occupancy.
   a.   Occupancy Requirement - Prior to the occupancy of any manufactured
home, the home owner or authorized representative shall secure from the
Building Commissioner a Certificate of Occupancy stating that the building and
its use comply with all provisions of the ordinance applicable to the building
or the use in the district in which it is located.
   b.   Issuance of Certificate - After submission of an application of
Occupancy, the Building Commissioner shall make such referrals to other local
officials for technical determinations as he deems appropriate for conformance
with conditions of the "Zoning Permit" and the standards set out in this
ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Schererville. If the
applicant has conformed with all of the required conditions and standards, a
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued.
   c.   Denial of Certificate - If any of the conditions or standards required
by this ordinance have not been complied with, the Certificate of Occupancy
shall not be issued, and a written statement specifying the reasons for non-
issuance shall be made and given to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 896, V [B], 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-91 Appeal.
   An action to review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by an administrative official or board charged with enforcement of the zoning
ordinance shall pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-919.
(Ord. No. 896, VII, 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-92 Penalty for Violation.
   a.   Failure to Comply - Each day of non-compliance with the provisions of
this ordinance constitutes a separate and distinct ordinance violation. Any
person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this ordinance shall be
fined in a sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) each day a violation exists.
   b.   Removal - A structure, located on property in violation of this
ordinance, shall be subject to removal from such property. However, the owner
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to bring the property into compliance
before action for removal can be taken. If action finally is taken by the
appropriate authority to force compliance, the expenses involved shall be
chargeable to the owner and constitute a lien against the property.
   c.   Removal Method - The Town Council or the Plan Commission or the Board
of Zoning Appeals or its designated administrator may institute suit for
injunctive relief in an appropriate court to cause such violation to be
prevented, abated or removed.
(Ord. No. 896, VIII, 7-14-82)
Sec. 7-93 through Sec. 7-97 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 8. Condominium Conversion Regulations.  6
 
Notes
     I.C., § 32-1-6-1, et seq., sets forth the "Horizontal Property Law".
6 Editor's Note: Ord. No. 887 was retained during the recodification process
  since the Town Attorney's Office did not determine to do otherwise.
Sec. 7-98 Construction.
   This Article shall be construed liberally to insure protection for the
tenant when he is subject to a condominium conversion.
(Ord. No. 887, § 1, 5-12-82)
Sec. 7-99 Severability.
   Should any provision of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or
invalid for any reason, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
(Ord. No. 887, § 2, 5-12-82)
Sec. 7-100 Applicability.
   This Article applies to all multifamily dwellings located within the Town of
Schererville which are to be developed as conversion condominiums.
(Ord. No. 887, § 3, 5-12-82)
Sec. 7-101 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Article, the foregoing terms, phrases, and words
shall have the meanings assigned to them by this section unless their use in
the context of this ordinance clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
words used in the singular number include the plural number, words in the
masculine gender include the feminine gender. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
   a.   Common elements - All portions of the property except the units.
   b.   Condominium - Real estate formally submitted or subject to the Indiana
Horizontal Property Law, as that Act may be amended, and to this ordinance.
   c.   Condominium instruments - All documents and authorized amendments,
including but not limited to, the declaration, by-laws, plats, floor plans,
condominium disclosure statement, exhibits or schedules thereto, which the
Indiana Horizontal Property Law requires to be filed in the Office of the Lake
County Recorder, and which are required to be filed pursuant to the provisions
of this ordinance with the Town Building Commissioner.
   d.   Condominium Unit - An enclosed space consisting of one or more rooms,
occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a structure of one (1) or more
floors or stories designed for residential use with either a direct exit to a
public street or highway or an exit to a public way, together with the
undivided interest in the common areas as that phrase is defined by the Indiana
Horizontal Property Law.
   e.   Declarant - Any person who plans to execute or has executed the
declaration or on whose behalf the declaration is executed.
   f.   Declaration - The instrument by which property is submitted for filing
in the Office of the Lake County Recorder by the Indiana Horizontal Property
Law and this ordinance as hereafter provides.
   g.   Developer - Any person who has property legally or equitably owned by
him subject to the provisions of the Indiana Horizontal Property Law, including
any successor to such developer's entire interest in the property.
   h.   Filing - The complete submission of all documents required by Section
7-102(c) with a stamped date of filing contained thereon.
   i.   Offering - Any advertisement, publication, or inducement, either
written or verbal, by a declarant to promote the purchase of a condominium unit
or prospective condominium unit.
   j.    Multiple-family dwelling - A building containing three (3) or more
dwelling units.
   k.   Person - An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, trust or other
legal entity capable of holding title to real estate.
   l.   Property - All the land, property and space comprising the parcel, all
improvements and structures erected, constructed or contained therein or
thereon, including the building and all easements, rights and appurtenances
belong thereto, and all fixtures and equipment intended for the mutual use,
benefit, or enjoyment of the unit owners, submitted to the provisions of this
Article.
(Ord. No. 887, § 4, 5-12-82)
Sec. 7-102 Creation of a Condominium.
   a.   Notice of intent to tenants - Before the formal filing and concurrently
with its delivery to tenants, the declarant shall deliver to the Town of
Schererville a copy of the Notice of Intent to Convert and an affidavit
providing a list of the tenants to whom said notice was supplied and the date
or dates of delivery or attempted delivery. a copy of this ordinance shall be
attached to all such notices. Said notices shall contain the information
required by the town as set forth in regulations promulgated hereunder.
   b.   Condominium Code Assessment Report - Within sixty (60) days after the
Notice of Intent has been sent to tenants and to the Town pursuant to Section
7-102 'a' and upon payment of the application fee as set forth in Section
7-103 'd', a Condominium Code Assessment Report shall be prepared by the Town
listing violations of all applicable codes existing as of that date.
   c.   Filing and receipt of the condominium instrument.
      1.   Before recording a declaration with the Lake County Recorder, the
declarant must file with the Town of Schererville:
         a)   The condominium instruments, including the declaration, by-laws,
plats, and condominium disclosure statement.
         b)   A report prepared by an independent licensed architect or
engineer describing the items specified in Section
7-103 '2' g.
         c)   A copy of the affidavit referred to in Section
7-102 'a'.
      2.   The Town of Schererville shall inform the declarant in writing as to
whether all documents required for filing by this ordinance have been
submitted, said information to be provided no later than twenty-one (21) days
after offering of said documents by the declarant. The filing date shall be
that date, as stamped on the documents submitted, when all required documents
are in the possession of the town. Documents required to be filed under this
section shall be filed with the Town Council or their designee.
      3.   Upon receipt of the documents specified in subparagraph (1) for
filing, the Town Council or their designee shall add the following stamped
statement to the first page of the declaration:
"The Town of Schererville has received all the condominium instruments and
other required documents for filing as of this date. Such receipt does not
constitute approval by the Town of the contents, nor verification of the facts
and statements contained therein."
   A condominium can be created in the Town of Schererville only if that
statement with the required signature is on the declaration at the time that
the declaration is recorded with the Lake County Recorder.
      4.   Where a declarant has filed with the Town a Notice of Intent or
other condominium instrument for a building that the Town has determined or
subsequently determines in its Condominium Code Assessment Report not to be in
compliance with all applicable building, zoning and housing codes, the
declarant shall also file:
         a)   A verified statement showing the estimated cost and time of
completion of the work necessary to correct each code violation on said report
and source of said estimate.
         b)   Satisfactory evidence of sufficient funds to cover all of the
costs in Section
7-102 c. 4. (a) above without the use of any purchaser's funds.
      5.   In addition to the requirements of this section, the declarant must
file with the Town an exact copy of all condominium instruments recorded with
the Lake County Recorder within ten (10) days after recording.
   d.   Contents of declaration - The declaration for a condominium must
contain the following:
      1.   The name of the condominium, which must include the word
"condominium" or be followed by the words "a condominium".
      2.   The provisions required by the Indiana Horizontal Property Law and
this ordinance.
      3.   An allocation to each unit of a portion of votes in the association
and a percentage of the common expenses of the association, both of which shall
be in the same ratio as the percentage of ownership in the common elements of
the condominium.
   e.   Conveyance with uncompleted items: Security.
      1.   Title to any sold unit shall not be conveyed before correction of
all code violations within that unit except that non-life safety items that
could not, because of weather conditions, be completed or corrected at the time
conveyance is scheduled may be covered by a unit escrow to be set up at or
prior to closing for the benefit of the individual unit purchaser and covering
the estimated cost of correction of those items. There shall also be an escrow
set up at or prior to closing for contracted for but not completed non-code
improvements within the unit. This may, but need not be, the same "unit
escrows" as that covering code violations.
      2.   An escrow account or other satisfactory security shall be
established prior to conveyance of title to the first unit, which escrow or
other security shall be for the benefit of the Unit Owner's Association, shall
be utilized for and be in an amount necessary to correct the code violations in
the common areas and the contracted for but uncompleted non-code improvements
of the common areas. Said "common area escrow" or other security shall have
been established prior to conveyance of the first unit.
      3.   When the declarant has demonstrated pursuant to regulations that the
above sections have been satisfied, the Town Council or their designee shall
cause to be issued a certificate of approval to convey title to purchasers. The
Town shall within fifteen (15) days of a request for this certificate provide
either the certificate or a list of outstanding violations.
(Ord. No. 887, § 5, 5-12-82)
Sec. 7-103 Protection of Purchasers.
   a.   Condominium disclosure statement.
      1.   The declarant must provide the condominium disclosure statement
filed with the Town to all existing tenants in a conversion condominium. A copy
of the condominium disclosure statement must be available for public inspection
in the sales or business office of the declarant.
      2.   The condominium disclosure statement shall disclose fully and
accurately the characteristics of the condominium and the units therein and all
unusual and material circumstances and features affecting the condominium. It
shall include the following:
         a)   The name, principal address and telephone number of the declarant
or developer and the condominium.
         b)   A general description of the condominium, including the number
and type of units, the asking price of each type of unit, any restrictions on
use and occupancy of the units, floor plans, the arrangements for off-street
parking and the proportion of units that the declarant intends to rent.
         c)   Copies of the declaration, the by-laws, the rules and
regulations, and any contracts and leases to be signed by purchasers at
closing, with a brief narrative description of each document.
         d)   A projected itemized budget for one (1) year after the date of
the first conveyance to a purchaser, including operating costs, management
costs and reserve costs:
         e)   A description of the proposed improvements to the units or the
common elements, in addition to those required under Section
7-102 4e' which have not been completed by the date on which the condominium
instruments are filed with the Town. The description of each improvement shall
specify the type and quality of materials to be used, the estimated cost, and
the time by which improvement shall be completed.
         f)   For a conversion condominium, information available on the actual
expenditures made for all repairs, maintenance, operation, or upkeep of the
subject property within the last three (3) years set forth with the proposed
budget of the condominium. If the property has not been in existence for a
period of three (3) years, the information shall be provided for the maximum
period the property has been occupied.
         g)   A statement of the declarant, based on a report prepared by an
independent, licensed architect or engineer, describing the present condition
of all structural components i.e. roof, foundation, external and supporting
walls; major mechanical, electrical, plumbing and heating system, and also
including the approximate dates of construction, installation and major
repairs, the expected useful life of each item, and, for major mechanical
systems, the estimated cost of replacing each of the same.
         h)   A list of any uncured violations of the applicable building and
housing codes or any other applicable codes, which are specified in the
Condominium Assessment Report prepared by the Town.
         i)   A copy of any management contract, recreational lease or other
contract or lease affecting the condominium with a brief narrative description
of each document and an indication of the relationship, if any, between the
declarant and the managing agent or firm.
         j)    The terms of any warranties provided by the declarant.
         k)    Any initial or special fee due from the purchaser at closing
with a description of the purpose and method of calculating the fee.
         l)    Any current or expected fee to be paid by unit owners for the
use of the common elements and other facilities related to the condominium.
         m)    A description of any Hens, title defects, or encumbrances
affecting the title to the condominium as of the date of preparation of the
condominium disclosure statement.
         n)    A description of any financing offered by the declarant.
         o)   A description of the insurance coverage to be provided for the
benefit of the unit owners.
         p)    A statement that within thirty (30) days after receipt of a
condominium disclosure statement and all amendments thereto, a purchaser may
cancel a contract for purchase of a unit in accordance with the conditions
specified in section 6 'b\
         q)    A statement that any deposit made in connection with the
purchase of a unit will be held in an escrow account until closing and will be
returned to the purchaser if the contract is canceled pursuant to Section
7-103 'b\
         r)    The status of any pending litigation which would directly affect
the subject condominium and/or the declarant's ability to convey clear title.
   b.   Purchaser's right to cancel.
      1.   Unless delivery of a condominium disclosure statement is not
required, a declarant shall provide a purchaser of a unit with a copy of the
condominium disclosure statement and all amendments thereto before entering
into a contract of sale-Unless a purchaser is given the condominium disclosure
statement more than thirty (30) days before executing a contract for the
purchase of a unit, the purchaser may cancel the contract within thirty (30)
days after first receiving the condominium disclosure statement. The notice of
cancellation by the purchaser must be in writing.
      2.   Cancellation pursuant to subparagraph (1) without penalty. All
payments which were made the purchaser before cancellation, including interest
where applicable, shall be refunded by declarant within ten (10) days after
receiving notice of cancellation.
   c.   Escrow of deposits.
      1.   Any deposit made in connection with the purchase or reservation of a
unit shall be placed in escrow and held in an account designed solely for that
purpose by an institution whose accounts are insured by a government agency
until 1) delivered to the declarant at closing; 2) delivered to the declarant
because of purchaser's default under a contract to purchase the unit; or 3)
refunded to the purchaser.
      2.   If the deposit is placed in an interest bearing account, the
interest shall be paid to the purchaser.
      3.   Such escrow funds shall not be subject to attachment by the
creditors of either the purchaser or the declarant.
   d.   Warranties.
      1.   All sales contracts for the first-time sale of any condominium unit
covered under this ordinance shall contain the following express warranties by
the declarant:
         a)   Common elements and systems. Common elements and systems shall
refer to the roof, foundation, external and supporting walls and other
structural elements, the electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
other mechanical system, and all other common facilities, including but not
limited to private sidewalks, recreational areas and common open space (but
excluding decorating and carpeting). The declarant shall warrant the materials,
workmanship, operation, construction, or condition of all such items or
elements for two (2) years from the day of transfer of title of the first unit
so transferred. The declarant shall provide his own warranty, whether or not
any manufacturer's warranty currently exists.
         b)   Individual unit mechanical equipment. Individual unit mechanical
equipment shall refer to all appliances and other mechanical equipment
including heating, electrical, and plumbing systems physically located within
the individually owned units. The declarant shall warrant the materials,
workmanship, operation, construction, and condition of said items for one year
from the date of title transfer of that individual unit.
      2.   The declarant shall have the option to repair or replace warranted
systems or elements, or to pay the cash value of such repair or replacement,
except that where he/she fails upon notice and reasonable time as set forth
below, to repair, replace, or pay for said item or system, or to state in
writing why they do not fall within the warranty, the unit owners, may decide
whether to repair or replace the items, The declarant shall not be required to
honor his/her own warranty unless or until the unit owner or association, as
the case may be, shall have first sought to enforce existing manufacturer's
warranties.
      3.   In order to cause said warranty to be honored, the unit owner, as
the case may be, shall give timely notice of any defect or failure of operation
to the declarant or his successor, all such notices to be during the period of
warranty.
      4.   To assure compliance with the warranties set forth in this
subsection the declarant shall set up escrows or other appropriate security
acceptable to the Town pursuant to regulations promulgated under this section,
which shall provide for said escrows or other security to revert to sole
control of the declarant at the expiration of the different warranty periods
unless outstanding claims exist against them. Escrows or other appropriate
security shall be in an amount constituting the total of one percent (1 %) of
the sales price of each unit sold.
(Ord. No. 887, § 6, 5-12-82)
Sec. 7-104 Protection of Tenants.
   a.   Notice requirements.
      1.   A declarant of a conversion condominium shall give each of the
tenants in possession of units subject to this ordinance notice of intent to
convert no less than two hundred ten (210) days prior to requiring the tenants
to vacate, at least one hundred twenty (120) days of which must elapse before
the recording of the condominium instruments with the Lake County Recorder.
This notice shall be concurrently filed with the Town as provided in Section
7-102 'a'.
      2.   The notice of intent must set forth the rights of tenants under this
ordinance and must include a copy of this ordinance as an attachment. Such
notice shall be hand delivered or sent by certified mail.
      3.   No tenant may be required by the declarant to vacate upon less than
two hundred ten (210) days notice, except by reason of nonpayment of rent,
conduct that disturbs other tenants' peaceful enjoyment of the premises, or
other substantial violations of the terms of the rental agreement. The terms of
tenancy may not be altered during that period.
      4.   Nothing in this section permits termination of a lease by a
declarant in violation of its terms.
      5.   Any tenant under a lease entered into subsequent to the effective
date of this ordinance who receives a notice of intent to convert shall at any
time after receipt of the notice have the right to terminate the lease with
sixty (60) days written notice to the landlord, which sixty (60) days shall
start to run from the date that the next rental payment is due. Such
termination shall be without penalty or other termination charge to the tenant.
By delivering the notice of termination to the landlord, the tenant waives the
right to purchase the unit under Section
7-104 'b'.
      6.   Where an existing tenant's lease has expired and not been renewed,
at the landlord's behest, and within ninety (90) days of the last effective day
of said lease a notice of intent to convert has been served on any tenant in
that building, the most recent tenant whose lease expired shall have the same
rights of purchase and of relocation as if he were still a tenant of that unit.
This section does not apply to termination of leases for violations of their
terms or default by the tenant.
      7.   Those tenants under a lease entered into subsequent to the effective
date of this ordinance who within thirty (30) days of signing of a lease,
whether or not they have moved into the unit, receive notice of intent to
convert shall have fifteen (15) days from receipt of that notice to serve an
immediate fifteen (15) day notice of their intent to vacate, or not to honor
said lease. There shall be no penalties assessed against tenants who void their
lease pursuant to this section.
   Failure of said tenant to utilize this fifteen (15) day notice right is not
a waiver of his rights to give a sixty (60) day notice as set forth in Section
7-104 'a' '5' above.
      8.   Failure of a declarant to give notice as required by the above
section is a defense to an action for possession, unless the tenant knowingly
avoids receiving or delivery of said notice of intent.
   b.   Tenant's right to purchase - During the one hundred twenty (120) day
period following the delivery to tenants of the notice of intent, or until
thirty (30) days after the condominium instruments have been filed with the
Town, whichever is longer, the declarant shall offer the tenant his unit. This
offer shall be held open until tenant's acceptance or refusal, but in no event
longer than the expiration of either the one hundred twenty (120) period or the
thirty (30) days after filing of the condominium instruments, whichever is
longer. Inaction by the tenant after the expiration of the one hundred twenty
(120) days or thirty (30) days shall constitute a waiver of his right of first
purchase. Said offer shall be either a first-time offer to the tenant when a
bonafide offer has been submitted for that unit by a third party. Under either
procedure, the tenant shall have thirty (30) days to execute his own contract
for the unit from the date of receipt of the offer or right of first refusal.
If a tenant foils to execute a contract during that period, the declarant may
not offer to sell that unit during the following one hundred eighty (180) days
at a price or on terms more favorable to the prospective purchaser than the
price or terms offered to the tenant without first making same offer to the
tenant, who shall have no less than fifteen (15) days within which to accept
the offer.
   c.   Relocation assistance - Within fourteen (14) days after receiving a
receipted bill for costs of relocation, the declarant must pay actual moving
expenses to a maximum amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) or one months'
rent, whichever is higher, for any tenant of record.
   d.   Access.
      1.   The tenant in a conversion condominium shall not unreasonably
withhold consent to the declarant to enter the unit t in order to inspect the
premises, make necessary or agreed repairs, supply necessary or agreed
services, or show the unit to prospective or actual workmen or purchasers in
accordance with subparagraph *2* below. The landlord shall not abuse the right
of access or use it to harass the tenant. Except in case of emergency, or
unless it is impracticable to do so, the landlord shall give the tenant at
least two (2) days notice of his intent and may enter only at reasonable times.
      2.   An occupied unit which is offered for initial sale can be shown to a
prospective purchaser only during the last (90) days of the notice period or
tenancy, whichever terminates at a later date.
      3.   The declarant shall not undertake remodeling for conversion of a
unit while it is occupied by a tenant, nor create any unreasonable disruption
of the common areas, including but not limited to restricting access thereto,
nor interfere with the quiet use and enjoyment of the premises, nor abuse the
right of access or use it to harass the tenant.
(Ord. No. 887, § 7, 5-12-82)
Sec. 7-105 Violations and Penalties.
   a.   Investigation and Conciliation.
      1.   The Town Council or their designee is authorized and directed to
receive complaints and conduct such investigations as he deems necessary
pursuant to the authority vested in that office.
      2.   Whenever it is determined by the Town Council of their designee that
there has been a violation of this ordinance or any duly adopted rule or
regulation of the Town, that office is authorized to seek all or a portion of
the following relief, or any other relief that may be granted by law:
         a)   Attempt to conciliate the matter by conference or otherwise and
secure a written conciliation agreement.
         b)   Seek a written assurance of discontinuance which shall be signed
by the declarant and the Town Council or their designee.
         c)   Institute injunctive or other appropriate action or proceeding in
any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a restraining order, permanent or
temporary injunction or any other appropriate form of relief.
   b.   Penalties.
      1.   The Town Attorney may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
to enjoin a violation which has been found to exist by the Town Council as a
result of an inspection. The penalty for such violation shall be not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each unit with respect to which the
violation has occurred. Each day during which any unit has been advertised or
offered and such advertisement or offer has not been withdrawn shall constitute
a separate offense.
      2.   Any person who willfully makes an untrue or misleading statement of
material facts, or willfully omits to provide required data in any document
prepared pursuant to this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each day of continuing violation.
   c.   Civil remedy - Any unit owner or tenant may file a suit in any court of
competent jurisdiction for injuries sustained by him as a result of a violation
by declarant of any provisions of this ordinance. In the event that such
violation if found to occur, the court may assess compensatory damages, and in
addition, punitive damages equal to three (3) times the amount of compensatory
damages, but not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The court shall
also award the unit owner's or tenant's attorney reasonable fees for his
services in the event that such a violation has occurred. If the Court finds
that no violation has occurred, the court shall assess reasonable attorney's
fees against the unit owner and tenant. Contractual promises shall not be held
to have merged with the deed and shall survive conveyance of the unit. This
section shall not constitute a limitation on any other private right of action.
   d.   Administration.
      1.   The Town Council or their designee shall administer this ordinance
and may promulgate regulations to carry out its enforcement with the review by
the Town Council. An application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per unit
shall be charged for conversion condominiums to be paid upon approval of the
condominium plat. This is in addition to other applicable fees. Said fee does
not apply to the resale of individual units by any owner.
      2.   The Town Council or their designee shall submit an annual report to
the Town Council which provides comprehensive data and other documentation on
the development of new and conversion condominiums.
(Ord. No. 887, § 8, 5-12-82)
Sec. 7-106 through Sec. 7-109 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 9. Fire Prevention Code.
Sec. 7-110 Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire or explosion, there is adopted by the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code
recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1970
edition, thereof, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended (by Section
7-118 of this Ordinance) of which code not less than three (3) copies have been
and now are filed in the Office of the Clerk of the said Town of Schererville
and the same are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length,
herein, and from the date on which this Article shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Town of
Schererville.
(Ord. No. 594, § 1, 11-14-73)
Sec. 7-111 Establishment and Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention.  7
   a.   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention of the Fire Department of the Town of Schererville which Bureau of
Fire Prevention is established and which shall be operated under the
supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
   b.   The Officer in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be
appointed by Chief of the Fire Department with approval of the Town Council on
the basis of examination to determine his qualifications. His appointment shall
continue during good behavior and satisfactory service, and shall not be
removed from Office except for cause. Said examination shall be such as may,
from time to time, be prescribed by the Town Council, in their sole discretion.
   c.   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The Chief of
the Fire Department shall recommend to the Town Council of the Town of
Schererville the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such
authorization is made, shall be selected through examination to determine their
fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and non-
members of the Fire Department and appointments made after examination shall be
for an indefinite term with removal only for cause.
   d.   A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Town Council of the municipality; it shall contain all
proceedings under this code, with such relevant and material statistics as the
Chief of the Fire Department may wish to include therein; the Chief of the Fire
Department shall also recommend any amendments to the code, which in his
judgment, shall be desirable.
(Ord. No. 594, § 2, 11-14-73)
 
Notes
7    Editor's Note: Section
  2-121 of this Code addresses the Fire Prevention Bureau.
Sec. 7-112 Definitions.
   a.   Wherever the word "Municipality" is used in the Fire Prevention Code,
it shall be held to mean the Town of Schererville, Indiana, a municipal
corporation.
   b.   Whereby the term "Corporation Counsel" is used in the Fire Prevention
Code, it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the Town of Schererville.
   c.   Wherever the words "Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention" are used in
the Fire Prevention Code they shall be held to mean the appointed officer in
charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(Ord. No. 594, § 3, 11-14-73)
Sec. 7-113 Modifications.
   The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have power to modify any of
the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by owner
or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties
in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the
spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial
justice done. The particulars of such modifications, when granted or allowed,
and the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention thereon shall be
entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished
the applicant.
(Ord. No. 594, § 4, 11-14-73)
Sec. 7-114 Appeals.
   Whenever the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that
the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of
the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to the
Town within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision complained of.
(Ord. No. 594, § 5, 11-14-73)
Sec. 7-115 New Materials, Process and/ or Occupancies Which May Require
Permits.
   The Town Council, the Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify,
after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now
enumerated in said code. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall post
such list in a conspicuous place and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons.
(Ord. No. 594, § 6, 11-14-73)
Sec. 7-116 Penalties.
   a.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order
as affirmed or modified by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or by a
court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally
for each and every such violation and non-compliance respectively, be guilty of
an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). The imposition of one
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.
   b.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ord. No. 594, § 7, 11-14-73)
Sec. 7-117 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances.
   All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the
provisions of this ordinance or of the code adopted are repealed.
(Ord. No. 594, § 8, 11-14-73)
Sec. 7-118 Amendments and Modifications of Fire Prevention Code.
   The following numbered Sections of the Fire Prevention Code referred to in
this Ordinance be and the same are amended and modified so as to read and
provide as follows:
"Section 12.5 b. The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited
within the limits and boundaries of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, except
for temporary storage for use in connection with an approved blasting
operation; provided, however, this prohibition will not apply to wholesale and
retail stocks of small arms ammunition, fuse lighters, fuse igniters and safety
fuses (not including cordeau detonant fuses) in quantities involving less than
five hundred (500) pounds of explosive material nor shall it apply to
explosive-actuated power devices, when employed in construction operations in
highly populated areas, in quantities involving less than fifty (50) pounds of
explosive material. Nor shall the limitation on storage of explosives and
blasting agents apply to any person who or operation which has first obtained a
permit to store the explosives or blasting agents from the officer in charge of
the Fire
   Prevention Bureau upon application."
"Section 16.22 a. The storage of Class 1 liquids in tanks above ground and
outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits and boundaries of the Town
of Schererville, Indiana, except, unless and until the person storing or
proposing to store such Class I liquids in tanks above ground and outside of
buildings shall have first obtained a permit from the officer in charge of the
Fire Prevention Bureau upon due application having been made."
"Section 16.61. No new bulk plants shall be constructed within the limits and
boundaries of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, except, unless and until the
person proposing to construct such tanks as owner or agent shall have first
obtained a permit to do so from the officer in charge of the Fire Prevention
Bureau upon due application having been made therefore."
"Section 12.7 m. Vehicles transporting explosives shall avoid congested traffic
in densely populated areas except that any such vehicles which must follow a
route within the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, on which there is
congested traffic or which proceeds through a densely populated area may do so
upon the owner or operator thereof obtaining a permit from the officer in
charge of the Fire Prevention Bureau upon due application made therefore."
(Ord. No. 594, § 9, 11-14-73)
"Section 28.1. Bonfires and Outdoor Rubbish Fires.
   Permit Required. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish
fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained without a permit or
other proper authorization. During construction or demolition of buildings or
structures no waste materials or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the
premises or in the immediate vicinity."
(Ord. No. 760, 9-13-78)
Sec. 7-119 Validity.
   It is declared that should any section, paragraph, sentence, or word of this
ordinance or of the code adopted be declared for any reason to be invalid, it
is the intent of the Town of Schererville that it would have passed all other
portion ordinance independent of the elimination herefrom of any such portion
as may be declared invalid.
(Ord. No. 594, § 10, 11-14-73)
Sec. 7-120 through Sec. 7-124 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 10. Excavations, Easements and Right-of-Ways.
Division I. Excavations.
Sec. 7-125 Permit Required.  8
   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, partnership, firm, or
corporation to cut, break, alter, or excavate the surface of any street or
other public place, or the ground beneath the aforesaid surfaces in the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, without first obtaining approval from the
appropriate Town Official.
(Ord. No. 693, § 1, 6-8-77)
 
Notes
8    Editor's Note: This Section was modified by the Town during the
  recodification process.
Sec. 7-126 Application.
   Whenever any person, persons, partnership, firm or corporation shall desire
to cut, break, alter, or excavate such surfaces or cut underneath such surfaces
enumerated in Section
7-125 of this Article, such person, persons, partnership, firm or corporation
shall file an application in triplicate provided by the Town of Schererville
with the Building Department of said Town.
   When the Building Department has received said completed, approved
application and the permit fee as determined by the fee schedule provided with
the application, the Building Department shall issue said permit providing the
applicant has filed a bond required in the ordinance. In the event an emergency
arises where an excavation or cutting must be made at night or on a holiday,
such excavation or cutting may be made only by persons, firms, partnerships, or
corporations having on file a current bond as required in this ordinance, but
such permit shall be promptly applied for and paid for on the next business
day.
(Ord. No. 693, § 2, 6-8-77)
Sec. 7-127 Bond Requirements.
   Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of the preceding
section, the applicant shall also execute and file with the Clerk-Treasurer a
bond or certified check in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
with proper surety, conditioned that such obligors will indemnify and save the
Town harmless against loss or damage that may be caused by such excavation or
that may arise or result therefrom, or from a failure or omission to keep or
maintain adequate and proper warning signs, lights or barriers at the site of
such excavation, as hereinafter required and further condition that such
applicant will backfill and resurface such excavation according to the
provisions set forth in Section 13 of Ordinance 353 (Specifications for
Construction of Streets, Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters, etc. for the Town of
Schererville, Indiana).  9  Such bond shall also contain a condition that in
case an excavation is made by the principal obligor in an emergency when the
Clerk-Treasurer's Office is closed, he will apply and pay for the proper permit
on the next business day of such Office. All bonds shall be subject to the
approval of the Town Council of Schererville, Indiana.
   Said person, persons, partnership, firm or corporation shall further furnish
to the Town of Schererville at the time of mailing said application proof of
the fact that they are covered by liability insurance in an amount not less
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage and fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) for injury to any one (I) person and three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any one accident. Said applicant shall prove
to the satisfaction of the Town payment of a premium for said insurance so that
the Town will be protected for a period of one (1) year from the date of the
completion of the work performed by the applicant within the Town limits.
   Provided, however, that any person, persons, partnership, firm or
corporation may file one bond conditioned as above set forth to cover and apply
to all work done under this ordinance. A separate permit shall be obtained as
herein provided for the making of separate openings or excavations. Immediately
upon the filing of said bond as herein provided, The Clerk-Treasurer shall
notify the Public Works Director of such fact, and if said application is
satisfactory and said bond is sufficient as to form and surety, said Public
Works Director shall approve the same by endorsing his approval thereon.
   Provided, however, that at the time of filing said application as herein
provided a permit fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be
paid, which sum shall become a part of the Street Fund of said Town. In the
event said application and bond is not approved said sum shall be returned to
the applicant.
(Ord. No. 693, § 3, 6-8-77)
 
Notes
9    Editor's Note: The Ordinance referenced has been amended, See Section
  7-35, et seq., of this Chapter.
Sec. 7-128 Additional Bonds.
   If any applicant shall have on file a good and sufficient bond in the Office
of the Clerk-Treasurer, the same shall cover any one or more excavations for
which a permit has been issued, provided that the Public Works Director may
demand an additional bond when in his judgement such is required by the extent
or number of excavations applied for by the applicant.
(Ord. No. 693, § 4, 6-8-77)
Sec. 7-129 Compliance with Warning Barrier Regulations.
   Any person, persons, partnership, firm or corporation making an excavation
in or underneath the surface of a street or public place in the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, shall erect and place suitable warning barriers, signs,
lights, and post flag men during working hours in conformance with the Indiana
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices at or near the excavation in such a
manner as to prevent damage to persons and property that might otherwise result
from or be caused by the presence of such excavation. The applicant shall at
all times keep a copy of the permit at the job site.
(Ord. No. 693, § 5,6-8-77)
Sec. 7-130 Notification to Public Works Director.  10
   Prior to the beginning of work, the applicant shall notify the Public Works
Director, and immediately upon the completion of work and backfilling of the
excavation, under the provisions of this Article he shall again notify the
Public Works Director, who shall as soon as possible, inspect the restoration
of the surface at the site of such excavation to the condition as specified in
Section
7-133 of this Article. The applicant shall be responsible to maintain the
restored surface for a period of one (1) year after it is opened to traffic.
(Ord. No. 693, § 6, 6-8-77)
 
Notes
10    Editor's Note: At the request of the Town "Town Engineer" was deleted and
   replaced with "Public Works Director", throughout this Article.
Sec. 7-131 Funds to be Credited.
   All fees received for permits under this Article shall be credited and go to
the Street Department Fund of the Town. All fines and penalties shall be paid
into the General Fund of the Town.
(Ord. No. 693, § 7, 6-8-77)
Sec. 7-132 Enforcement.
   It shall be the concurrent duty of the Public Works Director, the Street
Superintendent, the Utilities Superintendent and the Police Department of the
Town to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance by appropriate investigation
and action, provided that this section shall not be so construed as to give the
power of arrest to the Public Works Director, the Street Superintendent, or the
Utilities Superintendent.
(Ord. No. 693, § 8, 6-8-77)
Sec. 7-133 Backfill Regulations.
   Any excavation into a Town Street or public place shall be backfilled with
material from that excavation, providing it does not contain any materials
which are not suitable, such as frozen, lumpy or saturated materials; large
stones; broken pavement slabs; rubbish or other objectionable materials. Prior
to backfilling, all lumber, rubbish, bracing and refuse shall be removed from
the trench or excavation. The backfill material shall be compacted to ninety
five percent (95%) of its Modified AASHTO optimum density by tamping or
rolling. The backfill material shall be placed in layers no greater than twelve
(12) inches.
   In addition to the backfill, the base course and pavement shall be restored
to the quality specified in Title IV, Section 3 of Ordinance 353
(Specifications for Construction of Streets, Curbs, Sidewalks, Gutters, etc.,
for the Town of Schererville, Indiana).  11
(Ord. No. 693, § 9, 6-8-77)
 
Notes
11    Editor's Note: This ordinance referred to has been amended. See Section
   7-35, et seq., of this Code.
Sec. 7-134 Maintenance.
   Any excavation into a Town Street or public place shall not be allowed to
remain open for more than three (3) days, unless an extension of time is
granted by the Public Works Director for unusual circumstances encountered in
the performance of work. All excavations into Town Streets or public places
shall be backfilled immediately upon completion of the work and shall be
surfaced within fourteen (14) days of the completion of the work. During times
when permanent surfacing materials are unavailable, a temporary surface will be
permitted; however, the temporary surface must be removed and replaced by a
permanent surface within six (6) months of the time of placement. The aforesaid
bond and maintenance responsibility will then continue throughout the period
the temporary surface is in place and extend for one (1) year from the
completion date of the permanent surface.
(Ord. No. 693, § 10, 6-8-77)
Sec. 7-135 Violations.
   Any person who shall make an excavation or opening in or underneath the
surface of a street or public place in the Town without a proper permit from
the Town or without having on file a proper bond or fail to erected maintain
suitable warning barriers, signs, lights, or post flag men during working hours
at or near any such excavation in order to prevent damage to persons and
property, or who shall fail to keep a copy of the permit at the job site, or
fails to backfill any excavation or opening promptly when the work has been
completed, or who shall fail to apply for or pay for a permit after making an
emergency excavation, or who shall fail to, neglect, refuse, or omit to perform
or discharge any other act or duty imposed herein, shall be punished as
provided in the Article, and shall be liable to the Town in any action on such
bond for any actual loss or damage sustained by the Town by reason of any
breach of the condition of such bond or for any violation of this Article.
(Ord. No. 693, § 11, 6-8-77)
Sec. 7-136 Penalties.
   Any person, persons, partnership, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor less than fifty dollars ($50.00). Every day any
violation of this Article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 693, § 12, 6-8-77)
Sec. 7-137 Severability.
   The invalidity of any section, paragraph, clause, sentence, or provision of
this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other section, paragraph,
clause, sentence or provision.
(Ord. No. 693, § 13, 6-8-77)
Sec. 7-138 through Sec. 7-139 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Easements and Right-of-Ways.
Sec. 7-140 Construction Prohibited Upon Easements and Right-of-Ways.
   From and after the date of the passage and adoption of this ordinance by the
Town Council of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, corporation or association, owning or occupying real estate in
the Town of Schererville, Indiana, to cause to be constructed upon any easement
or right-of-way over, along, across or under said real estate any building,
structure or improvement of any kind.
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 12-11-74)
Sec. 7-141 Penalties.
   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this ordinance shall
be fined in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day said
violation continues and each day said violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. No. 628, § 2, 12-11-74)
Sec. 7-142 through Sec. 7-159 Reserved for Future Use.
Chapter 8
Traffic and Parking Regulations
Article 1. Traffic Code.
Division I. General Provisions.
   
Sec. 8-1   Short Title.
   
Sec. 8-2   Definitions.
   
Sec. 8-3   Severability.
   
Sec. 8-4   Repeal.
   
Sec. 8-5   through Sec. 8-9 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Enforcement. Signs and Signals.
   
Sec. 8-10   Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials.
   
Sec. 8-11   Obedience to Police.
   
Sec. 8-12   Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices.
   
Sec. 8-13   Manual and Specifications for Traffic Control Devices.
   
Sec. 8-14   Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices.
   
Sec. 8-15   When Traffic Control Devices Are Required for Enforcement Purposes.
   
Sec. 8-16   Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings.
   
Sec. 8-17   Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices or Railroad
Signs or Signals.
   
Sec. 8-18   Surveys and Posting of Temporary Signs.
   
Sec. 8-19   through Sec. 8-21 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Speed Limits.
   
Sec. 8-22   Maximum State Established Speed Limits.
   
Sec. 8-23   Special Local Speed Zones.
   
Sec. 8-24   15 M.P.H. Speed Zones.
   
Sec. 8-25   20 M.P.H. Speed Zones.
   
Sec. 8-26   25 M.P.H. Speed Zones.
   
Sec. 8-27   30 M.P.H. Speed Zones.
   
Sec. 8-28   35 M.P.H. Speed Zones
   
Sec. 8-29   Park Areas - "Slow Children Playing".
   
Sec. 8-30   through Sec. 8-33 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Operation of Motor Vehicle Regulations.
   
Sec. 8-34   Motor Vehicle Defined.
   
Sec. 8-35   Activities Prohibited.
   
Sec. 8-36   Unlawful Riding.
   
Sec. 8-37   Child Passenger Restraint.
   
Sec. 8-38   Passenger Restraint.
   
Sec. 8-39   through Sec. 8-49 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Parking Regulations.
   
Sec. 8-50   Trucks of Nine Thousand (9,000) Pounds or More-Parking Regulations.
   
Sec. 8-51   Limited Truck Exceptions.
   
Sec. 8-52   Penalty.
   
Sec. 8-53   Enforcement and Temporary Access.
   
Sec. 8-54   Physically Disabled Person Parking Restrictions.
   
Sec. 8-55   Application of Division.
   
Sec. 8-56   Regulations Not Exclusive.
   
Sec. 8-57   Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited; No Signs Required.
   
Sec. 8-58   Standing or Parking Close to Curb.
   
Sec. 8-59   Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic.
   
Sec. 8-60   Unloading Passengers.
   
Sec. 8-61   Double Parking.
   
Sec. 8-62   Special Regulations for Street Work and Snow Removal.
   
Sec. 8-63   Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets.
   
Sec. 8-64   Parking Prohibited From 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. School Day Only on Certain
Streets.
   
Sec. 8-65   Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets to 15 Minutes 8 a.m. to 6
p.m.
   
Sec. 8-66   Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets-One Hour 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
   
Sec. 8-67   Illegally Parked or Abandoned Vehicles.
   
Sec. 8-68   Towing and Storing Fees.
   
Sec. 8-69   Storage of Vehicles.
   
Sec. 8-70   No Parking Areas.
   
Sec. 8-71   Parking Prohibited After Snow is Two (2) Inches - Schedule 2.
   
Sec. 8-72   Booting of Motor Vehicles.
   Sec. 8-73   through Sec. 8-77 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Traffic
   
Sec. 8-78   Traffic Control Signal Legend.
   
Sec. 8-79   Flashing Signals.
   
Sec. 8-80   Stop Signs.
   
Sec. 8-81   Four (4) Way Stop Signs.
   
Sec. 8-82   Yield Right of Way Signs and Three (3) Way Stop Streets.
   
Sec. 8-83   Stop When Traffic Obstructed.
   
Sec. 8-84   U Turns and Left Turns.
   
Sec. 8-85   One Way Streets and Alleys.
   
Sec. 8-86   Traffic Control Devices Schedule.
   
Sec. 8-87   through Sec. 8-104 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Traffic Control in Parks.
   
Sec. 8-105   Signs Erected.
   
Sec. 8-106   Restrictions.
   
Sec. 8-107   Exceptions.
   
Sec. 8-108   through Sec. 8-114 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Local Authorities to Regulate Traffic on Local Roads and
Streets.
   
Sec. 8-115   Definitions.
   
Sec. 8-116   Authority of Town Administration Established.
   
Sec. 8-117   Enforcement.
   
Sec. 8-118   Penalty.
   
Sec. 8-119   through Sec. 8-121 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Truck Regulations.
   
Sec. 8-122   Heavy Truck Weight Restrictions.
   
Sec. 8-123   Restriction Signs Erected.
   
Sec. 8-124   Authority of Town Manager.
   
Sec. 8-125   Verification.
   
Sec. 8-126   Penalties.
   
Sec. 8-127   Vehicle Owner Restrictions.
   
Sec. 8-128   and Sec. 8-129 Reserved for Future Use
Division X. Towing Charges and Regulations.
   
Sec. 8-130   Towing and Removing Charges.
   
Sec. 8-131   Day and Night Rates and Times.
   
Sec. 8-132   Towing Contracts to Remove Vehicles Declared Public Nuisances.
   
Sec. 8-133   Independent Contractors.
   
Sec. 8-134   Bonding and Hold Harmless Provisions.
   
Sec. 8-135   through Sec. 8-139 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XI. Fines and Penalties.
   
Sec. 8-140   Enforcement.
   
Sec. 8-141   Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking.
   
Sec. 8-142   Failure to Comply or Destroying Notice.
   
Sec. 8-143   Violations and Penalties.
   
Sec. 8-144   Safe Operation of Motor Vehicles - Penalty.
   
Sec. 8-145   through Sec. 8-159 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XII. Weight Restrictions on Specific Roads.
   
Sec. 8-160   Vehicle Weight Restrictions on Rohrman Road.
   
Sec. 8-161   Vehicle Weight Restrictions on Junction Avenue, Joliet Street.
   
Sec. 8-162   Designated Truck Routes - Penalties.
   
Sec. 8-163   Vehicle Restrictions on 77th Avenue - Penalties.
   
Sec. 8-164   through Sec. 8-169 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIII. Golf Cart Usage Regulations.
   
Sec. 8-170   Authorization.
   
Sec. 8-171   Definition.
   
Sec. 8-172   License Required.
   
Sec. 8-173   Regulations.
   
Sec. 8-174   Penalties.
   
Sec. 8-175   through 8-179 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 1. Traffic Code.
Division I. General Provisions.  1
 
Notes
     Editor's Note: The provisions of the Schererville Traffic Code are from
1 Ord. No. 958, passed on June 15, 1984, which amended Ord. Nos. 560, 837 and
  965.
Sec. 8-1 Short Title.
   This Chapter may be known and cited as the Traffic Code of the Town of
Schererville, Indiana.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-38)
Sec. 8-2 Definitions.  2
   a.   The words and phrases used herein shall have the same meaning and
definitions as defined in Indiana Code, § 9-13-1, et seq., addressing
“definitions”.
(Ord. No. 958, § 1, 6-13-84; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-39; Ord. No. 1496, §
1, 7-12-00; Ord. No. 1519, § 1, 3-14-01)
   b.   Compression Release Engine Brake - A hydraulically operated device that
converts a power producing diesel engine into a power absorbing retarding
mechanism.
(Ord. No. 1496, § 1, 7-12-00; Ord. No. 1519, § 1, 3-14-01)
   c.   Child Passenger Restraint System - A device that is manufactured for
the purpose of protecting children from injury during a motor vehicle accident
and meets the requirements and standards prescribed in Indiana Code, § 9-13-2-
23 and 49 CFR 571.213.
(Ord. No. 1519, § 1, 3-14-01)
   d.   Passenger Motor Vehicle - A motor vehicle designed for carrying
passengers and does not include a motorcycle, bus, school bus, tractor or
recreational vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1519, § 1, 3-14-01)
 
Notes
2    I.C., §§ 9-13-1-2 through 9-13-2-200, set forth definitions addressing
  traffic.
Sec. 8-3 Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or portion of this Chapter, is
held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of said Divisions. The Town
Council declares that it intended this Traffic Code to be severable.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-40)
Sec. 8-4 Repeal.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with
the provisions of the traffic code are repealed, except that this repeal shall
not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for the
violation of any ordinance, repealed, prior to the taking effect of this Code.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-41)
Sec. 8-5 through Sec. 8-9 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Enforcement, Signs and Signals.
Sec. 8-14 Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials.
   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department of this Town
to enforce the provisions of the Traffic Code and all state laws applicable to
street traffic in this Town. Officers of the Police Department are authorized
to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal
in conformance with all traffic laws and ordinances; provided that in the event
of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police or fire department may direct traffic, as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions of the Traffic Code.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-42)
Sec. 8-11 Obedience to Police.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any
lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer, or fireman when acting
in accordance with appropriate governing law.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-43)
Sec. 8-12 Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices.  3
   The Town shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this
town to make effective the provisions of said ordinances.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-44)
 
Notes
3    I.C., §§ 9-21-4-1 through 9-21-4-19, address traffic control devices.
Sec. 8-13 Manual and Specifications for Traffic Control Devices.  4
   All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State of Indiana. All signs and signals
required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be
uniform as to type and location throughout the town. All traffic control
devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or
this Traffic Code shall be official traffic control devices.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-45)
 
Notes
     I.C., §§ 9-21-2-1 through 9-21-2-4, address the Indiana Manual on Uniform
4 Traffic Control Devices. During the recodification process the Town requested
  deletion of "State Highway Commission" and insertion of "State of Indiana"
  throughout this Article.
Sec. 8-14 Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices.
   The driver of every vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with the
ordinances of this town unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-46)
Sec. 8-15 When Traffic Control Devices are Required for Enforcement Purposes.
   No provision of the Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time of the alleged violation an
official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-47)
Sec. 8-16 Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings.  5
   a.   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. No person shall place or
maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, any traffic
signs or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be
deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of
signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be
mistaken for official signs.
   b.   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-48)
 
Notes
5    I.C., §§ 9-21-3-1 through 9-21-3-11, address Traffic Control Signals.
Sec. 8-17 Interference with Official Traffic Control Devices or Railroad Signs
or Signals.  6
   No person shall without lawful authority, attempt to, or in fact, alter,
deface, injure, knock down, obscure, or remove any official traffic control
device, sign or street name sign, or any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
(Schererville Town Code § 8-2-49)
 
Notes
6    Editor's Note: Ord. No. 958, § 2, 6-13-84 deleted paragraph "b" of original §
  1.17 of Ord. No. 560.
Sec. 8-18 Surveys and Posting of Temporary Signs.
   a.   Surveys and Posting of Temporary Signs - Whenever the Chief of Police
and the Metropolitan Police Commission of the town, in the course of the
traffic study deem it advisable to delete or to add other streets to the
schedules attached to this Traffic Code, they may do so on a temporary basis
and such streets and locations, when posted by signs, shall be deemed for said
temporary period to be incorporated within the respective sections scheduled
herein.
   b.   Copy of New Sign Locations to Town Council - Upon the posting of said
streets the Police Commission and/or the Chief of Police shall immediately
forward copies of said addition to the Town Council, the Clerk-Treasurer, and
the Town attorney. In addition, a copy of the change or addition to said
schedule shall be posted in a public place in each ward of the Town of
Schererville. In the event that the Town Council shall, by resolution, deem
said addition to the schedules unwise or improper then said signs shall be
immediately removed. Unless and until the Town Council disapproves of said
proposed addition or modification of said schedules, then the Chief of Police
and the Metropolitan Police Commission may maintain such signs for any period
they may deem sufficient to properly evaluate the effects and benefits of said
addition or modification to the schedules not to exceed one (1) year.
(Schererville Town Code § 8-2-50)
   c.   At least once each year, the Police Commission shall forward to the
Town Council a list of suggested modifications in the schedules of this Traffic
Code, as determined by studies, engineering, traffic surveys, or experience and
as verified by temporary posting of signs as hereinbefore described.
(Schererville Town Code § 8-2-51)
Sec. 8-19 through Sec. 8-21 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Speed Limits.
Sec. 8-22 Maximum State Established Speed Limits.  7
   The speed limits as set forth in the state statutes shall be applicable upon
all streets within the Town of Schererville, except as modified by this Traffic
Code. As authorized by state law the Town declares and determines upon the
basis of engineering and/or traffic investigation that certain speed
regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets. In such event, it shall
be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in excess of any
speed so declared in this Traffic Code, when signs are in place giving notice
thereof.
(Schererville Town Code § 8-2-23)
 
Notes
     I.C., § 9-21-5-2, sets the following maximum speed limits; 30 mph in an
  urban district, 55 mph on highways; 65 mph on national inlerstates; 60 mph for
7 vehicles of 26,000 lbs. or more on interstate highways; and 15 mph in an alley.
  Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1360, § 1, established Schedule 1 "Speed Zones" and
  Schedule 2 "Traffic Control Devices".
Sec. 8-23 Special Local Speed Zones.  8
   No driver of any vehicle shall exceed the prima facie speed limit upon those
streets or portions thereof described in this Division which speeds so declared
thereon shall be effective at all times when signs are erected giving notice
thereof. The speed limits on state highways shown on the schedule are merely
for reference and coordination with other speed zones and their inclusion
therein shall not be deemed to modify any speed limit set by the State of
Indiana.
(Schererville Town Code § 8-2-24)
 
Notes
8    I.C., § 9-21-5-1, et seq., addresses speed limits.
Sec. 8-24 15 M.P.H. Speed Zones.
   The following locations are determined upon the basis of engineering and/or
traffic investigations to be 15 M.P.H. speed zone areas:
   a.   Old Lincoln Hwy & Lincolnwood at curve.
(Ord. No. 1360, 12-11-96)
   b.   Reserved.
   c.   Reserved.
   d.   Reserved.
Sec. 8-25 20 M.P.H.Speed Zones.  9
   The following locations are determined upon the basis of engineering and/or
traffic investigations to be 20 M.P.H. speed zone areas:
      Location   From   To
   1.   80th Ct.   US 41    US 41
   2.   Eagleridge Dr.   Deer Creek Dr.   R.R. Tracks
   3.   Sunset Blvd.   US 30    Edgewood St.
   4.   Lakeview Dr.   Sunset Blvd.   St. John Rd.
   5.   Schilling Dr.   Sunset Blvd.   Patterson Dr.
   6.   Southview Dr.   Schilling Dr.   Edgewood St.
   7.   Tanglewood Dr .   St. John Rd.   Castleview Dr.
   8.   Ridgemoore Dr .   Patterson St.   Churchill Dr.
   9.   Augusta Blvd .      Churchill Dr.
   10.   Lakeview Dr.   St. John Rd.   Sunset Blvd.
   11.   Huppenthal Dr.   St. John Rd.   Lakeview Dr.
   12.   Kennedy Ave.   Joliet St.   Kaeser Blvd.
   13.   68th Pl.   Kennedy Ave.   Baptist School
   14.   68th Pl.   Baptist School   Kennedy Ave.
   15.   67th Ave.   Kennedy Ave.   Baptist School
   16.   67th Ave.   Baptist School   Kennedy Ave.
   17.   Kennedy Ave.   Kaeser Blvd.   Joliet St.
   18.   Redar Dr.   Junciton Ave.   Austin Ave.
   19.   Redar Dr.   Austin Ave.   Junction Ave.
   20.   Austin Ave.    US 30    Golfview Dr.
   21.   Anna St.   US 30    Risen Dr.
   22.   Anna St.   Wilhelm Dr.   US 30
   23.   Wilhelm St.    Anna St.   Junction Ave.
   24.   Wilhelm St.    Junction Ave.   Anna St.
   25.   Gregory St.    Austin Ave.   Schaeffer Dr.
   26.   Austin Ave.    Joliet St.   US 30
   27.   Gregory St.   Schaffer Dr.   Hartley Dr.
   28.   Hartley Dr.   Joliet St.   Gregory/James Wittchen Dr.
   29.   Prostman Dr.   Gregory St.   Teibel Dr.
   30.   North Rd.   Austin Ave.   Hilltop Dr.
   31.   Hilltop Dr.   US 30    North Rd.
   32.   Old Lincoln Hwy.   US 30    Lincolnwood (Except at Bend)
   33.   Iroquois Rd.   Lincolnwood Ave.   Kennedy Ave.
   34.   Kennedy Ave.   US 30    Robinhood Blvd.
   35.   Robinhood Blvd.   Maid Marion St.   77th Ave.
   36.   Naples Dr.   77th Ave.   Naples Ct.
   37.   Sorrento Dr.   Naples Dr.   Capri Dr.
   38.   Helena St.   Elizabeth Dr.   Anna St.
   39.   Lincoln Dr.   Anna St.   Elizabeth Dr.
   40.   Divac Dr.
   41.   Parkway Dr.
   42.   Mockingbird Dr.
   43.   Morningside Dr.   Mor[n]ingside Cr.   Tanya Terr.
   44.   Julie Dr.   Joiliet St.   Susan Dr.
   45.   James Wittchen Dr.   Cline Ave.   Hartley Dr.
   46.   Sussex Dr.   Cline Ave.   Bristol Ln.
   47.   78th Ave.   Burr St.   Hanley St.
   48.   77th Pl.   Hanley St.   Mount St.
   49.   Durbin St.   78th Ln.   77th Pl.
   50.   Hanley St.   78th Ave.   78th Ln.
   51.   81 st Pl.   Burr St.   Pine Island Dr.
   52.   Pine Island Dr.
   53.   85th Ln.   Pine Island Dr.   C[la]rk Pl.
   54.   85th Pl.   Burr St.   Pine Island Dr.
   55.   85th Pl.   Pine Island Dr.   Burr St.
   56.   Springvale Dr.
   57.   Pineview Dr.
   57.   [a] Deerpath Dr.   Austin Ave.   77th Ave.
   58.   Deerpath West   77th Ave.   Austin Ave.
   59.   76th Ave.   Red River    Deer Run Dr.
   60.   75th Ave.   Burr St.   Dove Dr.
   61.   Mount Dr.   Wolf Dr.   Foxwood Dr.
   62.   Forrest Ridge Dr.   73rd Ave.   75th Ave.
   63.   Mallard Ln.   73rd Ave.   75th Ave.
   64.   Wren Dr.   73rd Ave.   Teal Terr.
   65.   Finch Dr.   Mallard Ln.   72nd Ave.
   66.   70th Ave   Burr St.   Wren Dr.
(Ord. No. 1360, 12-11-96)
 
Notes
9    I.C., § 9-21-5-3, authorizes local authorities to alter maximum speed
  limits. (See also: I.C., § 9-21-5-6.)
Sec. 8-26 25 M.P.H. Speed Zones.
   The following locations are determined upon the basis of engineering and
traffic investigations to be 25 mph speed zones:
      Location   From   To
   1.   Old Lincoln Hwy   US 41    US 30
   2.   Woodhollow Dr.   Maple Pl.   US 41
   3.   Cypress Dr .   Maple Pl.   Woodhollow Dr.
   4.   Cypress Dr.   Woodhollow Dr.   Maple Pl.
   5.   Oak St.   Kennedy Ave.   End of Street
   6.   Scherland Dr. East Bound and West Bound
   7.   Starlight Dr.
   8.   Springhill Dr.   77th   Bach Rd.
   9.   Springhill [Dr.]   York Rd.   77th Ave.
   10.   Stratford Ln.   Springhill Dr.   Victoria Rd.
   11.   York Rd.   Alexander St.   Springhill Dr.
   12.   Venice Dr.   Capri Dr.   Sorrento Dr.
   13.   Venice Dr.   Sorrento Dr.   Capri Dr.
   14.   Naples Dr.   Naples Ct.   77th Ave.
   15.   Capri Dr.   77th Ave.   Manchester Ln.
   16.   Anna St.   Lincoln Dr.   77th Ave.
   17.   Harvest Dr.   US 30    Painted Leaf Dr.
   18.   Harvest Dr.   Grandview Ct.   US 30
   19.   Novo Dr.   Joliet St.   Appletree Dr.
   20.   High Ridge Dr.   St. George Dr.   Selo Dr.
   21.   Porter Pl.   Pine Island Dr.   85th Ave.
   22.   Porter Pl.   85th Ave.   Pine Island Dr.
   23.   Durbin Ln.   Mathews St.   Mathews St.
   24.   87th Ln.   Mathews St.   Clark Pl.
   25.   87th Ln.   Clark Pl.   Mathews St.
   26.   Reserved. (No listing was included in Ord. No. 1360)
   27.   Mathews Ln.   86th Pl.   87th Ln.
   28.   Mathews Ln.   87th Ln.   86th Pl.
   29.   86th Pl.   Mathews St.   Clark Pl.
   30.   86th Pl.   Clark Pl.   Mathews St.
   31.   Hanley Ln.   Mathews St.   85th Pl.
   32.   Hanley Ln.   85th Pl.   Mathews St.
   33.   Clark Pl.    89th Pl.   Mathews St.
   34.   Britton Dr.
(Ord. No. 1360, 12-11-96)
   35.   Reserved.
Sec. 8-27 30 M.P.H. Speed Zones.
   The following locations are determined upon the basis of engineering and/or
traffic investigation to be 30 M.P.H. Speed Zones:
      Location   From   To
   1.   77th Ave.   US 41    Austin Ave.
            [Except for School Zones]
   2.   77th Ave.   Austin Ave.   US 41
            [Except for School ZonesJ
   3.   Main St.   US 41    Kennedy Ave.
   4.   Airport Rd.   R.R. Tracks   Dyer Limits
   5.   St. John Rd.   US 30    Patterson St.
   6.   Kennedy Ave.   Main St.   Junction Ave.
   7.   Kennedy Ave.   Junction St.   Main St.
   8.   Junction Ave.   Kennedy Ave.   Joliet St.
   9.   Junction Ave..   Joliet St.   Kennedy Ave.
   10.   Joliet St.   US 30    Fairbanks
            [Except for School Zones]
   11.   Lincolnwood Ave.   Old Lincoln Hwy   77th Ave.
   12.   Lincolnwood [Ave.]   Stephen Dr. N   Old Lincoln Hwy.
   13.   77th Ave.   Cline Ave.   Austin Ave.
   14.   Burr St.   US 30    91st Ave.
   15.   Burr St.   91st Ave.   US 30
   16.   91st Ave.   Burr D[r]    Clark Rd.
   17.   Austin Ave.   Elizabeth Dr.   77th Ave.
   18.   Cline Ave.   US 30    Joliet St.
            [Except for School Zones]
(Ord. No. 1360, 12-11-96)
Sec. 8-28 35 M.P.H. Speed Zones.
   The following locations are determined upon the basis of engineering and/or
traffic investigation to be 30 M.P.H. Speed Zones:
      LOCATION   FROM   TO
   1.   Main St.   Kennedy Ave.   Griffith Limits East Bound
   2.   Main St.   Hoosier Prairie   US 41
   3.   Division St.   Kennedy Ave.   Cline Ave.
(Ord. No. 1360, 12-11-96)
Sec. 8-29 Park Areas - "Slow Children Playing".
   Signs reading "Slow Children Playing" or signs with words of similar import
shall be placed on all streets in the area of a park within the Town of
Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 791, Schedule 14, 9-12-79)
Sec. 8-30 through Sec. 8-33 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Operation of Motor Vehicle Regulations.
Sec. 8-34 Motor Vehicle Defined.  10
   The term "motorized vehicle", as used in this Division, is defined as any
mechanical vehicle used for the carrying of one or more persons, which is
propelled by a motor or engine powered by electricity or internal combustion
including, but not limited to, automobiles, motor trucks, motor buses,
motorcycles, motor scooters, motor bikes, mini bikes, go-carts, and other like
and similar motorized vehicles.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-4-1)
 
Notes
10    I.C., § 9-13-2-105, defines "motor vehicles".
Sec. 8-35 Activities Prohibited.  11
   a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle
over, along, on or across any privately owned property in the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 658, 4-14-76)
   b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle in
the Town of Schererville, Indiana except over, on, along and across public
roads, streets, thoroughfares.
(Ord. No. 658, 4-14-76)
   c.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any privately owned
and non-publicly owned land in the Town of Schererville, Indiana, to allow said
privately owned or occupied lands to be used for the operation of any motorized
vehicle.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-4-2) (Ord. No. 658, 4-14-76)
   d.   All motor vehicles are prohibited from using compression release engine
brakes within the corporate boundaries of the Town, except in the case of the
failure of the service brake system.
(Ord. No. 1496, § 2, 7-12-00)
   e.   Each violation of this Article as amended from time to time shall be
punished by a fine or penalty in accordance with the penalty provisions of Sec.
3-99 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1496, § 2, 7-12-00)
 
Notes
      I.C., §§ 9-21-13-1 through 9-21-13-7, address funeral processions. I.C., § 9-21-
11 13-2, prohibits driving between vehicles of a funeral procession. All local
   ordinances addressing funeral processions were deleted at the request of the Town.
Sec. 8-36 Unlawful Riding.  12
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of duty.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-25)
 
Notes
12    I.C., §§ 9-21-10-1 through 9-21-10-13, address motorcycles, and I.C., §§ 9-21-11-
   1 through 9-21-11-14, address bicycles and motorized bicycles.
Sec. 8-37 Child Passenger Restraint.
   a.   A person who operates a motor vehicle in which there is a child less
than four (4) years of age shall have said child restrained by a child
passenger restraint system. However, if it is reasonably determined that the
child will not fit in the restraint system, then said child shall be properly
fastened and restrained by a safety belt.
   b.   A person who operates a passenger motor vehicle that is equipped with a
safety belt meeting the standards stated in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards Number 208 (49 CFR 571.208) shall have every child at least four (4)
years of age but less than twelve (12) years of age properly fastened and
restrained by a child passenger restraint system or a safety belt.
   c.   A vehicle may be stopped by the Schererville Police Department to
determine compliance with this Section. However, the vehicle, its contents, the
operator or a passenger in the vehicle may not be searched or detained solely
because of a violation of this Section.
   d.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Section
shall be subject to a minimum penalty in the amount of ninety-five dollars
($95.00).
(Ord. No. 1519, § 2, 3-14-01)
   e.   All penalties collected by the Schererville Town Court for violation of
this section, as referenced above, shall be deposited into the General Fund
Court Fines - Child Passenger Restraint.
(Ord. No. 1519, § 4, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 1519A, § 1, 4-11-01)
Sec. 8-38 Passenger Restraint.
   a.   Each front seat occupant of a motor vehicle that is equipped with a
safety belt meeting the standards stated in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard Number 208 (49 CFR 571.208) shall have a safety belt properly fastened
about the occupant's body at all times when the vehicle is in motion.
   b.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. No. 1519, § 3, 3-14-01)
   c.   Sixty percent (60%) of all penalties collected by the Schererville Town
Court for violation of this section, as referenced above, shall be deposited
into the General Fund Court Fines - Passenger Restraint. The remaining forty
percent (40%) of such penalties shall be deposited into the General Fund as
miscellaneous revenue.
(Ord. No. 1519, § 5, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 1519A, § 2, 4-11-01)
Sec. 8-39 through Sec. 8-49 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Parking Regulations.  13
 
Notes
13    Editor's Note: Division V is former Chapter 8-5 of the 1989 Schererville
   Town Code which incorporated Ord. Nos. 871 and 560.
Sec. 8-50 Trucks of Nine Thousand (9,000) Pounds or More-Parking Regulations.
   No person(s), company, corporation or legal entity shall park or cause to be
parked nor be allowed to stop or stand any truck of greater than nine thousand
(9,000) pounds gross weight and/or bearing license plate description greater
than truck-9 or its foreign jurisdiction equivalent, or truck-tractor or semi-
trailer, of any kind, in any residential district or districts that is zoned
residential, nor shall such parking, stopping or standing be permitted on any
street, alley park, public right-of-way or private property, private driveway
or private lot in the Town of Schererville, at any time, except in municipal
vehicles where and when required.
[Ord. No. 871, § 1, 9-9-81; Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-1 (See also §
8-122 Regulatory Weight Limits)]
Sec. 8-51 Limited Truck Exceptions.  14
   a.   The following streets shall be excepted from Section
8-50:
      1.   Route U.S. Highway 30
      2.   Route U.S. Highway 41
(Ord. No. 871, § 2, 9-9-81)
   b.   The purpose and intent of this ordinance shall not be construed to
prohibit temporary and singular access of semi-trucks or tractor-trailers into
residential districts or districts that are zoned residential for the principal
purpose of delivering requested merchandise, goods, or services to a private
residence.
[Ord. No. 871, § 3, 9-9-81; (Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-2)]
 
Notes
14    Editor's Note: Ord. No. 871 amended Ord. No. 842 which was passed on
   February 11, 1981.
Sec. 8-52 Penalty.
   Any person(s), company, corporation or legal entity who shall violate any of
the provisions of Section
8-50 may be declared a public nuisance pursuant to Indiana Statute and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense.
Each day such violation is committed or caused to be permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
[Ord. No. 871, § 5, 9-9-81; (Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-3)]
Sec. 8-53 Enforcement and Temporary Access.
   a.   The Schererville Metropolitan Police Department, together with its
agents and employees is hereby authorized and expressly directed to enforce the
provisions of this Division at any time when it is so directed by the Town or
upon receiving a complaint of an ordinance violation from a Schererville
resident.
(Ord. No. 871, § 6, 9-9-81)
   b.   The Schererville Metropolitan Police Department and its agents and
employees are hereby authorized and given express license and permission to
enter into any private property, private driveway or private lot in the Town of
Schererville as may be necessary for purposes of issuing a violation of this
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 871, § 4, 9-9-81; Schererville Town Code, § 85-4)
Sec. 8-54 Physically Disabled Person Parking Restrictions.   15
   A "Physically Disabled Person" shall mean any person who:
   a.   has permanently lost the use of one or more legs or arms,
   b.   is permanently unable to move without the aid of crutches, braces, a
wheelchair or a walker;
   c.   is certified to be severely restricted in mobility due to ta
disability, condition or impairment by a physician having an unlimited license
to practice medicine;
   d.   is certified by an optometrist or ophthalmologist licensed to practice
in any state to be blind or visually impaired; or
   e.   is a certified recipient of parking placard for persons with physical
disabilities by any state or municipality.
   Any person who parks a motor vehicle within any part of a space reserved for
a physically disabled person, or the registered owner of such motor vehicle,
other than a person who (i) is a physically disabled person, or (ii) is
transporting a physically disabled person to or from the space in a motor
vehicle with a properly affixed placard or license plate issued by any state or
municipality, shall, upon a finding of liability, be subject to a fine of not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
(Ord. No. 856; 4-22-81; Ord. No. 1639, § 1, 2-9-05; Schererville Town Code, §
8-5-5)
 
Notes
15    I.C., §§ 9-14-5-1 through 9-14-5-7, set forth the 1993 State Law addressing
   "Parking Placards for Physically Handicapped Individuals".
Sec. 8-55 Application of Division.
   The provisions of this Division prohibiting the standing or parking of a
vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified and as
indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or an official traffic control device.
(Ord. No. 560, Chapter 3, 1011-72; Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-6)
Sec. 8-56 Regulations Not Exclusive.
   The provisions of this Division imposing a time limit on parking shall
relieve any person from a duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or
at specified times.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-7)
Sec. 8-57 Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited; No Signs Required.  16
   a.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the law, or the
directions of a police officer, or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk.
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      3.   Within an intersection.
      4.   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.
      5.   On a crosswalk.
      6.   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      7.   With thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30)
feet of points on a curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless
a different length has been indicated by signs or markings.
      9.   Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      10.   Within twenty (20) feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
fifty (50) feet of said entrance.
      11.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
      12.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of
or curb of a street.
      13.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
      14.   Within fifty (50) feet of the center of gate of any industrial
plant.
   b.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Ord. No. 560. 10-11-72; Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-8)
 
Notes
16    I.C., § 9-21-16-5, addresses stopping, standing, and parking.
Sec. 8-58 Standing or Parking Close to Curb.
   a.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of the lawful
traffic movement and with the right hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of
the curb or the edge of the roadway.
   b.   Angle parking in the town of Schererville, Indiana is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 560, 10-11-72; Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-9)
Sec. 8-59 Parking not to Obstruct Traffic.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the
width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. No. 560, 10-11-72, Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-10)
Sec. 8-60 Unloading Passengers.
   The driver of any bus when stopping to load or unload passengers at any
place within this town, shall before stopping, drive the bus as close as
practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the street or roadway on which he
is proceeding.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-19)
Sec. 8-61 Double Parking.
   No person shall park a vehicle on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge of or curb of a street.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-20)
Sec. 8-62 Special Regulations for Street Work and Snow Removal.  17
   a.   Work. The Public Works Director is given the power to post temporary
signs reading "No Parking - Street Work" along any street which he intends to
sweep, clear, or work within the succeeding 24 hours. The street commissioner
shall post every street that he intends to work with said signs prior to 4 PM
of the preceding day.
   All vehicles shall be removed before 7 AM of the day the street is to be
worked.
   b.   Snow removal. No person shall park any vehicle on any street within the
corporate limits of the town, whenever there is two (2") inches or more of snow
thereon, until said snow is removed. Any vehicle which is parked on said
streets when the depth of the snow exceeds two (2") inches may be towed away in
the manner provided in this Chapter.
   c.   All streets are affected.
[(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-15) (See Also §
8-71 of this Code)]
 
Notes
17    Editor's Note: The Town requested that "Street Commissioner" be deleted and
   that "Public Works Director" be substituted during the recodification process".
Sec. 8-63 Parking Prohibited at all Times on Certain Streets.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described in Schedule 3:
(Ord Nos. 560 and 692; Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-11)
   Parking Prohibited at All Times - Schedule 3
   a.   Birch Street - entire length
   b.   Commercial Drive - entire length
   c.   Junction Avenue from Joliet Street to Redar Drive
   d.   Junction Avenue, east side of street, from Austin Avenue to South Park
Avenue
   e.   Kennedy Avenue, west side of street, from Joliet street to point 100
feet North
   f.   Rohrmans Road, east side of street, from Joliet Street to 100 feet
North
   g.   Rohrmans Road, west side of street, from Joliet Street to Rausch Road
   h.   Rohrmans Road, east side of street, from West Ditch to 68th Avenue
   i.   65th Street - entire length
   j.   In front of all Governmental buildings and public buildings when signs
prohibit
(Ord. No. 560, 692 and 791 § 1, Schedule 3,9-12-79)
   k.   South side of Sunset Drive from U.S. Route 41 West to its end
(Ord. No. 1002)
   l.    North side of Sunset Drive from U.S. Route 41 West to its end
(Ord. No. 1002)(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-3)
   m.   Reserved
   n.   Reserved
   o.   Reserved
Sec. 8-64 Parking Prohibited from 8 AM to 4 PM School Days Only on Certain
Streets.
   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule 4 on school days, within
the district.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-12)
   Schedule 4 - Parking Prohibited from 8 AM to 4 PM, School Days Only on
Certain Streets.
   a.   North side of Joliet Street from Austin Avenue east to driveway at east
end of Homan School.
   b.   Joliet Street from intersection of Romans Road to one hundred (100)
feet in both direction.
   c.   West side of Austin Avenue from Joliet Street to Redar Drive.
   d.   East side of Austin Avenue from Joliet Street to North end of Homan
School.
   e.   North side of Wilhelm Street from Central Avenue to West comer of
school building.
   f.   West side of Central Avenue from Wilhelm Street to alley.
(Ord. No. 791, § 1, Schedule 4, 4-17-79)
   g.   Reserved.
   h.   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 791, § 1, Schedule 4, 4-17-79; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-4)
Sec. 8-65 Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets - to 15 minutes 8 AM to 6 PM.
   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than 15 minutes between the hours of 8 AM and 6 PM of
any day, except Sundays and legal holidays, within the district or upon any of
the streets described in Schedule 5.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-13)
   Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets - 15 Minutes 8 AM to 6 PM - Schedule
5.
   a.   West side of Wilson Street from Joliet Street to Fire Station entrance.
(Ord. No. 791, § 1, Schedule 5, 9-17-79; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-6)
   b.   Reserved.
   c.   Reserved.
   d.   Reserved.
   e.   Reserved.
Sec. 8-66 Parking Time Limited on Certain Street - One Hour 8 AM to 6 PM.
   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than one (1) hour between the hours of 8 AM and 6 PM
of any day, except Sundays and legal holidays, within the district or upon any
of the streets described in Schedule 6.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-14)
   Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets to One Hour 8 AM to 6 PM - Schedule
6.
   a.   Joliet Street from Anna Street to Austin Avenue.
(Ord. No. 791, § 1, Schedule 6, 9-17-79; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-6)
   b.   Reserved.
   c.   Reserved.
   d.   Reserved.
   e.   Reserved.
Sec. 8-67 Illegally Parked or Abandoned Vehicles.  18
   Any motor vehicle found upon the streets or highways within the Town of
Schererville, Indiana, illegally parked or reasonably appearing to be abandoned
may be removed from said street or highway, under the direction of the Police
Department, and be impounded in one of the garages in the town, or in a
privately owned garage, as designated by the Chief of Police. A notice shall be
mailed by the Schererville Police Department by registered mail to the
registered owner forthwith. If the car is not claimed within thirty (30) days,
the vehicle shall be sold or disposed of pursuant to state law.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-15-16)
 
Notes
18    I.C., §§ 9-22-1-1 through 9-22-1-32, address "abandoned motor vehicles".
Sec. 8-68 Maximum Towing and Storage Charges.  19
   a.   An authorized towing service may charge for towing or removing a
vehicle under this Chapter as follows:
Call-Out                       Current Rate       New Rate
Daytime Tow                    $100.00            $100.00
Nighttime Tow                  $100.00            $110.00
Daytime Winch and Tow          $65.00             Up to $50.00 (In Addition to
                                                  Tow)
Nighttime Winch and Tow        $75.00             $100.00
Daytime Winch Only             $65.00             $70.00
Nighttime Winch Only           $75.00             $85.00
Flatbed (Daytime or Nighttime) Owner's Discretion Owner's Discretion
Disconnect Linkage (No Keys)   Not Listed         $20.00
 
 
Storage Per Day:
Outside $15.00 $25.00
Inside  $20.00 $35.00
 
(Ord. No. 1203, § 1, 4-8-92; Ord. No. 1487, § 1, 5-10-00; Ord. No. 1636, § 1,
1-19-05; Ord. No. 1687, § 1, 12-13-06)
      2.   That Ordinance No. 1059 is further amended by adding the following
language:
         a.   If two (2) or more trucks are used, the charge shall be based on
two (2) callouts.
         b.   The rates set forth above are the maximum allowed, and applied to
passenger cars and other vehicles up to one (1) ton. The cost of towing of
vehicles heavier than one (1) ton are to be charged at the discretion of the
individual towing firms.
   The owner of any motor vehicle removed and impounded pursuant to the terms
of this Chapter may appear and claim said motor vehicle upon payment of the
towing and storage fees (set forth in §
8-130 of this Code) and presenting a release from the Schererville Police
Department, whereupon said vehicle shall be released to him or his authorized
representative.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-17)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: §
19 8-68 and §
   6-160 are identical and were requested to be included as these sections
   respectively during the recodification process.
Sec. 8-69 Storage of Vehicles.
   a.   Using streets for storage of vehicles or parking of vehicles for more
than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle upon any street or
public highway in the Town of Schererville, Indiana for a period longer than
seventy-two (72) consecutive hours except as hereinafter provided.
   b.   Any person who desires to park a motor vehicle upon any street in the
Town of Schererville, Indiana for a period of more than seventy-two (72)
consecutive hours shall apply to the Chief of Police of the town for a permit
to do so. The Chief of Police shall grant such permit only after determining
that:
      1)   the safety of the persons traveling on the street upon which it is
desired to park such motor vehicle will not be endangered, and
      2)   the reason stated for parking a motor vehicle for more than seventy-
two (72) hours consecutively is such that the granting of such permit is
necessary and reasonable, and
      3)   a permit granted by the Chief of Police shall state the name of the
person seeking the permit, his address, the address at which the motor vehicle
shall be parked, the model, kind and registration place of the motor vehicle to
be parked, and the expiration date of said permit.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-5-18)
Sec. 8-70 No Parking Areas.
   a.   The Traffic Code of the Town of Schererville is amended to provide for
"No Parking" on the east side of Austin Avenue from Joliet Street to Bunker
Drive; (Ord. No. 1229, 3-10-93)
   b.   The Traffic Code of the Town of Schererville is amended to provide for
"No Parking" on the north side of Redar Drive from Austin Avenue to Junction
Avenue; (Ord. No. 1229, 3-10-93)
   c.   South side of Sunset Drive from U.S. Route 41 West to its end.
(Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 2-12-86)
   d.   North side of Sunset Drive from U.S. Route 41 West to its end.
(Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 2-12-86)
   e.   Reserved.
   f.   Reserved.
   g.   Reserved
   h.   Reserved.
   i.   The Town Manager is authorized to order and have installed "No Parking"
signs pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Section.
(Ord. No. 1229, 3-10-93)
Sec. 8-71 Parking Prohibited After Snow is Two Inches (2") - Schedule 2.
   Parking is prohibited after snow is two inches (2") on all streets in the
Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 791, § 1, Schedule 2, (See also §
8-62 of this Code)
Sec. 8-72 Booting of Motor Vehicles.
   1.   Booting of motor vehicles in the Town is hereby prohibited, as set
forth hereinafter.
   2.   The following definitions shall apply to this section prohibiting the
booting of motor vehicles in the Town, unless content clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning, namely:
      A.   BOOT or BOOTING: The act of placing on a parked motor vehicle any
mechanical devise that is designed to be attached to a wheel or tire or other
part of such vehicle so as to prohibit the vehicle’s usual manner or movement.
The term includes any installation, adjustment or removal of an immobilization
devise.
      B.   COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT(S): A tract of land which is used for the
parking of motor vehicles or any other lot which contains parking spaces in
conformity with all city zoning and building requirements for parking spaces.
Town property and right of way shall not be considered COMMERCIAL PARKING LOTS.
      C.   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is propelled by a motor.
   3.   In the interest of public safety, there shall be no placement of a boot
upon any motor vehicle parked in any commercial parking lot in the Town. A boot
installed shall be removed immediately for no charge from any motor vehicle if
the vehicle is previously booted.
(Ord. No. 1983 §§ 1 - 3, 5-11-22)
through Sec. 8-77 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Traffic Controls.
Sec. 8-78 Traffic Control Signal Legend.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals, exhibiting the
words "go", "caution" or "stop" or exhibiting different colored lights
successively, the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights
shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles as follows:
   a.   Green alone or accompanied by the word "go" - Vehicular traffic facing
the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at
such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-
way to other vehicles and to pedestrians, lawfully within the intersection at
the time such signal is exhibited.
   b.   Yellow or caution - when shown with or following the green or go
signal: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in
safety, vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
   c.   Red alone or stop - vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point
as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until
green or go is shown.
   d.   Red with green arrow - Vehicular traffic facing such signal may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic.
(Schererville Town Code, 8-2-26)
   e.   Traffic control signals shall be located at the intersections as
provided in the Town's "Traffic Control Devices Schedule" set forth in §
8-86.
(Schererville Town Code, 8-2-26)
Sec. 8-79 Flashing Signals.
   Whenever flashing "red" or "yellow" signals are used they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
   a.   Flashing Red or Stop Signal - When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection of streets and/or streets and railroads or
at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection
and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making
a stop at a stop sign.
   b.   Flashing Yellow - Caution Signal - When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-27)
Sec. 8-80 Stop Signs.
   When stop signs are erected upon streets intersecting a through street at
the entrances thereto or at the entrance to any intersection designated in the
Town's "Traffic Control Devices" Schedule in §
8-86, every driver of a vehicle shall stop at every sign or at a clearly marked
stop line before entering the intersection.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-28)
Sec. 8-81 Four (4) Way Stop Signs.
   When stop signs are erected upon all four streets at any intersection
designated in the Town's "Traffic Control Devices", every vehicle shall stop at
every sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection.
The first vehicle reaching an Intersection shall, after stopping, have the
right-of-way to proceed.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-29)
Sec. 8-82 Yield Right-of-Way Signs and Three (3) Way Stop Streets.
   When yield right-of-way signs are erected at any intersection designated in
the Town's "Traffic Control Devices" in §
8-86 every vehicle approaching said sign shall reduce its speed to ten (10) mph
and may proceed through said intersection if it can do so without danger of
collision with any vehicle approaching on an intersecting street. If there is
any danger of collision with said approaching vehicle then the vehicle
approaching said yield right-of-way sign shall reduce its speed or stop to
allow said vehicle to clear the intersection.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-30)
Sec. 8-83 Stop When Traffic Obstructed.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-31)
Sec. 8-84 U Turns And Left Turns.  20
   a.   No driver of any vehicle shall make a U turn on any street or at any
intersection within the town.
   b.   When signs prohibiting such are erected no driver shall make a left
turn at those intersections.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-32)
 
Notes
20    I.C., § 9-21-8-19, addresses "U" Turns.
Sec. 8-85 One Way Streets and Alleys.
   a.   Authority to Post Signs - Whenever this Traffic Code designates any one
way street or alley, the Chief of Police shall direct the placement of signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic is permitted in
one direction only.
   b.   One Way Streets and Alleys - Upon those streets and alleys described in
the Town's "Traffic Control Devices" Schedule in §
8-86 vehicles shall move only in the indicated direction of travel.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-33)
Sec. 8-86 Traffic Control Devices Schedule.  21
   There is created a "Traffic Control Devices" Schedule of the Town of
Schererville which is set forth as follows:
Page 1
   S. W CORNER/ SUNSET BLVD & US 30
   N. W CORNER/JANICE DR & US 30
   S. E CORNER/OLD LINCOLN HWY & US 30
Page 2
   S. E. CORNER OF LINCOLNWOOD DR & US 30
   S. E. CORNER OF KENNEDY AV & US 30
   S. E. CORNER OF TRENTA CT & US 30
   N. W. CORNER OF HILLTOP DR & US 30
   N. W. CORNER OF ANNA ST & US 30
   N. W. CORNER OF REED LN & US 30
   N. W. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & US 30
Page 3
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODVIEW & HARVEST DR
   N. E. CORNER OF WOODVIEW & HARVEST DR
   S. E. CORNER OF HARVEST DR & US 30
Page 4
   S. W. CORNER OF SUNSET DR & US 41
   S. W. CORNER OF 78TH CT & US 41
   S. W. CORNER OF 80TH CT & US 41
   N. E. CORNER OF OAKSIDE DR & US 41
   S. W. CORNER OF OAKSIDE DR & CRESTVIEW DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CRESTVIEW DR & OAKSIDE DR
   N. E. CORNER OF OAKSIDE DR & CRESTVIEW
   S. W. CORNER OF OAKSIDE & MEADOW LN
   S. E. CORNER OF MEADOW LN & OAKSIDE DR
   N. W. CORNER OF MEADOW LN & OAKSIDE DR
   N. W. CORNER OF MEADOW LN & 77TH AVE
Page 5
   S. W. CORNER OF OLD LINCOLN HWY & US 41
   N. E. CORNER OF MORAINE TRACE & US 41
   N. E. CORNER OF SCHULTZ DR & US 41
Page 6
   S. W. CORNER OF CEDAR PARKWAY & US 41
   N. E. CORNER OF 67TH AV & US 41
   S. E. CORNER OF COMMERCIAL DR & 65TH AVE
   N. W. CORNER OF COMMERCIAL DR & 65TH AVE
Page 7
   N. W. CORNER OF EAGLERIDGE DR & DEER CREEK DR
   N. E. CORNER OF DEER CREEK DR & EAGLERIDGE DR
Page 8
   FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF DEER PARK CREEK
Page 9
   N. E. CORNER OF LAKEVIEW DR & ST JOHN RD
   S. W. CORNER OF SHADY LN & ST JOHN RD
   S. W. CORNER OF THORNHILL RD & ST JOHN RD
   N. W. CORNER OF ST JOHN RD & FARMDALE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF FARMDALE RD & ST JOHN RD
   N. E. CORNER OF HUPPENTHAL DR & ST JOHN RD
   S. E. CORNER OF ST JOHN RD & HUPPENTHAL DR
   S. W. CORNER OF TANGLEWOOD DR & ST JOHN RD
   S. W. CORNER OF ST JOHN RD & PATTERSON ST
   N. W. CORNER OF ST JOHN RD & W 77TH AVE
   S. W. CORNER OF W 77TH AVE & PATTERSON ST
   S. E. CORNER OF PATTERSON ST & W 77TH AVE
   S. E . CORNER OF PATTERSON ST & SCHILLING DR
   N. E. CORNER OF SCHILLING DR & PATTERSON ST
   S. E. CORNER OF SCHILLING DR & SOUTHVIEW DR
   N. W. CORNER OF SCHILLING DR & SOUTHVIEW DR
   N. E. CORNER OF SOUTHVIEW DR & SCHILLING DR
   N. W. CORNER OF THERESA DR & SOUTHVIEW DR
   N. W. CORNER OF BLUFF DR & SOUTHVIEW DR
   N. W. CORNER OF LOUIS DR & SOUTHVIEW DR
   S. W. CORNER OF THERESA DR & BLUFF DR
   S. W. CORNER OF SCHILLING DR & BLUFF DR
   N. E. CORNER OF SCHILLING DR & BLUFF DR
   S. E. CORNER OF BLUFF DR & SCHILLING DR
   N. E. CORNER OF THERESA DR & BLUFF DR
   S. W. CORNER OF SCHILLING DR & SUNSET BLVD
   N. W. CORNER OF SUNSET BLVD & SCHILLING DR
   S. E. CORNER OF SUNSET BLVD & SCHILLING DR
   S. W. CORNER OF LAKEVTEW DR & SUNSET BLVD
   S. W. CORNER OF OLD LINCOLN HWY & SUNSET BLVD
   S. E. CORNER OF SUNSET BLVD & US 30
   N. E. CORNER OF OLD LINCOLN HWY & SUNSET BLVD
   S. W. CORNER OF THERESA DR & THERESA DR
   S. E. CORNER OF THERESA DR& SCHILLING DR
   S. E. CORNER OF OLD LINCOLN HWY & US 30
Page 10
   S. W. CORNER OF SHADY LN & ST JOHN RD
   S. W. CORNER OF THORNHILL DR & ST JOHN RD
   N. W. CORNER OF ST JOHN RD & FARMDALE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF FARMDALE DR & ST JOHN RD
   S. E. CORNER OF ST JOHN RD & FARMDALE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF TANGLEWOOD DR & ST JOHN RD
   S. E. CORNER OF CORAL DR & TANGLEWOOD DR
   N. W. CORNER OF CORAL DR & CLOVER LN
   S. W. CORNER OF CLOVER LN & CORAL DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CORAL DR & CLOVER LN
   N. E. CORNER OF CLOVER LN & CORAL DR
Page 11
   N. W. CORNER OF CORAL DR & RHETT CT
   N. E. CORNER OF CYNTHIA CT & ST FRANCIS DR
   N. E. CORNER OF KEENLAND WAY & ST FRANCIS DR
   S. E. CORNER OF ST FRANCIS DR & KEENLAND WAY
   N. W. CORNER OF ST FRANCIS DR & KEENLAND WAY
   S. E. CORNER OF AUGUSTA BLVD & CHURCHILL DR
   S. W. CORNER OF AUGUSTA BLVD & 77TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF RIDGEMOOR DR & PATTERSON ST
   N. W. CORNER OF PATTERSON & 77TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 77TH AV & PATTERSON ST
   S. E. CORNER OF PATTERSON ST & 77TH AV
Page 12
   S. E. CORNER OF HUPPENTHAL DR & LAKEVIEW DR
   S. W. CORNER OF LAKEVIEW DR & EGGERT DR
   S. E. CORNER OF EGGERT DR & LAKEVIEW DR
   N. E. CORNER OF LAKEVIEW DR & EGGERT DR
   N. E. CORNER OF HUPPENTHAL DR & ST JOHN RD
   S. E. CORNER OF HUPPENTHAL DR& ST JOHN RD
Page 13
   SHERWOOD LAKE APARTMENTS
Page 14
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & MAPLE PL
   N. E. CORNER OF MAPLE PL & WOODHOLLOW DR
   S. E. CORNER OF PINE ST & MAPLE PL
   S. E. CORNER OF HEATHER CT & MAPLE PL
   S. E. CORNER OF WILLOW LN & MAPLE PL
   S. W. CORNER OF CYPRESS DR & MAPLE PL
   S. E. CORNER OF CYPRESS DR & MAIN ST
   S. W. CORNER OF WILLOW CT & WOODHOLLOW DR
   S. E. CORNER OD WOODHOLLOW DR & WILLOW LN
   N. E. CORNER OF WILLOW LN & WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & WILLOW LN
   N. W. CORNER OF PINE ST & WOODHOLLOW DR
   S. E. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & OAK CT
   N. W. CORNER OF OAK CT & WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & OAK CT
   S. W. CORNER OF OAK CT & WOODHOLLOW DR
Page 15
   S. E. CORNER OF LISA LN & WOODHOLLOW DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CYPRESS DR &. WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. E . CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & CYPRESS DR
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & CYPRESS DR
   N. W. CORNER OF CYPRESS DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
Page 16
   N. W. CORNER OF CYPRESS DR. & MULBERRY LN
   N. E. CORNER OF MULBERRY LN & CYPRESS DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CYPRESS DR & MULBERRY LN
   S. E. CORNER OF CYPRESS DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. E. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & CYPRESS DR
   N. W. CORNER OF CYPRESS DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & CYPRESS DR
   S. E. CORNER OF FOREST DR & BRIARWOOD DR
   S. W. CORNER OF MULBERRY LN & JUNIPER DR
   S. W. CORNER OF CEDAR LN & JUNIPER DR
   S. E. CORNER OF BRIARWOOD DR & MULBERRY LN
   N. E . CORNER OF MULBERRY LN & BRIARWOOD DR
   N. W. CORNER OF BRIARWOOD DR & MULBERRY LN
   S. W. CORNER OF MULBERRY LN & BRIARWOOD DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CEDAR LN& SPRUCE DR
   N. E. CORNER OF SPRUCE DR & CEDAR LN
   S . W. CORNER OF SPRUCE DR & CEDAR LN
   S . E. CORNER OF JUNIPER DR & SPRUCE DR
   N. W. CORNER OF SPRUCE DR & PLUM CREEK DR
   N. W. CORNER OF MAPLE CT & SPRUCE DR
Page 17
   S. E. CORNER OF PERSIMMON DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   S. W. CORNER OF BROOKE LN & WHITEWOOD DR
   S. E. CORNER OF WHITEWOOD DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. E. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & BLUEGRASS DR
   N. W. CORNER OF BLUEGRASS DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & BLUEGRASS DR
   N. W. CORNER OF EVERGREEN LN & PERSIMMON DR
   N. W. CORNER OF PERSIMMON DR & BROOKE LN
   S. E. CORNER OF PLUM CREEK DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. E. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & PLUM CREEK DR
   N. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & PLUM CREEK DR
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & PLUM CREEK DR
   S. E. CORNER OF HOLLY LN& WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. W. CORNER OF HOLLY LN & WOODHOLLOW DR
Page 18
   N. E. CORNER OF PLUM CREEK DR & MAIN ST
   N. E. CORNER OF BLUEGRASS & PLUM CREEK DR
   N. E. CORNER OF HOLLY LN & PLUM CREEK DR
   S. E. CORNER OF PLUM CREEK DR & HOLLY LN
   N. E. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & PLUM CREEK DR
   S. E. CORNER OF PLUM CREEK DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. W. CORNER OF BLUEGRASS DR & HOLLY LN
   N. E. CORNER OF HOLLY LN & BLUEGRASS DR
   S. W. CORNER OF HOLLY LN & BLUEGRASS DR
   S. E. CORNER OF BLUEGRASS DR & HOLLY LN
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & HOLLY LN
   N. W. CORNER OF BLUEGRASS DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. E. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & BLUEGRASS DR
   N. W. CORNER OF HOLLY LN & WOODHOLLOW DR
   N. E. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & HOLLY LN
   S. E. CORNER OF WHITEWOOD DR & WOODHOLLOW DR
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODHOLLOW DR & HOLLY LN
Page 19
Page 20
Page 21
Page 22
Page 23
   BRIAR RIDGE
Page 23
   S. W. CORNER OF WINSTON CT & KENNEDY AV
   N. E. CORNER OF OAK ST & KENNEDY AV
   N. E . CORNER OF SCHERLAND DR & KENNEDY AV
   S. E. CORNER OF SPIVAK DR & OAK ST
   N. W. CORNER OF SPIVAK DR & SCHERLAND DR
   S. E . CORNER OF SPIVAK DR & SCHERLAND DR
   S. E . CORNER OF BEN DR & SCHERLAND DR
   N. W. CORNER OF BEN DR & SCHERLAND DR
   S. E. CORNER OF BEN DR & OAK ST
Page 24
   S. E. CORNER OF JUNCTION AV & KENNEDY AV
   N. E. CORNER OF DIVISION ST & KENNEDY AV
   N. W. CORNER OF KENNEDY AV & JUNCTION AV
   S. W. CORNER OF JUNCTION AV & KENNEDY AV
Page 25
   N. W. CORNER OF KENNEDY AV & 67TH AV
   N. E. CORNER OF 67TH AV & KENNEDY AV
   S. E. CORNER OF KENNEDY AV & 67TH AV
   N. W. CORNER OF KENNEDY AV & 68TH PL
   N. E. CORNER OF 68TH PL & KENNEDY AV
   S. E. CORNER OF KENNEDY AV & 68TH PL
   N. W. CORNER OF KENNEDY AV & JOLIET ST
   N. W. CORNER OF TERRACE DR & JOLIET ST
   N. W. CORNER OF KUHN DR & JOLIET ST
   N. W. CORNER OF HOMAN DR & JOLIET ST
   S. E. CORNER OF REED LN& JOLIET ST
   N. W. CORNER OD REED LN & US 30
   N. W. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & US 30
   S. W. CORNER OF 68TH PL & ROMAN RD
Page 26
   DUPLICATE INTERSECTIONS
Page 27
   N. W. CORNER OF MARY ST & JUNCTION AV
   N. E. CORNER OF REDAR DR & JUNCTION AV
   N. E. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & JUNCTION AV
   N. W. CORNER OF JUNCTION AV & JOLIET ST
   S. E. CORNER OF JUNCTION AV & JOLIET ST
   S. W. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & JUNCTION AV
   S. W. CORNER OF REDAR DR & AUSTIN AV
   N. W. CORNER OF AUSTIN AV & JOLIET ST
   N. E. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & AUSTIN AV
   S. E. CORNER OF AUSTIN AV & JOLIET ST
   S. W. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & AUSTIN AV
Page 28
   N. E. CORNER OF BUNKER DR & AUSTIN AV
   N. E. CORNER OF GOLFVIEW DR & AUSTIN AV
Page 29
   N. E. CORNER OF KOLLING RD & AUSTIN AV
   S. W. CORNER OF REDAR DR & AUSTIN AV
   N. W. CORNER OF SHERWOOD CLUB & JOLIET ST
Page 30
   N. W. CORNER OF ANNA ST & US 30
   S. E. CORNER OF ANNA ST & WILHELM ST
   N. E. CORNER OF WILHELM ST & ANNA ST
   N. W. CORNER OF ANNA ST & WILHELM ST
   S. E. CORNER OF ANNA ST & JOLIET ST
   N. E. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & ANNA ST
   N. W. CORNER OF ANNA ST & JOLIET ST
   S. W. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & ANNA ST
   N. W. CORNER OF FRANCISCO ST & JOLIET ST
   N. W. CORNER OF ROMAN RD & JOLIET ST
   N. E. CORNER OF RAUSCH DR & ROMAN RD
   N. E. CORNER OF ROMAN RD BY SHOP
   N. W. CORNER OF MARY ST & JUNCTION AV
   N. W. CORNER OF MARY ST & JOLIET ST
   N. E. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & MARY ST
   S. E. CORNER OF MARY ST & JOLIET ST
   S. W. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & MARY ST
   N. W. CORNER OF MARY ST & WILHELM ST
   S. W. CORNER OF WILHELM ST & MARY ST
   N. E. CORNER OF WILHELM ST & MARY ST
   N. W. CORNER OF WILSON ST & WILHELM ST
   S. E. CORNER OF WILSON ST & JOLIET ST
Page 31
   N. W. CORNER OF JUNCTION AV & WILHELM ST
   S . E. CORNER OF REIPLINGER RD & WILHELM ST
   N. W. CORNER OF AUSTIN AV & WILHELM ST
   S. W. CORNER OF WILHELM ST & AUSTIN AV
   S. E. CORNER OF AUSTIN AV & WILHELM ST
   N. E. CORNER OF WILHELM ST & AUSTIN A V
   N. E. CORNER OF JUNCTION AV& AUSTIN A V
   S. E. CORNER OF BURGANDY ST & REIPLINGER RD
   S. E. CORNER OF CHELSA ST & REIPLINGER RD
   S. E. CORNER OF HAMPTON CT & REIPLINGER RD
   N. W. CORNER OF REIPLINGER RD & AUSTIN AV
Page 32
   S. W. CORNER OF GREGORY ST & VERNON AV
   N. E. CORNER OF GREGORY ST & AUSTIN AV
   N. W. CORNER OF VERNON AV & GREGORY ST
   N. E. CORNER OF GREGORY ST & VERNON AV
   S. E. CORNER OF VERNON ST & WILHELM ST
   S. E. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & JOLIET ST
   N. W. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & WILHELM ST
   S. W. CORNER OF WILHELM ST & SOUTH PARK AV
   N. E. CORNER OF WILHELM ST & SOUTH PARK AV
   S. E. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & WILHELM ST
   N. W. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & GREGORY ST
   S. W. CORNER OF GREGORY ST & SOUTH PARK AV
   N. E. CORNER OF GREGORY ST & SOUTH PARK AV
   S. E. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & GREGORY ST
   N. W. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & GRANT ST
   N. E. CORNER OF GRANT ST & SOUTH PARK AV
   S. E. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & GRANT ST
   N. E. CORNER OF LAKE ST & SOUTH PARK AV
   N. W. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & JUNCTION AV
   S. W. CORNER OF JUNCTION AV & SOUTH PARK AV
   N. E. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & JUNCTION AV
   S. W. CORNER OF GRANT ST & SCHAFER DR
   N. W. CORNER OF SCHAFER DR & GREGORY ST
   N. E. CORNER OF GREGORY ST & SCHAFER DR
   S. E. CORNER OF SCHAFER DR & GREGORY ST
   S. W. CORNER OF WILHELM ST & SCHAFER DR
   S. E. CORNER OF SCHAFER DR & JOLIET ST
Page 33
   S. E. CORNER OF HARTLEY DR & JOLIET ST
   N. E. CORNER OF JAMES WITTCHEN DR & HARTLEY DR
   N. W. CORNER OF HARTLEY DR & GREGORY ST & JAMES WITTCHEN DR
   S. W. CORNER OF GREGORY ST & HARTLEY DR & JAMES WITTCHEN DR
   S. E. CORNER OF PROTSMAN DR & GREGORY ST
   N. E. CORNER OF SEIBERT DR & PROTSMAN DR
   S. E. CORNER OF FISHTORN DR & TEIBEL DR
   N. W. CORNER OF FISHTORN DR & SOUTH PARK AV & KATHLEEN DR
   N. E. CORNER OF KATHLEEN DR & FISHTORN DR & SOUTH PARK AV
   S. E. CORNER OF SOUTH PARK AV & FISHTORN DR & KATHLEEN DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CHRISTENSON LN & KATHLEEN DR
   S. E. CORNER OF GOVERT DR & JAMES WITTCHEN DR
   S. W. CORNER OF SIEBERT DR & GOVERT DR
   S. W. CORNER OF TEIBEL DR & GOVERT DR
   S. W. CORNER OF BENCO CT & GOVERT DR
   N. W. CORNER OF GOVERT DR & KATHLEEN DR
   S. W. CORNER OF KATHLEEN DR & GOVERT DR
   S. E. CORNER OF GOVERT DR & KATHLEEN DR
   N. E. CORNER OF KATHLEEN DR & GOVERT DR
Page 34
   S. W. CORNER OF GARD LN & GOVERT DR
   S. E. CORNER OF GOVERT DR & KNOXBURY LN
Page 35
   S. W. CORNER OF NORTH RD & AUSTIN AV
   N. E. CORNER OF FAIRVIEW LN & AUSTIN AV
   N. W. CORNER OF HILLTOP DR & US 30
   N. E. CORNER OF NORTH RD & AUSTIN AV
Page 36
   N. E.   CORNER OF MIAMI RD & LINCOLNWOOD AV
   N. E.   CORNER OF IROQU[I]OIS RD & LINCOLNWOOD AV
   N. E.   CORNER OF WALNUT PL & LINCOLNWOOD AV
   N. E.   CORNER OF LINDEN RD & LINCOLNWOOD AV
   N. E.   CORNER OF STEPHEN DR N & LINCOLNWOOD A V
   N. E.   CORNER OF STEPHEN DR S & LINCOLNWOOD AV
   N. W. CORNER OF LINCOLNWOOD AV & 77TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 77TH AV & LINCOLNWOOD AV
   S. E. CORNER OF LINCOLNWOOD AV & 77TH AV
   N. E. CORNER OF 77TH AV & LINCOLNWOOD AV
   S. E. CORNER OF OLD LINCOLN HWY & US 30
   N. E. CORNER OF CHEYENE DR & OLD LINCOLN HWY
   N. E. CORNER OF PONTIAC RD & CHEYENNE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CHIPPEWA DR & PONTIAC RD
   N. W. CORNER OF CHIPPEWA DR & IROQU[T]OIS RD
   S. W. CORNER OF IROQU[I]OIS RD & KENNEDY AV
   N. E. CORNER OF LITTLE JOHN RD & KENNEDY AV
   S. E. CORNER OF KENNEDY AV & US 30
   S. W. CORNER OF PONTIAC RD & KENNEDY AV
Page 37
   N. W. CORNER OF STARLIGHT DR & 77TH AV
Page 38
   S. W. CORNER OF LITTLE JOHN DR & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   S. W. CORNER OF NOTTINGHAM & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   N. W. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & FRIAR TUCK DR
   S. W. CORNER OF FRIAR TUCK DR & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   N. E. CORNER OF FRIAR TUCK DR & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   S. E. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & FRIAR TUCK DR
   S. W. CORNER OF MAID MARION N & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   S. W. CORNER OF MAID MARION S & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   S. W. CORNER OF FRIAR TUCK DR & SIR RICHARD RD
   N. W. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & NORMANDY RD
   N. E. CORNER OF NORMANDY BLVD & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   S. E. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & NORMANDY RD
Page 39
   N. E. CORNER OF ELIZABETH DR & NORMANDY RD
   S. W. CORNER OF ST DUNSTAN DR & NORMANDY RD
   N. W. CORNER OF NORMANDY RD & SIR GAWAINE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF SIR GAWAINE RD & NORMANDY RD
   S. E. CORNER OF NORMANDY RD & SIR GAWAINE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF QUEEN ELEANOR DR & NORMANDY RD
   S. E. CORNER OF KING HENRY DR & QUEEN ELEANOR DR
   N. E. CORNER OF QUEEN ELEANOR DR & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   N. W. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & 77TH AV
   S. E. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & SIR GAWAINE DR
   N. E. CORNER OF SIR GAWAINE DR& ROBINHOOD BLVD
   N. W. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & SIR GAWAINE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & ST DUNSTAN DR
   N. E. CORNER OF ST DUNSTAN DR & ROBINHOOD BLVD
   N. W. CORNER OF ROBINHOOD BLVD & ST DUNSTAN DR
   S. E. CORNER OF SPRINGHILL DR & 77TH AV
Page 40
   S. W. CORNER OF STRATFORD LN & SPRINGHILL DR
   S. W. CORNER OF YORK RD AND SPRINGHILL DR
   N. E. CORNER OF STRATFORD LN & VICTORIA RD
   N. W. CORNER OF VICTORIA RD & YORK RD
   N. E. CORNER OF YORK RD & ALEXANDER ST
Page 41
   S. E. CORNER OF TURIN DR & BACH RD
   N. W. CORNER OF HUGEL HILL & TURIN DR
   S. W. CORNER OF TURIN DR & HUGEL HILL ST
   N. E. CORNER OF TURIN DR & HUGEL HILL ST
Page 42
   S. E. CORNER OF NAPLES DR & 77TH AV
   N. E. CORNER OF SORRENTO DR & NAPLES DR
   N. W. CORNER OF NAPLES DR & NAPLES CT
   S. W. CORNER OF NAPLES CT & NAPLES DR
   S. E. CORNER OF NAPLES DR & NAPLES CT
   S. E. CORNER OF VENICE DR & SORRENTO DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CAPRI DR & 77TH AV
   N. W. CORNER OF CAPRI DR & SORRENTO DR
   S. W. CORNER OF SORRENTO DR & CAPRI DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CAPRI DR & SORRENTO DR
   N. W. CORNER OF CAPRI DR & VENICE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF VENICE DR & CAPRI DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CAPRI DR & VENICE DR
Page 43
   N. W. CORNER OF ROMA CT & CAPRI DR
   N. E. CORNER OF CAPRI DR & NAPLES DR
   N. W. CORNER OF NAPLES DR & CAPRI DR
   S. W. CORNER OF CAPRI DR & NAPLES DR
   N. W. CORNER OF TURIN DR & CAPRI DR
   N. E. CORNER OF SEVILLE CT& CAPRI DR
Page 44
   S. W. CORNER OF HELENA ST & ELIZABETH DR
   S. W. CORNER OF LINCOLN DR & ELIZABETH DR
   S. W. CORNER OF ELIZABETH DR & AUSTIN AV
   S. E. CORNER OF SHEILA DR & ELIZABETH DR
   N. W. CORNER OF AUSTIN AV & 77TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 77TH AV & AUSTIN AV
   N. E. CORNER OF 77TH AV & AUSTIN AV
   S. E. CORNER OF AUSTIN AV & 77TH AV
Page 45
   S. E. CORNER OF TRENTA CT & US 30
   N. W. CORNER OF TRENTA CT & LINCOLN DR
   N. E. CORNER OF LINCOLN DR & ANNA ST
   N. W. CORNER OF ANNA ST & PARKWAY DR
   N. E. CORNER OF PARKWAY DR & ANNA ST
   S. E . CORNER OF ANNA ST & PARKWAY DR
   S. W. CORNER OF PARKWAY DR & ANNA ST
   N. W. CORNER OF ANNA ST & ELIZABETH DR
   N. E. CORNER OF ELIZABETH DR & ANNA ST
   S. E. CORNER OF ANNA ST & ELIZABETH DR
   S. W. CORNER OF ELIZABETH DR & ANNA ST
Page 46
   N. W. CORNER OF ANNA ST & 7 6TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 76TH AV & ANNA ST
   S. E. CORNER OF ANNA ST & 76TH AV
   N. W. CORNER OF ANNA ST & 77TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 76TH AV & GRAND AV
   N. E. CORNER OF 76TH AV & GRAND AV
   N. W. CORNER OF GRAND AV & 77TH AV
   N. W. CORNER OF LORI LN & 76TH AV
   S. E. CORNER OF LORI LN & 76TH AV
Page 47
   N. W. CORNER OF DIVAC DR & 77TH AV
Page 48
   N. E. CORNER OF 75TH AV & CLINE AV
   N. E. CORNER OF 77TH AV & CLINE AV
   N. E. CORNER OF ROHRMAN RD & CLINE AV
   N. W. CORNER OF CLINE AV & 77TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 77TH AV & CLINE AV
   S. E. CORNER OF ROHRMAN RD & CLINE AV
Page 49
   S. E. CORNER OF HARVEST DR & US 30
   N. E. CORNER OF WOOD VIEW DR & HARVEST DR
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODVIEW DR & HARVEST DR
   N. E. CORNER OF GRAND VIEW CT & HARVEST DR
   N. W. CORNER OF HARVEST DR & AUTUMN DR
   S. W. CORNER OF AUTUMN DR & HARVEST DR
   N. E. CORNER OF AUTUMN DR & HARVEST DR
   S. E. CORNER OF HARVEST DR & AUTUMN DR
   S. W. CORNER OF HARVEST CT & HARVEST DR
   N. E. CORNER OF CERES DR & HARVEST DR
   N. W. CORNER OF HARVEST DR & PAINTED LEAF DR
   S. W. CORNER OF PAINTED LEAF DR & HARVEST DR
   N. E. CORNER OF PAINTED LEAF DR & HARVEST DR
   S. W. CORNER OF AUTUMN DR & CERES DR
   N. E. CORNER OF AUTUMN DR & CERES DR
   S. E. CORNER OF CERES DR & AUTUMN DR
   N. W. CORNER OF MORNINGSIDE DR & PAINTED LEAF DR
   S. W. CORNER OF PAINTED LEAF DR & MORNINGSIDE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF MORNINGSIDE DR & PAINTED LEAF DR
Page 50
   N. W. CORNER OF MOCKINGBIRD DR & ROHRMAN RD
   N. E. CORNER OF DEMENTER DR & PAINTED LEAF DR
   N. E. CORNER OF OAKLEAF DR & PAINTED LEAF DR
   N. W. CORNER OF PAINTED LEAF DR & MOCKINGBIRD DR
   S. E. CORNER OF PAINTED LEAF DR & MOCKINGBIRD DR
   N. E. CORNER OF MOCKINGBIRD DR & PAINTED LEAF DR
   S. E. CORNER OF ACORN DR & MOCKINGBIRD DR
   S. W. CORNER OF MORNINGSIDE CT & MORNINGSIDE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF DEMENTER DR & MORNINGSIDE DR
   N. W. CORNER OF MORNINGSIDE DR & RIDGLEY ST
   N. E. CORNER OF RIDGELY ST & MORNINGSIDE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF MORNINGSIDE DR & RIDGELY
Page 51
   N. W. CORNER OF BURGE DR & JUS[T]ICE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF JUSTICE DR & BURGE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF BURGE DR & JUSTICE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF KRAME DR & BURGE DR
   N. W. CORNER OF BURGE DR & 85TH AV
Page 52
   N. E. CORNER OF 76TH AV & HAMLIN ST
   N. W. CORNER OF HAMLIN ST & US 30
Page 53
   S. W. CORNER OF SANDI LN & CLINE AV
   S. E. CORNER OF TERRI LN & SANDI LN
   S. W. CORNER OF KATHLEEN DR & TERRI LN
   N. E. CORNER OF KATHLEEN DR & PATTI LN
   S. W. CORNER OF KATHLEEN DR & PATH LN
   S. W. CORNER OF KNOXBURY DR & CLINE AV
Page 54
   NEWCASTLE ESTATES
Page 55
   N. W. CORNER OF JULIE DR & JOLIET ST
   S. E. CORNER OF JULIE DR & JOLIET ST
   N. W. CORNER OF CLINE AV & JOLIET ST
   S. W. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & CLINE AV
   S. E. CORNER OF CLINE AV & JOLIET ST
   N. E. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & CLINE AV
   S. E. CORNER OF MICHAEL DR & JULIE DR
   N. W. CORNER OF MICHAEL DR & JAMES WITTCHEN DR
   N. W. CORNER OF SUSAN DR & JAMES WITTCHEN DR
   S. W. CORNER OF JAMES WITTCHEN DR & CLINE AV
Page 56
   N. E. CORNER OF ST GEORGE DR & CLINE AV
   S. E. CORNER OF ST GEORGE DR & HIGH RIDGE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF VALLEY CT & HIGH RIDGE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF NOVO DR & JOLIET ST
   N. W. CORNER OF NOVO DR & HIGH RIDGE DR
   S. W. CORNER OF HIGH RIDGE DR & NOVO DR
   S. E. CORNER OF SELO DR & HIGH RIDGE DR
   N. E. CORNER OF HIGH RIDGE DR & NOVO DR
Page 57
   S. E. CORNER OF JULIE DR & SUSSEX DR
   S. W. CORNER OF SUSSEX DR & CLINE AV
Page 5 8
   N. E. CORNER OF JORDON CIRCLE & CLINE AV
Page 59
   S. W. CORNER OF JOLIET ST & BROAD ST
   N. W. CORNER OF BROAD ST & JOLIET ST
Page 60
   S. E. CORNER OF EDISON ST & JOLIET ST
Page 61
   S. W. CORNER OF 69TH PL & EDISON ST
   N. E. CORNER OF 70TH AV & EDISON ST
   S. W. CORNER OF 70TH PL & EDISON ST
   N. W. CORNER OF EDISON ST & 71ST AV
Page 62
   NEW ELLIOTT
Page 63
   N. W. CORNER OF BURR ST & 75TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 75TH AV & BURR ST
   S. E. CORNER OF BURR ST & 75TH AV
   N. E. CORNER OF 75TH AV & BURR ST
Page 64
   NEW ELLIOTT
Page 65
   N. E. CORNER OF 78TH AV & BURR ST
   S. E. CORNER OF HANLEY PL & 78TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 78TH AV & HANLEY ST
   N. W. CORNER OF HANLEY ST & 77TH PL
   N. E. CORNER OF 77TH PL & HANLEY ST
   S. E. CORNER OF HANLEY ST & 77TH PL
   S. E. CORNER OF DURBIN DR & 77TH PL
   N. W. CORNER OF HANLEY ST & 78TH LN
   N. W. CORNER OF DURBIN DR & 78TH LN
   N. W. CORNER OF MOUNT ST & 78TH LN
   N. E. CORNER OF 78TH LN & MOUNT ST
   N. E. CORNER OF 78TH CT & MOUNT ST
   N. E. CORNER OF 78TH PL & MOUNT ST
   N. E. CORNER OF 77TH CT & MOUNT ST
   S. E. CORNER OF MOUNT ST & 77TH PL
   S. W. CORNER OF 77TH PL & MOUNT ST
   N. W. CORNER OF MOUNT ST & 77TH PL
Page 66
   N. E. CORNER OF COMMERCE BLVD & BURR ST
   S. W. CORNER OF FOUNTAIN DR & PINE ISLAND DR
   N. E . CORNER OF PINE ISLAND DR & 81ST PL
   S. W. CORNER OF 81ST PL & PINE ISLAND DR
Page 67
   N. E. CORNER OF 81ST PL & BURR ST
   N. E. CORNER OF 83RD PL & BURR ST
Page 68
   S. E. CORNER 82ND CT & PINE ISLAND DR
Page 69
   N. W. CORNER OF PINE ISLAND DR & PORTER PL
   N. E. CORNER OF PORTER PL & PINE ISLAND DR
   S. E . CORNER OF PINE ISLAND DR & PORTER PL
   N. W. CORNER OF PINE ISLAND DR & 85TH LN
   N. E. CORNER OF 85TH LN & PINE ISLAND DR
   S. E. CORNER OF PINE ISLAND DR & 85TH LN
Page 70
   N. W. CORNER OF 85TH PL & MATHEWS ST
   S. E. CORNER OF MATHEWS ST & 85TH PL
   S. W. CORNER OF 85TH PL & MATHEWS ST
   S. W. CORNER OF DURBIN LN & MATHEWS ST
   N. E. CORNER OF 86TH PL & MATHEWS ST
   N. W. CORNER OF MATHEWS ST & DURBIN LN & 87TH LN
   S. W. CORNER OF DURBIN LN & MATHEWS ST
   S. E. CORNER OF MATHEWS ST & DURBIN LN & 87TH LN
   N. E. CORNER OF 87TH LN & MATHEWS ST & DURBIN LN
   S. E. CORNER OF MATHEWS LN & 86TH PL
   N. W. CORNER OF MATHEWS LN & 87TH LN
   S. W. CORNER OF 87TH LN & CLARK PL
Page 71
   N. E. CORNER OF 85TH PL & BURR ST
   S. W. CORNER OF 85TH PL & HANLEY LN
   S. E. CORNER OF HANLEY LN & 85TH PL
   N. E . CORNER OF 85TH PL & HANLEY LN
   S. W. CORNER OF HANLEY LN & MATHEWS ST
Page 72
   N. W. CORNER OF MATHEWS ST & 89TH PL
   N. E. CORNER OF 89TH PL & MATHEWS ST
   S . E. CORNER OF MATHEWS ST & 89TH PL
   N. E. CORNER OF 89TH CT & MATHEWS ST
   N. E. CORNER OF 90TH LN & MATHEWS ST
   N. W. CORNER OF MATHEWS ST & 91 ST AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 89TH TERRACE AND CLARK PL
   S. W. CORNER OF 89TH PL & CLARK PL
   S. E. CORNER OF CLARK PL & 89TH PL
   N. W. CORNER OF CLARK PL & 89TH PL
Page 73
   S. W. CORNER OF SPRINGVALE DR N & BURR ST
   S. W. CORNER OF SPRINGVALE DR S & BURR ST
Page 74
   S. W. CORNER OF WOODLAND DR & PINEVIEW DR
   N. W. CORNER OF PINEVIEW LN & 91ST AV
Page 75
   RESERVED FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
Page 76
   DUPLICATE
Page 77
   N. W. CORNER OF CAPRI DR & 81ST AV & MANCHESTER LN
   S. E. CORNER OF MANCHESTER LN & 81 ST & CAPRI DR
   N. E. CORNER OF 81 ST AV & MANCHESTER LN & CAPRI DR
Page 78
   N. E. CORNER OF DEERPATH DR W & AUSTIN AV
   N. W. CORNER OF DEERPATH DR & 77TH AV
   S. E. CORNER OF BARBARA JEAN DR & DEERPATH W
Page 79
   DUPLICATE
Page 80
   N. W. CORNER OF SHEILA ST & ELIZABETH DR
   N. W. CORNER OF LINCOLN DR & ELIZABETH DR
   S. E. CORNER OF SHEILA DR & ELIZABETH DR
   S. W. CORNER OF ELIZABETH DR & AUSTIN AV
   N. W. CORNER OF RED RIVER DR & 76TH AV
   S. E. CORNER OF DEER RUN DR & BIG SAND DR
Page 81
   S. E. CORNER OF BRITTON DR & JOLIET ST
   S. W. CORNER OF BRITTON DR & BRITTON DR
Page 82
   S. E. CORNER OF FOXWOOD DR & 75TH AV
   N. E. CORNER OF MOUNT DR & FOXWOOD DR
Page 83
   S. W. CORNER OF QUAIL CT & FOREST RIDGE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF FOREST RIDGE DR & 73RD AV
   N. W. CORNER OF FOREST RIDGE DR & 75TH AV
Page 84
   S. E. CORNER OF MALLARD LN & 73RD AV
   N. W. CORNER OF MALLARD LN & CARDINAL CT
   S. W. CORNER OF CARDINAL CT & MALLARD LN
   S. E. CORNER OF MALLARD LN & CARDINAL CT
   N. E. CORNER OF CARDINAL CT & MALLARD LN
   N. W. CORNER OF MALLARD LN & 75TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 75TH AV & MALLARD LN
   N. E. CORNER OF 75TH AV & MALLARD LN
   S. E. CORNER OF STARLIND DR & 75TH AV
   N. W. CORNER OF STARLING DR & HERON AV
   S. E. CORNER OF STARLING DR & HERON AV
   N. E. CORNER OF HERON DR & STARLING DR
   S. W. CORNER OF PHEASANT CT & DOVE DR
   S. E. CORNER OF DOVE DR & HERON DR
   S. W. CORNER OF HERON DR & DOVE DR
   N. W. CORNER OF DOVE DR & HERON DR
Page 85
   N. W. CORNER OF MALLARD LN & 73RD AV
   S. E. CORNER OF STARLING DR & 72ND AV
   N. E. CORNER OF TEAL TERRACE & STARLING DR
   N. W. CORNER OF STARLING DR & 70TH AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 70THAV& STARLING DR
   S. W. CORNER OF STARLING DR & 70TH AV
   N. E. CORNER OF 70TH AV & STARLING DR
   N. E. CORNER OF GULL DR & STARLING DR
   S. W. CORNER OF 70TH AV & WREN DR
   N. W. CORNER OF WREN DR & CRANE CT
   S. W. CORNER OF CRANE CT & DOVE DR
   N. E. CORNER OF FINCH DR & WREN DR
   N. W. CORNER OF WRE DR & 73RD AV
Page 86
   N. E. CORNER OF 70TH AV & BURR ST
   N. W. CORNER OF FOXWOOD DR & 70TH AV
   S. E. CORNER OF FOXWOOD DR & 70TH AV
   N. W. CORNER OF HAWK DR & 70TH AV
   N. W. CORNER OF FOREST RIDGE DR & 70TH AV
Page 87
   S. W. CORNER OF JASKULA LN & BURR ST
   S. W. CORNER OF 70TH AV & BURR ST
   S. E. CORNER OF FALCON DR & 70TH AV
   N. W. CORNER OF FALCON DR & 70TH AV
   N. E. CORNER OF GULL DR & SWAN LN
Page 88 - 92
   FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
Page 93
   S. E. CORNER OF MATHEWS ST & 91ST AV
   S. W. CORNER OF 92ND AV & CLARK ST
Page 94
   THE GREENS OF SHERWOOD
Page 95
   VICTORIA PLACE
Page 96
   SARATOGA EAGLERIDGE
   N. E. CORNER OF POSTON PL & TICONDEROGA ST
   N. E. CORNER OF POSTON PL & ST JOHN RD
   N. W. CORNER OF TICONDEROGA ST & POSTON PL
   S. E. CORNER OF TICONDEROGA ST & POSTON PL
   S. W. CORNER OF POSTON PL & TICONDEROGA ST
   N. W. CORNER OF COWAN CT & THIEL DR
   N. E. CORNER OF THIELD DR & COWAN CT
   S. E. CORNER OF COWAN CT & THIEL DR
(Ord. No. 1360, § 2, 12-11-96)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1343 passed July 17, 1996 had an "Addendum A" which
   was identical to Schedule 2 entitled "Traffic Control Devices" from § 2 of Ord.
21 No. 1360 passed December 11, 1996. That Schedule has been included verbatim as §
   8-86; however the editor's note that it has not been provided with a reference
   guide for the references to pages 1 - 96 cited in the schedule.
Sec. 8-87 through Sec. 8-104 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Traffic Control in Parks.
Sec. 8-105 Signs Erected.
   The Town Council shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs
designating the provisions of this ordinance at the entrance of each park.
(Ord. No. 890, 6-9-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-7-1)
Sec. 8-106 Restrictions.
   a.   The Town authorities prohibit the use of any motor vehicles, which
include but are not limited to motorcycle, automobile, trucks, dune buggies,
go-carts, snowmobiles, etc., within the boundaries of any public park within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville, excluding specifically designated
parking areas within a park area.
   b.   The Town authorities further prohibit the use of any other means of
transportation or locomotion which the Police Department deems to be dangerous
to pedestrians or that may damage or injure any of the park landscape, fixtures
or other public property.
(Ord. No. 890, 6-9-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-7-2)
Sec. 8-107 Exceptions.
   a.   This ordinance shall not be interpreted as to exclude any town
department motorized vehicles from use within the park premises.
   b.   The town authorities prohibit any tamed or domesticated animals from
being within any park area either attended or unattended.
(Ord. No. 890, 6-9-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-7-3)
Sec. 8-108 through Sec. 8-114 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Local Authorities to Regulate Traffic on Local Roads and
Streets.
Sec. 8-115 Definitions.  22
   Pursuant to Indiana Code, §§ 9-6-3-1, et seq., 36-9-2-5, 36-8-2-4, and 35-1-
12-1 local town authorities may regulate the conduct, use, possession, or flow
of traffic upon such streets and roads or impose restrictions as to the
conduct, use, possession or flow of traffic upon such streets and roads where
conditions exist in the opinion of the Town Council or other town authorities
that might endanger the public health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. No. 882, 2-15-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-6-1)
 
Notes
22    Editor's Note: I. C., § 9-6-3-1, et seq., was repealed in 1988, accordingly all
   penal language has been removed from the Chapter.
Sec. 8-116 Authority of Town Administrator Established.
   The Town Administrator shall declare that the conduct, use, possession or
flow of traffic upon any street, road, highway, alley or other public
thoroughfare poses or might pose a danger to the public health, safety or
welfare. No prior notice is necessary for such declaration.
(Ord. No. 882, 2-15-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-6-2)
Sec. 8-117 Enforcement.
   The Town Administrator may restrict or prohibit the conduct, use,
possession, or flow of traffic upon such streets or roads and notify the police
department or other town departments to assist in erecting signs, barricades,
barriers, markings, lights or other implements to effect the purpose of this
ordinance.
   The Town Administrator shall designate, in writing which street, road,
alley, highway, or public thoroughfare with reasonable particularity he
declares are a danger to the public health and also declare with reasonable
particularity the time in which the restricted use of closing of said street or
road shall take effect and when said restricted use or closing may be removed,
if possible. Suitable and convenient alternate routes may be provided for
traffic so diverted and appropriately marked.
(Ord. No. 882, 2-15-82, Schererville Town Code, § 8-6-3)
Sec. 8-118 Penalty.
   Any person violating the restrictions imposed by this ordinance shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation, and in all civil actions, oral evidence of
the location and content of such signs, barricades, barriers, markings, lights
or other implements shall be prima facie evidence of the adoption and
application of such restriction or closing by the Town Administrator and the
validity thereof. The town authorities shall upon request by any party in any
action at law furnish, under seal of the Town Clerk a certified copy of the
resolution or declaration by the Town Administrator establishing the
restriction or closing in question which shall be accepted by any court as
conclusive proof of such designation or determination by the Town
Administrator.
(Ord. No. 882, 2-15-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-6-4)
Sec. 8-119 through Sec. 8-121 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Truck Regulations.  23
 
Notes
23 23    I. C., §§ 9-20-1-1 through 9-20-1-4, address size and weight
   restrictions.
Sec. 8-122 Heavy Truck Weight Restrictions.
   a.   Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 9-20-1-1, et seq., local town authorities
may prohibit the operation of vehicles upon such streets and roads or impose
restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated upon such streets or
roads for a total period of ninety (90) days in any one (1) calendar year,
whenever said streets, roads, and highways by reason of deterioration, rain,
snow, frost, or other climatic conditions will be seriously damaged or
destroyed unless the use of vehicles thereon is prohibited or the permissible
weights thereof reduced.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-17) (See Also §
8-50 et seq. of this Code)
   b.   All vehicle traffic which has a gross weight of five (5) tons shall not
travel upon any municipal roadway designated in this chapter, so long as the
designated roadways are marked by signs at each end point, with the following
exceptions:
      1.   Construction Vehicles; and,
      2.   Local delivery vehicles within the town limits where there is no
alternate roadway without such limitation from the point observed by law
enforcement official to its destinations.
      3.   Penalty for violation shall be as set forth in this Chapter as a
moving violation.
(Ord. No. 1127, 9-13-89)
Sec. 8-123 Restrictive Signs Erected.
   The Town Manager shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs
designating the provisions of this ordinance at each end of that portion of any
town street, road or highway affected thereby and at intersecting streets,
roads or highways and the ordinance shall not be effective unless and until
such signs are erected and maintained.
(Ord. No. 881, § 1, 2-10-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-18)
Sec. 8-124 Authority of Town Manager.
   The town authorities (Town Manager) may prohibit the operation of trucks or
other commercial vehicles, or may impose limitations as to the weight, size or
use thereof, on designated streets, roads or highways, which prohibitions and
limitations shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on such streets,
roads or highways. Suitable and convenient alternate routes shall be provided
for traffic so diverted and appropriately marked.
(Ord. No. 881, § 2, 2-10-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-19)
Sec. 8-125 Verification.
   On the trial of any person charged with the violation of the restrictions
thus imposed; and in all civil actions oral evidence of the location and
content of such signs or markings shall be prima facie evidence of the adoption
and application of such restriction by the town authorities (Town Manager) and
the validity thereof. The town authorities shall upon request by any party in
any action at law furnish, under seal of the town authorities (Town Clerk), a
certified copy of the resolution by the Town Manager establishing the
restriction in question which shall be accepted by any court as conclusive
proof of such designation or determination by the Town Manager.
(Ord. No. 881, § 3, 2-10-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-20)
Sec. 8-126 Penalties.
   Every person found violating this ordinance and Town Code Section shall for
the first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00); for a second such conviction within one (1) year
thereafter such person shall be punished by a fine of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00); and upon a third and subsequent conviction within
one (1) year of the first conviction such person shall be punished by a fine of
not less than one thousand dollars ($1000.00).
(Ord. No. 1546, § 1, 1-23-02; Ord. No. 881, § 4, 2-10-82; Schererville Town
Code, § 8-2-21)
Sec. 8-127 Vehicle Owner Restriction.
   It is unlawful for the owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise
directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly to permit the
operation of such vehicle upon a street, road or highway in any manner contrary
to this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 881, § 5, 2-10-82; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-22)
Sec. 8-128 and Sec. 8-129 Reserved for Future Use.
Division X. Towing Charges and Regulations.
Sec. 8-130 Towing and Removing Service Charges.
   a.   An authorized towing service may charge for towing or removing a
vehicle under Sec. 4-148 and Sec. 4-149 and of this Code shall be as follows:
      Day Time Tow Charge      $100.00
      Night Time Tow Charge      $110.00
      Flat Bed Charge         Owner's Discretion
      Day Time Winch and Tow Charge   Up to $50.00 (In Addition to Towing Fee)
      Night Time Winch and Tow Charge   $100.00
(Ord. No. 1487, § 1, 5-10-00; Ord. No. 1636, § 1, 1-19-05; Ord. No. 1687, § 1,
12-13-06)
   b.   If two (2) or more trucks are used, the charge shall be based on two
(2) call-outs.
      Day Time Winch Only      $70.00
      Night Time Winch Only      $85.00
      Disconnect Linkage (No Keys)   $20.00
   c.   The rates set forth above are the maximum allowed and applied to
passenger cars and other vehicles up to one (1) ton. The cost of towing
vehicles heavier than one (1) ton are to be changed at the discretion of the
individual towing firm.
(Ord. No. 1203, § 2, 4-8-92; Ord. No. 1636, § 1, 1-19-05)
      Storage per day:
      1.   Outside         $25.00
      2.   Inside            $35.00
(Ord. No. 1203, § 1, 4-8-92; Ord. No. 1636, § 1, 1-19-05)
Sec. 8-131 Day and Night Rates and Times.
   For purposes of this Division, day rate time is 7:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m.
Night rate time is 6:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 1059, § A, 3-9-88)
Sec. 8-132 Towing Contracts to Remove Vehicles Declared Public Nuisances.
   To facilitate the removal of abandoned vehicles or parts of vehicles
declared a public nuisance, the police department may enter into towing
contracts or agreements for the removal and storage of abandoned vehicle and
parts.
(Ord. No. 1059, § B, 3-9-88)
Sec. 8-133 Independent Contractors.
   All contracts or agreements must provide that the towing firms are not
agents of the Town of Schererville, but that as independent contractors.
(Ord. No. 1059, § A, 3-9-88)
Sec. 8-134 Bonding and Holding Harmless Provisions.
   All contracts or agreements with the towing firms provide that the towing
firms are bonded and that they agree to hold harmless the Town of Schererville,
Indiana for as a result of any and all legal action which may occur as a result
of said towing and storage contract or agreement.
(Ord. No. 1059, § B, 3-9-88)
Sec. 8-135 through Sec. 8-139 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XI. Fines and Penalties.  24
 
Notes
24    Editor's Note: This Division incorporates the provisions of Ord. No. 836,
   passed on November 12, 1980, which amended Ord. Nos. 8, 776, 581A, and 581.
Sec. 8-140 Enforcement.  25
   The procedures for the enforcement of this Chapter to be used by the
Schererville Metropolitan Police Department and its members, shall be as
prescribed by the pertinent statues of the State of Indiana for violation of
State Traffic Regulations and as prescribed in Town of Schererville Ordinance
No. 560, passed and adopted October 11, 1972, as amended.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-16)
 
Notes
      I.C., § 9-30-3-4, defines "non-moving traffic offense"; and I.C., § 9-30-3-5,
25 defines traffic offenses. I.C., § 9-30-3-6 sets forth the form of "Information and
   Submission" for Traffic cases.
Sec. 8-141 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing
the parking or standing of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the notice to appear was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at
the time of such violation the registered owner of such vehicle, will
constitute prima facie evidence that such registered owner was the person who
parked such vehicle at the time arid place and for the time during which such
violation occurred.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-55)
Sec. 8-142 Failure to Comply or Destroying Notice.
   a.   If a violator or restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under
this Traffic Code or other ordinances relating to the traffic of this Town,
does not appear in response to the Notice affixed to such vehicle within a
period of ten (10) days, a complaint shall be filed for the enforcement of the
same in the Lake County Court.
(Ord. Nos. 965, 837; Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-56 [a])
   b.   No person whether the recipient thereof or otherwise, shall willfully
throw away, alter, mar, mutilate, destroy or discard the written notice
described in this Traffic Code.
(Schererville Town Code, § 8-2-56 [b])
Sec. 8-143 Violations and Penalties.  26
   Section
3-95 through
3-122 of this Schererville Town Code should be consulted.
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The codifiers were advised by the Town to reference penalty
26 provisions in
   Chapter 3 for consistency purposes.
Sec. 8-144 Safe Operation of Motor Vehicles - Penalty.
   a.   Any and all individuals operating a motor vehicle within the town
boundaries of Schererville. Indiana, shall operate said vehicle in a reasonable
and safe manner based upon the conditions at the time of operation.
   b.   The officer issuing a traffic citation for violation of this ordinance
must specifically state the basis for why he determines the operation of a
motor vehicle to be unreasonable or unsafe for conditions.
   c.   Violation of this ordinance shall be subject to the same penalty
provisions applicable to all other Schererville town ordinance violations.
(Ord. No. 1365, §§ 1-3, 12-26-96)
Sec. 8-145 through Sec. 8-159 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XII. Weight Restrictions on Specific Roads.  27
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The reader should also consult Sec.
27 8-122 through Sec.
   8-127 for general weight restrictions.
Sec. 8-160 Vehicle Weight Restrictions on Rohrman Road.
   a.   A vehicle weight restriction shall be established for Rohrman Road
commencing at Cline Ave. and proceeding southeast to Mockingbird Drive, and the
aforesaid restriction shall apply to all stretches of Rohrman Road extending to
the east of said intersection, all in the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
   b.   A weight restriction shall prohibit any vehicle from utilizing Rohrman
Road in the designated area which weighs in excess of eleven thousand (11,000)
pounds.
   c.   License plates indicating a weight greater than eleven thousand
(11,000) pounds shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is overweight
and subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
   d.   Any Schererville police officer having reasonable suspicion that a
vehicle exceeds the aforesaid weight restrictions shall have the authorization
to request the driver of the subject vehicle to proceed to the nearest scales
for the purpose of determining the true and actual weight of the vehicle.
   e.   The only vehicles excluded from the provisions of this ordinance shall
be municipally-owned vehicles or school buses owned or utilized by a school
corporation.
   f.   The minimum penalty for a violation of this ordinance shall be in the
amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) with a maximum penalty of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
(Ord. No. 1380, § § 1-6. 4-23-97)
Sec. 8-161 Vehicle Weight Restrictions on Junction Avenue, Joliet Street, and
Austin Avenue.
   a.   A vehicular weight restriction shall be established for the following
roads in the Town of Schererville, Indiana:
      1.   Southbound Junction Avenue commencing at the intersection of Kennedy
Ave. and Junction Ave. and proceeding in a southbound direction to the
intersection of Joliet St. and Junction Ave.;
      2.   Joliet St. between U.S. 3 0 and Cline Avenue;
      3.    Austin Avenue, all lanes of traffic north of U.S. 30.
   b.   Said weight restriction shall prohibit any vehicle weighing in excess
of eleven thousand (11,000) pounds from utilizing the roadways designated here
above.
   c.   License plates indicating a weight greater than eleven thousand
(11,000) pounds shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is overweight
and subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
   d.   Any Schererville police officer having reasonable suspicion that a
vehicle exceeds the aforestated weight restrictions shall have the
authorization to request the driver of the subject vehicle to proceed to the
nearest scales for the purpose of determining the true and actual weight of the
vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1379(a), §§ 1-4, 7-9-97)
Sec. 8-162 Designated Truck Routes and Penalties.
   a.   The following roadways are the designated truck routes for
Schererville, Indiana:
      1.   Cline Avenue north to Avenue 11; and
      2.   U.S. 41 north to Main St., east on Main St. to Kennedy Ave.
   b.   The only vehicles excluded from the provisions of Sec.
8-161 or Sec.
8-162 shall be municipally-owned vehicles or school buses owned or utilized by
a school corporation. Also, any vehicle, which is making a local delivery to a
business or residence located on a restricted street or thoroughfare, shall be
exempt from the provisions of this ordinance as well as any vehicles utilized
by any business located within the boundaries of Schererville, Indiana.
   c.   The minimum penalty for a violation of Sec.
8-161 or Sec.
8-162 shall be in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), a maximum
penalty two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
(Ord. No.1379(a), §§ 5-7, 7-9-97)
Sec. 8-163 Vehicle Restrictions on 77th Avenue – Penalties.
   a.   That the truck vehicle usage regulations are established herein for
77th Avenue commencing from St. John Road (Patterson Street), east, without
interruption, to Cline Avenue, in the Town of Schererville. There shall be no
through truck traffic or usage on the above-described public way except for
local deliveries.
   b.   That liability shall be attributed to and prosecuted on each of an
operator and registered owner of any truck operating and charged with violation
of this section, as amended from time to time.
   c.   That the minimum penalty for a violation of this section, as amended
from time to time, shall be the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
with a maximum penalty of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00).
(Ord. No. 2005, §§ 1-4, 4-10-24)
Sec. 8-164 through Sec. 8-169 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIII. Golf Cart Usage Regulations.
Sec. 8-170 Authority.
   There are hereby established regulations for the use and operation of golf
carts on public streets, roads and alleys in the Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana, as set forth hereinafter in this enabling Ordinance. The use
and operation of golf carts on public streets, roads and alleys in the Town of
Schererville is permitted and authorized when such use and operation is in
compliance with the stated regulations herein and applicable provisions of I.C.
§ 9-21-1-3.3 et seq.  
(Ord. No. 1909, § 1, 8-9-17)
Sec. 8-171 Definition.
   The definition of golf cart is as specified hereinafter, namely:
   Golf Cart."Golf Cart" means a four (4) wheeled motor vehicle originally and
specifically intended/constructed to transport one (1) or more individuals. For
purposes of this Ordinance, and as same is amended hereafter from time to time,
a golf cart shall be included in the definition of a slow moving vehicle as the
same is defined in I.C. § 9-21-9-1, as a "vehicle that is (1) pulled; (2)
towed; (3)  self-propelled; or (4) animal drawn; that is not under ordinary
circumstances moved, operated, or driven at a speed greater than twenty-five
(25) miles per hour."
(Ord. No. 1909, § 2, 8-9-17)
Sec. 8-172 License Required.
   Any individual seeking to use and operate a golf cart, as defined, on public
streets, roads and alleys in the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
shall be a licensed driver under applicable Indiana law. Such individual using
and operating a golf cart in the Town of Schererville shall have such license
on his or her person at all times, as when operating a motor vehicle, during
the use and operation of any golf cart in the Town.
(Ord. No. 1909, § 3, 8-9-17)
Sec. 8-173 Regulations.
   The following regulations are hereby established for the operation and usage
of golf carts on public streets, roads and alleys in the Town of Schererville,
Lake County, Indiana, namely:
   a.   Insurance; proof of insurance; financing responsibility. All golf carts
to be operated and used on public streets, roads and alleys in the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, shall be covered by liability insurance in
an amount not less than the minimum the State of Indiana requires for
automobiles. Insurance proof shall be maintained and kept in a golf cart at all
times during any usage and operation of such golf cart.
   b.   Slow moving vehicle emblem display. All golf carts used on the public
streets, roads and alleys in the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana,
must display at all times a Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem and/or a red or amber
flashing light. Further, all golf carts shall be equipped with headlights,
taillights and turn signals in working order, at all times during operation on
Town public streets, roads and alleys.
   c.   Compliance with traffic law and town ordinances. All operators and
users of golfs cart on public streets, roads and alleys in the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, shall comply with and follow state traffic
laws under the provisions of I.C. § 9-21 et seq., and all applicable provisions
of the Town Code as currently in effect, or as amended hereafter from time to
time, pertaining to motor vehicle operation in the Town.
   d.   Places of operation. Usage and operation of golf carts shall be
restricted to the public streets, roads and alleys in residential neighborhoods
and communities in the Town. Such golf carts shall operate and be used at a
maximum speed limit of 25 mph. Exceeding a speed limit of 25 mph shall be
violative of this Ordinance and its regulations set forth. Further, golf carts
shall only be used or operated on public streets, roads and alleys within the
Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, with posted speed limit of 25 mph
or lower.
   e.   Occupancy. There shall be no usage or operation of a golf cart on
public streets, roads and alleys in the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana, with any more passengers, including operator, than designed for the
golf cart to transport. An operator and/or passengers shall remain seated in
the specific golf cart being used and operated at all times, and no extension
of any body part outside the interior of the golf cart shall occur while the
golf cart is being used and operated, in any way.
(Ord. No. 1909, § 4, 8-9-17)
Sec. 8-174 Penalties.
   Any individual violating any provision of this enabling Ordinance, as same
is amended hereafter from time to time, shall, upon determination of violation,
be subject to one (1) or more of the following penalties, namely:
   a.   Fines. A fine shall be issued of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
for a first offence, and no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a
second or subsequent offence. The determination of period of time for a fine
shall be a calendar year, with computation of time for fines being each
calendar year. In the event of violation citation being docketed for
prosecution of violation of same in the Town Court, attorney fees of the Town
for prosecution shall also be imposed.
   b.   Suspension or revocation of usage privilege. An individual failing or
refusing to pay a fine assessed hereunder for violation of this enabling
Ordinance, or who is cited with three (3) or more violations of this Ordinance
in a calendar year, shall be subject to suspension of operations for a golf
cart, or revocation, and with such suspension or revocation, shall be
prohibited from operating or using a golf cart on the public streets, roads and
alleys in the Town of Schererville thereafter for at least a one (1) calendar
year period.
(Ord. No. 1909, § 5, 8-9-17)
Sec. 8-175 through Sec. 8-179 Reserved for Future Use.
Chapter 9
Utilities
Article 1. General Provisions.
   
Sec. 9-1   Authority to Establish Utility Service.
   
Sec. 9-2   Authority to Establish Waterworks.
   
Sec. 9-3   Authority to Regulate Disposal of Sanitary Sewage.
   
Sec. 9-4   through Sec. 9-9 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Water Cross Connection Control.
   
Sec. 9-10   Statement of Purpose and Intent.
   
Sec. 9-11   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-12   Authority and Responsibility.
   
Sec. 9-13   Effect of Article as to Other Laws.
   
Sec. 9-14   Commercial and Industrial Hazards.
   
Sec. 9-15   Irrigation Systems.
   
Sec. 9-16   Residential Hazards.
   
Sec. 9-17   Fire Service.
   
Sec. 9-18   Pre-Existing Facilities.
   
Sec. 9-19   Location.
   
Sec. 9-20   Uninterrupted Service.
   
Sec. 9-21   Looped Taps.
   
Sec. 9-22   Prohibitions, Inspections and Recordkeeping.
   
Sec. 9-23   Enforcement.
   
Sec. 9-24   through Sec. 9-29 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Duties and Authorities of the Water Distribution And Sanitary
District.
   
Sec. 9-30   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-31   Development and Extension of Sanitary and Water Utility Facilities.
   
Sec. 9-32   Obligation to Connect and Pay Fees.
   
Sec. 9-33   Non-Discrimination in Rates and Charges.
   
Sec. 9-34   Financing and the Pro Rata Charges.
   
Sec. 9-35   Amendment of Prior Provision.
   
Sec. 9-36   Protection of Water and Sewer Transmission Lines-Tracer Wires.
   
Sec. 9-37   through Sec. 9-39 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 4. Boundaries of the Utility Board's Sanitary System, Duties and
Authority.
   
Sec. 9-40   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-41   Boundaries of Sanitary District.
   
Sec. 9-42   Development and Extension of Sanitary Sewer Utility Facilities.
   
Sec. 9-43   Obligation to Connect and Pay Fees.
   
Sec. 9-44   Financing the Pro Rata Charges.
   
Sec. 9-45   Rates Charged to St. John and Its Sanitary District.
   
Sec. 9-46   through Sec. 9-47 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 5. Water District Boundaries Identical to Sanitary District; Duties and
Authority.
   
Sec. 9-48   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-49   Creation of Water District.
   
Sec. 9-50   Development and Extension of Water Utility Extension.
   
Sec. 9-51   Obligation to Connect and Pay Fees.
   
Sec. 9-52   Non-Discrimination in Rates and Charges.
   
Sec. 9-53   Financing the Pro Rata Charges.
   
Sec. 9-54   through Sec. 9-59 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 6. Waterworks.
Division I. Rates and Charges.
   
Sec. 9-60   Basis of Waterworks Rates and Charges - Reasonable Rate of Return.
   
Sec. 9-61   Monthly Meter Rates.
   
Sec. 9-62   Minimum Monthly Charges.
   
Sec. 9-63   Hydrants and Private Fire Protection.
   
Sec. 9-64   Drinking Fountain Rates.
   
Sec. 9-65   Temporary Users.
   
Sec. 9-66   Collection of Deferred Payment Charges.
   
Sec. 9-67   Disconnection of Service.
   
Sec. 9-68   Disconnect and Reconnect Charge.
   
Sec. 9-69   Water Tracker Component Rates and Charges.
Division II. Other Water Policies and Procedures.
   
Sec. 9-70   Non-Municipal Fire Hydrants.
   
Sec. 9-71   Reserved.
   
Sec. 9-72   Leased Hydrants to Town of Schererville.
   
Sec. 9-73   System Development Charge.
   
Sec. 9-74   Rate of Return.
   
Sec. 9-75   Illegal Connection to, Misuse of and/or Tampering with Waterworks
System.
   
Sec. 9-76   through Sec. 9-79 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. New Customers.
   Sec. 9-80   Capacity Charges for the Connection of New Customers.
   Sec. 9-81   IURC Approval.
   Sec. 9-82   Surcharges.
   Sec. 9-83   through Sec. 9-87 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Water Meter Installation, Permits, Procedures and Fees.
   
Sec. 9-88   Outside Installation of Water Meters.
   
Sec. 9-89   Tapping Permit and Installation Fees.
   
Sec. 9-90   Inspections Required.
   
Sec. 9-91   Deposit Required.
   
Sec. 9-92   Supplementary Regulations.
   
Sec. 9-93   Location of Meters.
   
Sec. 9-94   Obstructions Prohibited-Penalties.
   
Sec. 9-95   Replacement of Pit Meters.
   
Sec. 9-96   Pit Meters Prohibited.
   
Sec. 9-97   Readings and Billings.
   
Sec. 9-98   Schererville Heights Surcharge.
   
Sec. 9-99   through Sec. 9-105 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Sprinkling Regulations.
   
Sec. 9-106   Sprinkling Rates.
   
Sec. 9-107   Authority to Impose a Sprinkling Ban.
   
Sec. 9-108   and Sec. 9-124 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 7. Sewage Works.
Division I. Industrial Cost Recovering System.
   
Sec. 9-125   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-126   Reimbursement Required by Industrial Users.
   
Sec. 9-127   Determination of Users Subject to Industrial Cost Recovery
Charges.
   
Sec. 9-128   Basis for Industrial Cost Recovery Rates.
   
Sec. 9-129   Accounting Procedures - Sewage Works Industrial Cost Recovery
Fund.
   
Sec. 9-130   Reviews By EPA.
   
Sec. 9-131   Bills and Collections.
   
Sec. 9-132   through Sec. 9-139 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Schedule of Rates and Charges.
   
Sec. 9-140   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-141   Classes of Users of the Treatment Works.
   
Sec. 9-142   Basis of Sewage Rates and Charges.
   
Sec. 9-143   Sewage Rates and Charges.
   
Sec. 9-144   Reserved.
   
Sec. 9-145   Strength and Character of Industrial Discharges.
   
Sec. 9-146   Monthly Billings and Collection of Delinquency Accounts
   
Sec. 9-147   Annual Study of Rates and Charges.
   
Sec. 9-148   Tap-In Fees.
   
Sec. 9-149   Collection Charge for Interceptor Sewer Facilities.
   
Sec. 9-150   By-Laws, Regulations and Authority to Prohibit Dumping.
   
Sec. 9-151   through Sec. 9-154 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Public Sewer System Regulations.
   
Sec. 9-155   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-156   Specific Sewage Regulations-Mandatory Connection.
   
Sec. 9-157   Permits and Inspection Fees.
   
Sec. 9-158   Pre-Treatment of Industrial Wastes.
   
Sec. 9-159   through Sec. 169 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 8. PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS.
Division I. General Provisions.
   
Sec. 9-170   Purpose of Policy.
   
Sec. 9-171   Administration.
   
Sec. 9-172   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-173   Abbreviations.
   
Sec. 9-174   through Sec. 9-177 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. General Sewer Use Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-178   Prohibited Discharge Standards.
   
Sec. 9-179   Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   
Sec. 9-180   State Pretreatment Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-181   Specific Pollutant Limitations.
   
Sec. 9-182   Town’s Right of Revision.
   
Sec. 9-183   Special Agreement.
   
Sec. 9-184   Dilution.
   
Sec. 9-185   through Sec. 9-187 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Pretreatment of Wastewater.
   
Sec. 9-188   Pretreatment Facilities.
   
Sec. 9-189   Additional Pretreatment Measures.
   
Sec. 9-190   Accidental Discharge/Sludge Discharge Control Plans.
   
Sec. 9-191   Tenant Responsibility.
   
Sec. 9-192   Hauled Wastewater.
   
Sec. 9-193   Vandalism
   
Sec. 9-194   and Sec. 9-195 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Eligibility.
   
Sec. 9-196   Individual Wastewater Survey.
   
Sec. 9-197   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement.
   
Sec. 9-198   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections.
   
Sec. 9-199   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections.
   
Sec. 9-200   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Extra Jurisdictional
Industrial Users.
   
Sec. 9-201   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents.
   
Sec. 9-202   Application Signatories and Certification.
   
Sec. 9-203   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions.
   
Sec. 9-204   and Sec. 9-205 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process.
   
Sec. 9-206   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration.
   
Sec. 9-207   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents.
   
Sec. 9-208   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals.
   
Sec. 9-209   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification.
   
Sec. 9-210   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer.
   
Sec. 9-211   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation.
   
Sec. 9-212   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance.
   
Sec. 9-213   and Sec. 9-214 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Reporting Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-215   Baseline Monitoring Reports.
   
Sec. 9-216   Compliance Schedule Progress Reports.
   
Sec. 9-217   Report on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline.
   
Sec. 9-218   Periodic Compliance Reports.
   
Sec. 9-219   Reports of Changed Conditions.
   
Sec. 9-220   Reports of Potential Problems.
   
Sec. 9-221   Reports from Unpermitted Users/Nonpermitted Users.
   
Sec. 9-222   Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting.
   
Sec. 9-223   Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste.
   
Sec. 9-224   Analytical Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-225   Sample Collection.
   
Sec. 9-226   Determination of Noncompliance.
   
Sec. 9-227   Date of Receipt of Reports.
   
Sec. 9-228   Recordkeeping.
   
Sec. 9-229   Certification Statements.
Division VII. Compliance Monitoring.
   
Sec. 9-230   Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling.
   
Sec. 9-231   Search Warrants.
   
Sec. 9-232 and Sec. 9-233 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Confidential Information.
   
Sec. 9-234 Information Policies.
   
Sec. 9-235 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance.
   
Sec. 9-236 Annual Publication.
   
Sec. 9-237 Reserved for Future Use.
Division X. Administrative Enforcement Remedies.
   
Sec. 9-238   Notification of Violation.
   
Sec. 9-239   Consent Orders.
   
Sec. 9-240   Show Cause Hearings.
   
Sec. 9-241   Compliance Orders.
   
Sec. 9-242   Cease and Desist Orders.
   
Sec. 9-243   Administrative Fines.
   
Sec. 9-244   Emergency Suspensions.
   
Sec. 9-245   Termination of Discharge.
   
Sec. 9-246   and Sec. 9-247 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XI. Judicial Enforcement Remedies.
   
Sec. 9-248   Injunctive Relief.
   
Sec. 9-249   Civil Penalties.
   
Sec. 9-250   Remedies Nonexclusive.
   
Sec. 9-251   through   Sec. 9-253 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XII. Supplemental Enforcement Action.
   
Sec. 9-254   Performance Bonds.
   
Sec. 9-255   Liability Insurance.
   
Sec. 9-256   Water Supply Severance.
   
Sec. 9-257   Public Nuisances.
   
Sec. 9-258   Informant Rewards.
   
Sec. 9-259   Contractor Listing.
   
Sec. 9-260   through Sec. 9-263 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations.
   
Sec. 9-264   Upset.
   
Sec. 9-265   Prohibited Discharge Standards/General/Specific Prohibitions.
   
Sec. 9-266   Bypass.
   
Sec. 9-267   and Sec. 9-268 Reserved For Future Use.
Division XIV. Surcharge Costs
   
Sec. 9-269   Nominal Domestic Sewage Waste Strength.
   
Sec. 9-270   Surcharge Rates.
   
Sec. 9-271   and 9-272 Reserved For Future Use.
Division XV. Miscellaneous Provisions.
   
Sec. 9-273   Pretreatment Charges and Fees.
   
Sec. 9-274   Severability.
   
Sec. 9-275   Conflicts.
   
Sec. 9-276   Effective Date.
   
Sec. 9-277   through 9-279 Reserved For Future Use.
Article 9. Stormwater Collection and Disposal System.
   
Sec. 9-280   through Sec. 9-299 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 10. Fats, Oils, and Greases Discharge Regulations Into the Sanitary
Sewage Collection System.
Division 1. General Provisions.
   
Sec. 9-300   Provisions and Policy.
   
Sec. 9-301   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-302   Abbreviations.
   
Sec. 9-303   and Sec. 9-304 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. General Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-305   through Sec. 9-309 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Grease Interceptor Specifications and Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-310   Specifications and Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-311   Grease Interceptor Criteria.
   
Sec. 9-312   through Sec. 9-314 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Oil/Water Specifications and Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-315   Specifications and Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-316   through Sec. 9-319 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Maintenance Record Keeping.
   
Sec. 9-320   Record Keeping Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-321   Interceptor Maintenance.
   
Sec. 9-322   through Sec. 9-327 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Penalties.
   
Sec. 9-328   Penalty Provisions.
   
Sec. 9-329   Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Applicability.
   
Sec. 9-330   User Applicability.
   
Sec. 9-331   through Sec. 9-339 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 11. Stormwater Technical Standards.
Division I. General Provisions.
   
Sec. 9-340   Abbreviations.
   
Sec. 9-341   Definitions.
   
Sec. 9-342   through Sec. 9-349 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Methodology for Determination of Runoff Rates.
   
Sec. 9-350   General.
   
Sec. 9-351   Development Sites Less Than or Equal to Five Acres In Size, with a
Contributing Drainage Area Less Than or Equal to Twenty-Five Acres and No
Depressional Storage.
   
Sec. 9-352   Development Sites Greater Than Five Acres in Size or Contributing
Drainage Area Greater than Twenty-Five Acres or With Significant Depressional
Storage.
   
Sec. 9-353   Development Sites with Drainage Areas Greater Than or Equal to One
Square Mile.
   
Sec. 9-354   Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Methodology for Determination of Retention/Detention Storage
Volumes.
   
Sec. 9-355   General.
   
Sec. 9-356   Post-Development Hydrologic Parameters.
   
Sec. 9-357   Design Storm and Allowable Release Rates for Development Sites
with On-Site Detention Facilities.
   
Sec. 9-358   Design Storm and Allowable Release Rates for Development Sites
Within a Designated Drainage Area Serviced by a Regional Detention Facility.
   
Sec. 9-359   through Sec. 9-364 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Storm Sewer Design Standards and Specifications.
   
Sec. 9-365   General.
   
Sec. 9-366   Design Storm Frequencies.
   
Sec. 9-367   Determination of Hydraulic Capacity for Storm Sewers Using
Manning’s Equation.
   
Sec. 9-368   Backwater Method for Pipe System Analysis.
   
Sec. 9-369   Minimum Size for Storm Sewers.
   
Sec. 9-370   Pipe Cover, Grade, and Separation from Sanitary Sewers.
   
Sec. 9-371   Alignment.
   
Sec. 9-372   Manholes/Inlets.
   
Sec. 9-373   Inlet Sizing and Spacing.
   
Sec. 9-374   Installation and Workmanship.
   
Sec. 9-375   Materials.
   
Sec. 9-376   Special Hydraulic Structures.
   
Sec. 9-377   Connections to Storm Sewer System.
   
Sec. 9-378   Drainage System Overflow Design.
   
Sec. 9-379   Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Open Channel Design Standards and Specifications.
   
Sec. 9-380   General.
   
Sec. 9-381   Design Storm Frequencies.
   
Sec. 9-382   Determination of Channel Waterway Area Using Manning’s Equation.
   
Sec. 9-383   Backwater Method for Drainage System Analysis.
   
Sec. 9-384   Channel Cross-Section and Grade.
   
Sec. 9-385   Side Slopes.
   
Sec. 9-386   Channel Stability.
   
Sec. 9-387   Drainage of Swales.
   
Sec. 9-388   Appurtenant Structures.
   
Sec. 9-389   Disposal of Spoil.
   
Sec. 9-390   Materials.
   
Sec. 9-391   Drainage System Overflow Design.
   
Sec. 9-392   through Sec. 9-394 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Stormwater Detention Design Standards for Peak Flow Control.
   
Sec. 9-395   General.
   
Sec. 9-396   Suggested Calculation Sequences for Designing a Detention Pond for
Peak Flow Control.
   
Sec. 9-397   Acceptable Detention Facilities.
   
Sec. 9-398   Allowable Release Rates.
   
Sec. 9-399   General Detention Basin Design Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-400   Additional Requirements for Wet-Bottom Facility Design.
   
Sec. 9-401   Additional Requirements for Dry-Bottom Facility Design.
   
Sec. 9-402   Detention Facilities in Floodplains.
   
Sec. 9-403   Joint Development of Control Systems.
   
Sec. 9-404   Diffused Outlets.
   
Sec. 9-405   IDNR Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-406   Allowance for Sedimentation
   
Sec. 9-407   Maintenance.
   
Sec. 9-408   and Sec. 9-409 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Construction Sites Stormwater Pollution Prevention Standards.
   
Sec. 9-410   General.
   
Sec. 9-411   Pollutants of Concern During Construction.
   
Sec. 9-412   Erosion and Sediment Control Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-413   Common Control Practices.
   
Sec. 9-414   Individual Lot or Parcel Controls.
   
Sec. 9-415   through Sec. 9-419 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Post-Construction Stormwater Quality Management Standards.
   
Sec. 9-420   Introduction.
   
Sec. 9-421   Post-Construction BMPs Performance Criteria.
   
Sec. 9-422   Pollutants of Concern After Construction Stabilization.
   
Sec. 9-423   Water Quality Characteristic by Land Use.
   
Sec. 9-424   Conventional Approach Procedures.
   
Sec. 9-425   Low Impact Development (LID) Approach Procedures.
   
Sec. 9-426   Special Provisions for “Hot Spot” Land Uses.
   
Sec. 9-427   Construction Sequencing Considerations.
   
Sec. 9-428   Inspection and Maintenance Requirements.
   
Sec. 9-429   Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Methodology for Determination of Required Sizing of BMPs.
   
Sec. 9-430   Introduction.
   
Sec. 9-431   Retention/Detention BMP Sizing.
   
Sec. 9-432   Flow Through BMP Sizing.
   
Sec. 9-433   and Sec. 9-434 Reserved for Future Use.
   Division X. Lot/Building Grading and Drainage Standards.
   
Sec. 9-435   Grading and Building Pad Elevations.
   
Sec. 9-436   Lot Drainage.
   
Sec. 9-437   Acceptable Outlet and Adjoining Property Impacts Policies.
   
Sec. 9-438   and Sec. 9-439 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XI. River Corridor, Bluffs, and Floodplain Protection Standards.
   
Sec. 9-440   Development within Floodways and Fluvial Erosion Hazard Corridors.
   
Sec. 9-441   Additional Consideration for Development Within or Adjacent to
Bluff Zones and Steep Slopes.
   
Sec. 9-442   Floodplain Avoidance/No Net Loss Floodplain Storage Policy.
   
Sec. 9-443   through Sec. 9-444 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XII. Standards Associated with Dams and Levees.
   
Sec. 9-445   Policy on Dams and Levees.
   
Sec. 9-446   Requirement Associated with Proposed Developments Downstream of
Dams.
   
Sec. 9-447   through Sec. 9-449 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIII. Special Standards for Proposed Solar Farms.
   
Sec. 9-450   Special Standards for Proposed Solar Farms.
   
Sec. 9-451   through Sec. 9-454 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 1. General Provisions.  1
 
Notes
1    I.C., § 36-9-23-1 through I.C., § 36-9-23-36, address municipal sewage
  works.
Sec. 9-1 Authority to Establish Utility Service.  2
   A Town may furnish or regulate the furnishing of utility service to the
public.
 
Notes
2    I.C., § 36-9-2-15, addresses utility service to the public.
Sec. 9-2 Authority to Establish Waterworks.  3
   A Town may regulate the furnishing of water to the public, and may
establish, maintain, and operate waterworks.
 
Notes
3    I.C., § 36-9-2-14, addresses Waterworks.
Sec. 9-3 Authority to Regulate the Disposal of Sanitary Sewage.  4
   a.   A Town may regulate the furnishing of the service of collecting,
processing, and disposing of waste substances and domestic or sanitary sewage,
which includes the power to determine the price to be charged for that service.
   b.   A Town may collect, process, and dispose of waste substances and
domestic or sanitary sewage, and may establish, maintain, and operate sewers,
sewage disposal systems, and systems to collect and dispose of waste
substances.
 
Notes
4    I.C., §§ 36-9-2-16 and 36-9-2-17, address the disposal of substances and
  domestic or sanitary sewage.
Sec. 9-4 through 9-9 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 2. Water Cross Connection System.  5
 
Notes
     On November 1, 1987, the Water Pollution Control Board promulgated
5 regulations for the implementation of a Cross Connection Control Program, 327
  IAC § 8-10-1, et seq. ord. No. 9241 amended Ord. No. 1071 which was passed on
  July 13, 1988.
Sec. 9-10 Statement of Purpose and Intent.
   The regulations of the Water Pollution Control Board authorize
municipalities to regulate users of the public water supply and to require such
users of the public water supply to take precautions against cross connections
between the public water supply and the private utilization of that water where
there is a hazard of contaminating the public water supply by backflow. The
Water Works of the Town of Schererville, the supplier of public water, wishes
to take primary responsibility for enforcement of the regulations promulgated
by the Water Pollution Control Board.
(Ord. No. 1241, Statement of Purpose and Intent, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-11 Definitions.
   a.   Air-Gap means an unobstructed vertical distance through atmosphere
between the discharge end of a pipeline supplied from a public water supply,
and the overflow rim of the receiving portion of the customer water system.
   b.   Commissioner means the executive and chief administrative officer of
the Indiana Department of Environmental Management. (State Law reference: Cross
Connections; Control; Operation; 327 IAC § 8-10-1 et seq.)
   c.   Cross Connection means any physical arrangement, including cross
connection control devices not in working order, whereby a public water supply
distribution system is directly connected, either continuously or
intermittently, with any secondary source of supply, sewer, drain, conduit,
pool, piping, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which is
capable of imparting to the public water supply, contaminants, contaminated
water, sewage, or other waste of liquid of unknown or unsafe quality.
   d.   Cross Connection Control Inspector means a person who has successfully
completed training in testing and inspection of cross connection control
devices at an agency or school acceptable to the commissioner of the Department
of Environmental Management, who has registered with the commissioner, and who
has not been notified by the commissioner that his work is unacceptable under
this rule (327 IAC § 8-10).
   e.   Double Check Valve Assembly means a device or assembly composed of two
(2) tightly closing shut-off valves surrounding two (2) independently acting
check valves, with (4) four test cocks, one (1) upstream of the four (4) valves
and one (1) between each of the four (4) check and shut-off valves.
   f.   Downstream is the normal direction of water flow from the public supply
to the user. "Upstream" is that direction which is opposite of downstream.
   g.   Hazard means the danger of public water contamination caused by
chemical, bacteriological, or other sources that may, under certain conditions
such as backflow, enter the public water supply system.
   h.   Potable Water means water that is suitable for drinking as determined
by the requirements of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act.
   i.   Pressure Vacuum Breaker means an assemble containing an independently
operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assemble
is to be located with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut off
valves attached to each end of the assembly.
   j.   Private Auxiliary Supply System refers to all private wells or other
private water supplies which are normally entirely independent and not
connected to the public water supply.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 1, 7-14-93)
   k.   Private Water Supply System is defined as: The lateral fire and service
line to the user's premises starting at the roundway (buffalo box) on the
service line and terminating at the point-of-usage; whether for fire,
suppression, irrigation or domestic usage.
(Ord. No. 1241A, § 1, 8-21-96)
   l.   Public Water Supply System is defined as: That system consisting of the
water mains and appurtenances such as fire hydrants and main values used to
distribute the potable water supply to the public, and shall terminate at the
roundway (buffalo box) for lateral service to the user; the Utility is the
owner of the Public Water Supply System.
(Ord. No. 1241A, § 2, 8-21-96)
   m.   Reduced Pressure Backflow Preventer means a device which is composed of
two (2) tightly closing shut-off valves surrounding two (2) independently
acting pressure-reducing check valves which in turn surround an automatic
pressure differential relief valve, and four (4) test cocks, one upstream of
the five (5) valves and one (1) between each of the four (4) check and shut-off
valves. The check valves effectively divide the structure into three (3)
chambers; pressure is reduced in each downstream chamber allowing the pressure
differential relief valve to vent the center chamber to atmosphere should
either or both check valves malfunction.
   n.   User is the water customer or public authority using potable municipal
water.
   o.   Utility is the Town of Schererville Water Works, a municipally owned
utility, governed by the Utility Board of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 1,7-14-93)
Sec. 9-12 Authority and Responsibility.
   a.   Utility Authorized - This Article authorizes the Utility to require
certain backflow prevention devices in private water supply systems to prevent
backflow into the public water supply system. It shall be the responsibility of
the user to install and maintain such devices in conformance with this Article
and other rules and regulations established by the State of Indiana.
   b.   Utility Sole Interpreter - The Utility Board or its designee shall be
the sole interpreter of this Article and the arbitrator and judge as to whether
such a backflow prevention device is required, if such a backflow prevention
device is required. The Utility may order installation of said device by
written notice to the user, under the conditions defined
   c.   Areas of Application, Geographic Location - Inasmuch as the Utility
serves customers outside of the corporate limits of the Town of Schererville,
this Article shall apply to all users, both urban and suburban, which shall
include all customers within the Schererville Sewer Utility District.
   d.   Coordination with State Uniform Plumbing Code - This Article
supplements the uniform Indiana Plumbing Code and shall not supersede the
provisions of the Plumbing Code.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 2, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-13 Effect of Article as to Other Laws.
   Where as the requirements of this Article are more specific than the state
law authorizing the enactment of these requirements, the provisions, of the
Article shall apply, but under no circumstances shall this Article be construed
to contradict existing state law regulating this matter.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 3, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-14 Commercial and Industrial Hazards.
   a.   A reduced pressure backflow preventer device shall be required for the
following hazards:
      1.   Manufactures of automotive, aircraft, farm, and similar equipment;
      2.   Canneries, packing, bottling, and similar plants;
      3.   Laundries, car washes, dry cleaners and similar facilities;
      4.   Mortuaries, laboratories, hospitals and medical facilities;
      5.   Plating, metal, plastic, and paper product plants;
      6.   Producers of chemicals, fertilizers, rubber, oil, drugs, dyes, and
other similar products;
      7.   Swimming pools, saunas, and solar heat systems;
      8.   Any private auxiliary water supply connected to the public supply;
      9.   Sewage treatment, recyclers and similar facilities;
      10.   Any facility using a booster pump to amplify the pressure of water
provided by the Utility;
      11.   Schools with any of the above hazardous activities; and
      12.   Any other commercial or industrial facility that is deemed by the
Utility to pose a contamination hazard.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 4, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-15 Irrigation Systems.
   a.   A reduced pressure backflow preventer, an air gap, or an approved
pressure type vacuum breaker device shall be required for the following
hazards:
      1.   Lawn-irrigation systems;
      2.   Similar lawn-care systems; and
      3.   Garden hose spigots placed below lawn grade.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 5, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-16 Hazards.
   A reduced pressure backflow preventer shall be required for the following
hazards:
   1.   Residents with hot water heat (boilers); such boilers should have, as
per the Indiana Plumbing Code, an expansion tank and or safety valves to
prevent expansion problems; and
   2.   Any residence with a private auxiliary water supply connected to the
public supply through the user's private water supply system.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 6, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-17 Fire Service.
   No hazardous line shall be attached to any fire hydrant or other fire
service line without an approved backflow prevention device. Permanent fire
service lines shall incorporate a double check valve assembly in one hundred
percent (100%) water systems or a reduced pressure backflow preventer in
chemical systems. Where domestic tap shall be subject to all the provisions of
this Article.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 7, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-18 Pre-existing Facilities.
   In general, pre-existing backflow preventers will not be allowed simply
because they were approved before the enactment of this ordinance. The Utility
will review the operation and hazard of each facility with backflow preventers
and determine acceptability based on operability and present hazard. If the
backflow preventers are found unacceptable, they shall be replaced with a
backflow prevention device in accordance with this Article.
   Pre-existing facilities that have no backflow prevention device and where
there is a definite present hazard shall be required to install an appropriate
device, regardless of whether their plumbing system was previously approved by
the Town.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 8, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-19 Location.
   The backflow prevention device shall be located immediately downstream of
the water meter and shall not be bypassed by any means. There shall be no taps
upstream of the backflow prevention device that are not protected by additional
backflow prevention devices. The existence of backflow prevention devices on
the user's premises other than at this required location shall not negate the
requirement at this location. Exact installation alignment and elevation
requirements shall be determined by reference to 327 IAC § 8-10-7 and other
applicable state law regulations.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 9, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-20 Uninterrupted Service.
   Users needing continuous service that cannot be interrupted for testing the
backflow prevention device shall install dual devices in parallel so that they
can be checked separately.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 10, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-21 Looped Taps.
   Heat exchange loops, intentionally returning water to the public supply,
shall not be allowed. Any extension is denied on the basis of government
security or any other reason, a maximum hazard shall be assumed requiring a
reduced pressure backflow prevention device.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 11, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-22 Prohibitions, Inspections and Record Keeping.
   a.   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the Town may enter the supply or distribution system of the Town, unless
such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection
and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Water Utility Department
of the Town and by the Environmental Management Board in accordance with Rule
320 IAC § 3-9.
   b.   It shall be the duty of the Utility to cause inspections to be made of
all properties served by the public water system where cross connections with
the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established by the Utility.
   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Utility shall
have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property
served by a connection to the public water system of the Town for cross
connections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so
served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of access
or refusal of requested pertinent information shall be deemed evidence of the
presence of cross connections.
   c.   The user is required to maintain said backflow prevention devices and
shall have them inspected and tested at six or twelve month intervals in
accordance with 327 IAC § 8-10-8 by a certified inspector, who shall report the
results to the Utility and to the user. The inspection shall be at the expense
of the user. Inspector certification is done by the State of Indiana and a
certificate is issued accordingly. Device repair is the responsibility of the
user.
   d.   The user shall retain records of all testing, repair, and approval of
backflow prevention devices for a three year period. The Utility is required to
retain all records of testing and repair of such devices.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 12, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-23 Enforcement.
   a.   Non-compliance to any of the terms stated in this ordinance will result
in the following escalating enforcement procedures:
      1.   A 30-day written notice will be sent by certified mail to the user
stating the specific violation, the recommended action, the time by which the
violation must be cured, and the penalty for failing to cure such violation.
The notice also will inform the user of his right to administrative review of
the specific alleged violation.
      2.   A 10-day final written notice by certified mail will be sent stating
the specific violation, the recommended action, the time by which the violation
must be cured, and the penalty to be imposed (discontinued service) if the
violation is not cured.
      3.   When the user has been provided with both required notices of non-
compliance and fails to cure the same as provided in the written notice,
service to the user will be discontinued.
      4.   Discontinued service will consist of closing the control valve to
the user's system, and the user will incur the standard monetary penalties for
delinquent shut off. The Utility will not restore service to the user until the
Utility has determined that the user is in compliance with the provisions of
this Article.
   b.   In the event that inspection of the user's premises or other compelling
evidence shows an immediate hazard of public water supply contamination the
utility is authorized to discontinue service to that user without prior notice.
Written notice shall be filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer's Office and County
Health Department and a copy given to the user within three (3) days of such
emergency action.
(Ord. No. 1241, § 13, 7-14-93)
Sec. 9-24 through Sec. 9-29 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 3. Duties and Authorities of the Water District and Sanitary District.
Sec. 9-30 Definitions.
   Allowable units and Allowable dwelling units shall mean the maximum number
of occupiable units, be they residential, commercial or industrial, a property
may include, under zoning ordinances that exist at the time of the advertising
for bid of any extension or development, even if the property may not be
developed to full density allowed at that time.
   Property owner shall mean each and every person, organization, corporation,
partner-ship, joint venture or title holder to any portion of real property
located within the real property within the district or, in the case of an
extension or development, the area for which the extension or development is
designed to serve.
   Pro rata share shall mean each allowable unit's proportionate cost of the
entire project cost, including but not limited to all design, construction,
financing, permit, acquisition, materials, legal and other costs, for the
extension or development of the potable water system.
   Owner's costs shall mean all tap in fees, security deposit and costs to
connect the unit to the water transmission and distribution line constructed by
the utility.
(Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 9-23-92)
Sec. 9-31 Development and Extension of Sanitary and Water Utility Facilities.
   The Utility Board of Trustees may, as it shall from time to time deem to be
fit and within the interest of the utility, develop and extend sanitary and/or
water utility facilities including facilities for providing water for
firefighting within portions of the water utility district. As it may so choose
and plan, the Utility Board may assess against each property owner its pro rata
share of the cost of such development and extension. This power and authority
shall not deprive the Utility Board of its power and authority to assume said
costs for some projects or extensions and not others, all of which lies within
the sound discretion of the Utility Board.
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 9-23-92)
Sec. 9-32 Obligation to Connect and Pay Fees.  6
   Any and all owners and/or occupiers of property as well as providers of fire
protection services whose property lies within one hundred (100) feet of an
existing or extended water transmission line designed or suitable for tapping
for private water service shall be obligated to connect to same and become a
customer within sixty (60) days of published notice of the availability of said
line for use by customers; similarly any and all owners and/or occupiers of
property as well as providers of fire protection services whose property lies
within three hundred (300) feet of an existing or extended sanitary sewer shall
be obligated to connect to same and become a customer within sixty (60) days of
published notice of the availability of said sanitary sewer for use by
customers. This provision further requires that prior to tap in but no later
than the sixtieth day after publication, the owner or occupier shall pay all
pro rata charges for extension, as established by Utility Board resolution, as
well as all security deposits, tap in fees and meter fees as are part of the
rate structure of the Utility. Failure to pay within the time shall subject
each and every property owner to liability for the pro rata cost, interest at
the prevailing statutory rate from the date due, and reasonable attorney fees
for action to collect the obligation. The Utility shall not deny the request of
any property owner so situated to a line suitable for tapping for private water
service or sanitary sewer to tap in once the line is declared suitable,
provided that party shall first have paid all charges, fees and deposits.
(Ord. No. 1217, § 3, 9-23-92)
 
Notes
6    I.C., § 36-9-23-30 establishes the 300' ft. requirement.
Sec. 9-33 Non-Discrimination in Rates and Charges.
   All property owners and users who shall hereby be added to the sanitary and/
or water utility of this Utility shall be required and allowed to purchase the
Utility's services at the same rate as charged the class of customer to which
that owner/user belongs who is already a customer of the Utility and likewise
be subject to the same obligations and duties of customers of that class.
Nothing in this section, however, shall limit the authority of the Utility
Board nor relieve the obligation of added customers, to pay the new customer's
pro rata costs of extension and/or development as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 1217, § 4, 9-23-92)
Sec. 9-34 Financing the Pro Rata Charges.
   The Utility Board of Trustees and the Town of Schererville shall allow
installment payment of pro rata charges, but not security deposit, meter fees
or tap in fees, for those persons able to demonstrate an inability to pay such
charges and an inability to obtain financing in the private sector. The terms
of such installments shall be as follows:
   a.   An applicant must file with the Clerk-Treasurer an application for
installment payments which shall include a sworn statement that the applicant
lacks available funds to pay the pro rata charges using the real property as
security.
   b.   The application shall be reviewed by the Clerk Treasurer for
sufficiency and, upon approval, the applicant, by all persons in title to the
subject property, shall execute a promissory note and recordable security
agreement for the repayment of the utility lien and promissory note, using the
benefitted real property as security for repayment.
   c.   The promissory note shall be for no longer than sixty (60) months and
shall be at an annually adjustable interest rate of equal to that of two (2)
points over prime rate.
   d.   At the time of application the owner shall deposit with the Clerk-
Treasurer funds sufficient to pay all tap in charges, security deposits and
costs to pay a private contractor to connect the unit to the water line.
(Ord. No. 1217, § 5, 9-23-92)
Sec. 9-35 Amendment of Prior Provision.
   All provisions of Utility Board Resolutions and Town Ordinances previously
adopted and inconsistent herewith, including Ordinance 1155, are amended to
conform to these provisions.
(Ord. No. 1217, § 6, 9-23-92)
Sec. 9-36 Protection of Water and Sewer Transmission Lines-Tracer Wires.  7
   From the effective date of this resolution and ordinance as adopted by the
Town Council, all persons who shall install connections to either the Town's
water main or to the Town's sanitary sewer, shall also install a tracer wire
that shall run the length of the connection, from the Town's main or
transmission or collection line, to the structure served by the utility, in a
manner that it is affixed to the pipe at intervals of no less frequently than
five (5) feet, and from the point of connection with the Town's line, having
had at least one (1) foot wound around the point of connection, and, at the
other end, either at the meter or cleanout inside the structure, with again at
least one (1) foot of wire wrapped around the pipe and taped, so that location
of the buried lines can be better accomplished. The wire shall be twelve (12)
gauge single strand insulated wire.
(Ord. No. 1242, 7-14-93)
 
Notes
7    Editor's Note: Res No. 93-14 of (he Utility Board of Trustees adopted July
  14, 1993, recommended the passage of Ord. No. 1242.
Sec. 9-37 through Sec. 9-39 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 4. Boundaries of the Utility Board's Sanitary System, Duties and
Authority.
Sec. 9-40 Definitions.  8
   Allowable units and allowable dwelling units shall mean the maximum number
of occupiable units, be they residential, commercial or industrial, a property
may include, under zoning ordinances that exist at the time of the advertising
for bid of any extension or development, even if the property may not be
developed to full density allowed at that time.
   Property owner shall mean each and every person, organization, corporation,
partner-ship, joint venture or title holder to any portion of real property
located within the real property within the district or, in the case of an
extension or development, the area for which the extension or development is
designed to serve.
   Pro rata share shall mean each allowable unit's proportionate cost of the
entire project cost, including but not limited to all design, construction,
financing, permit, acquisition, materials, legal and other costs, for the
extension or development of the potable water system and sanitary sewer system.
   Owner's costs shall mean all tap in fees, security deposit and costs to
connect the unit to the water transmission and distribution line and sanitary
sewer system constructed by the utility.
(Ord. No. 1195, § 1, 12-11-91)
 
Notes
8    Editor's Note: The Town requested that "and sanitary sewer system" be added to
  this section during the codification process.
Sec. 9-41 Boundaries of the Sanitary District.
   The boundaries of the sanitary sewer district shall be:
   All of Sections 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17; The North Half
of Section 20; All of Sections 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 35, 36; The Briar Ridge
Country Club Additions Unit 1, 5 Springwood, 7 Block 4 and 2, 17 Replat, 18 The
Pointe, 19 and Country Club Condominiums of Briar Ridge and Markey's Addition
being part of the East Half of the East Half of Section 6; The Briar Cove
Subdivision Phase 3 being part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast
Quarter of Section 7; The Amberleigh Estates Phase 1 and 2 being part of the
Northeast Quarter of Section 19, Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second
Principal Meridian. The following exceptions are for the above described land:
Excepting the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 36. Also
excepting the West Half of the West Half of Section 35. Also excepting the
South Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 26. Also excepting the West Half
of the Southwest Quarter of Section 21. Also excepting the Briar Ridge Country
Club Addition Unit 9 and parcel number 45-11-06-252-010.000-034 and 45-11-05-
353-014.000-034 being part of Section 5. All of Sections 1 and 2, Township 34
North, Range 9 West of the Second Principal Meridian. The following exceptions
are for the above described land: Excepting the Southeast Quarter of Section 1.
   A map of same is incorporated herein and set forth on the next page. The
existence of this district does not constitute or assume that the Utility Board
has any obligation to provide sanitary sewer service for any or all property
owners within the district beyond current customers but rather to allow for the
orderly development and extension and maintenance of service in the district.
(Ord. No. 1195A, § 2, 6-12-02; Ord. No. 1566, § 1, 12-11-02; Ord. No. 1644, §
1, 5-11-05; Ord. No. 2010, § 1, 7-10-24)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3507.jpg]
Sec. 9-42 Development and Extension of Sanitary Sewer Utility Facilities.
   The Utility Board of Trustees may, as it shall from time to time deem to be
fit and within the interest of the utility, develop and extend sanitary sewer
utility facilities. As it may so choose and plan, the Utility Board may assess
against each property owner its pro rata share of the cost of such development
and extension. This power and authority shall not deprive the Utility Board of
its power and authority to assume said costs for some projects or extensions
and not others, all of which lies within the sound discretion of the Utility
Board.
(Ord. No. 1195, § 3, 12-11-91)
Sec. 9-43 Obligation to Connect and Pay Fees.  9
   Any and all owners and/or occupiers of property as well as providers of fire
or extended sanitary sewer line designed or suitable for tapping for private
service shall be obligated to connect to same and become a customer within
sixty (60) days of published notice of the availability of said line for use by
customers. This provision further requires that prior to tap in but no later
than the sixtieth day after publication, the owner or occupier shall pay all
pro rata charges for extension, as established by Utility Board resolution, as
well as all security deposits, tap in fees and meter fees as are part of the
rate structure of the Utility. Failure to pay within the time shall subject
each and every property owner to liability for the pro rata cost, interest at
the prevailing statutory rate from the date due, and reasonable attorney fees
for action to collect the obligation. The Utility shall not deny the request of
any property owner so situated to a line suitable for tapping for private water
service to tap in once the line is declared suitable, provided that party shall
first have paid all charges, fees and deposits.
(Ord. No. 1195, § 4, 12-11-91)
 
Notes
9    Editor's Note: The Town requested that "ten percent (10%)" be deleted and
  substituted with "prevailing statutory", during the recodification process.
Sec. 9-44 Financing the Pro Rata Charges.  10
   The Utility Board of Trustees and the Town of Schererville shall allow
installment payment of pro rata charges, but not security deposit, meter fees
or tap in fees, for those persons able to demonstrate an inability to pay such
charges and an inability to obtain financing in the private sector. The terms
of such installments shall be as follows:
   a.   An applicant must file with the Clerk-Treasurer an application for
installment payments which shall include a sworn statement that the applicant
lacks available funds to pay the pro rata charges and shall be accompanied by
bona fide letters denying application for financing of the pro rata charges,
using the real property as security from at least two (2) commercial lending
institutions.
   b.   The application shall be reviewed by the Clerk-Treasurer for
sufficiency and, upon approval, the applicant, by all persons in title to the
subject property, shall execute a promissory note and recordable security
agreement for the repayment of the utility lien and promissory note, using the
benefitted real property as security for repayment.
   c.   The promissory note shall be for no longer than sixty (60) months and
at an interest rate established by the Utility.
   d.   At the time of application the owner shall deposit with the Clerk-
Treasurer funds sufficient to pay all tap in charges, security deposits and
costs to pay a private contractor to connect the unit to the sewer line.
(Ord. No. 1195, § 5, 12-11-91)
 
Notes
10    Editor's Note: The Town requested that "eighteen percent (18%)" be deleted
   and that broader language be included during the codification process.
Sec. 9-45 Rates Charged to St. John and Its' Sanitary District.  11
   a.   The ordinances of the Town of Schererville shall be amended to charge
the Town of St. John and its Sanitary District one dollar and fifty-one cents,
($1.51) per one-thousand (1,000) gallons, subject to review of two years from
the effective date of the rate adjustment.
(Ord. No. 1213, § 1, 11-25-92)
   b.   All other provisions of the contract between the parties and the rates
of other categories of customers be reaffirmed.
(Ord. No. 1213, § 2, 11-25-92)
   c.   This rate change shall become effective the first billing period after
adoption.
(Ord. No. 1213, § 3, 11-25-92)
 
Notes
11    Editor's Note: The Town requested the amount to read "$1.51" instead of
   $1.50 during the recodification process.
Sec. 9-46 through Sec. 9-47 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 5. Water District Boundaries Identical to Sanitary District, Duties and
Authority.
Sec. 9-48 Definitions.
   Allowable units and allowable dwelling units shall mean the maximum number
of occupiable units, be they residential, commercial or industrial, a property
may include, under zoning ordinances that exist at the time of the advertising
for bid of any extension or development, even if the property may not be
developed to full density allowed at that time.
   Property owner shall mean each and every person, organization, corporation,
partnership, joint venture or title holder to any portion of real property
located within the real property within the district or, in the case of an
extension or development, the area for which the extension or development is
designed to serve.
   Pro rata share shall mean each allowable unit's proportionate cost of the
entire project cost, including but not limited to all design, construction,
financing, permit, acquisition, materials, legal and other costs, for the
extension or development of the potable water system.
   Owner's costs shall mean all tap in fees, security deposit and costs to
connect the unit to the water transmission and distribution line constructed by
the utility.
(Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 3-13-91)
Sec. 9-49 Creation of Water District.
   a.   There is created a water utility district whose boundaries shall be
coextensive with the boundaries of the Schererville Sanitary District. By so
creating this district the Utility Board does not assume any obligation to
provide water service for any or all property owners within the district beyond
current customers but rather to allow for the orderly development and extension
and maintenance of water service in the district. (Ord. No. 1175, § 2, 3-13-91)
   b.   The following territory described by legal description of the
boundaries are added to and under the jurisdiction of the water district:
   All of Sections 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17; The North Half
of Section 20; All of Sections 211, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 35, 36; The Briar Ridge
Country Club Additions Unit l, 5 Springwood, 7 Block 4 and 2, 17 Replat, 18 The
Pointe, 19 and Country Club Condominiums of Briar Ridge and Markey's Addition
being part of the East Half of the East Half of Section 6; The Briar Cove
Subdivision Phase 3 being part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast
Quarter of Section 7; The Amberleigh Estate Phase 1 and 2 being part of the
Northeast Quarter of Section 19; The Green Gables Additions being part of the
Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section
27; That Part of the Ninth 280 feet of the South Half of the North east Quarter
of the Northeast Quarter of Section 27, lying East of Northwest-Southeast
direction pipeline, Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principal
Meridian. The following exceptions are for the above described land: Excepting
the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Qua1ter of Section 36. Also excepting
the West Half of the West Half of Section 35. Also excepting the West 755 feet
of the South Half of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section
26; And the following: Commencing at the Northwest corner of Section 26, thence
South along the West line of Section 26, a distance of 1320 feet+/- to the
point of beginning at the centerline of 87th Ave.; Thence Easterly along the
centerline of 87th Ave. a distance of 2640 feet+/- to a point on the centerline
of 87th Ave.; Thence Southeasterly along the centerline of 87th Ave. a distance
of 2000 feet+/- to the centerline of 89th Ave.; Thence Easterly along the
centerline of 89th Ave. a distance of 1220 feet+/- to the East line of Section
26; Thence South a distance of 2640 feet+/- the Southeast corner of Section 26;
Thence Westerly a distance of 5280 feet+/to the Southwest corner of Section 26;
Thence Northerly a distance of 3960 feet+/- to the point of beginning. Also
excepting the West Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 21. Also excepting
the Briar Ridge Country Club Addition Unit 9 and parcel number 45-l l-06-252-
010.000-034 and 45-11-05-353-014.000-034 being part Section 5. All of Sections
1 and 2, Township 34 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principal Meridian. The
following exceptions are for the above described land: Excepting the Southeast
Quarter of Section 1.
   A map of same is on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer available for
public inspection during regular business hours. (Ord. No. 1175B, § 1, 6-12-02;
Ord. No. 1560, 9-11-02; Ord. No. 1567, 12-11- 02; Ord. No. 1646, § 1, 6-8-05:
Ord. No. 2011, § 1, 7-10-24)
Sec. 9-50 Development and Extension of Water Utility Facilities.
   The Utility Board of Trustees may, as it shall from time to time deem to be
fit and within the interest of the utility, develop and extend water utility
facilities including facilities for providing water for fire fighting within
portions of the water utility district. As it may so choose and plan, the
Utility Board may assess against each property owner its pro rata share of the
cost of such development and extension. This power and authority shall not
deprive the Utility Board of its power and authority to assume said costs for
some projects or extensions and not others, all of which lies within the sound
discretion of the Utility Board.
(Ord. No. 1175, § 3, 3-13-91)
Sec. 9-51 Obligation to Connect and Pay Fees.  12
   Any and all owners and/or occupiers of property as well as providers of fire
protection services whose property lies within one hundred (100) feet of an
existing or extended water transmission line designed or suitable for tapping
for private water service shall be obligated to connect to same and become a
customer within sixty (60) days of published notice of the availability of said
line for use by customers. This provision further requires that prior to tap in
but no later than the sixtieth day after publication, the owner or occupier
shall pay all pro rata charges for extension, as established by Utility Board
resolution, as well as all security deposits, tap in fees and meter fees as are
part of the rate structure of the Utility. Failure to pay within the time shall
subject each and every property owner to liability for the pro rata cost,
interest at the prevailing statutory rate from the date due, and reasonable
attorney fees for action to collect the obligation. The Utility shall not deny
the request of any property owner so situated to a line suitable for tapping
for private water service to tap in once the line is declared suitable,
provided that party shall first have paid all charges, fees and deposits.
(Ord. No. 1175, § 4, 3-13-91)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The Town requested the percentage amounts in §§
12 9-51 and
   9-53 deleted and substitute the included language instead during the
   recodification process.
Sec. 9-52 Non-Discrimination in Rates and Charges.
   All property owners and users who shall hereby be added to the water utility
of this Utility shall be required and allowed to purchase water at the same
rate as charged the class of customer to which that owner/user belongs who is
already a customer of the Utility and likewise be subject to the same
obligations and duties of customers of that class. Nothing in this section,
however, shall limit the authority of the Utility Board nor relieve the
obligation of added customers, to pay the new customer's pro rata costs of
extension and/or development as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 1175, § 5, 3-13-91)
Sec. 9-53 Financing the Pro Rata Charges.
   The Utility Board of Trustees and the Town of Schererville shall allow
installment payment of pro rata charges, but not security deposit, meter fees
or tap in fees, for those persons able to demonstrate an inability to pay such
charges and an inability to obtain financing in the private sector. The terms
of such installments shall be as follows:
   a.   An applicant must file with the Clerk-Treasurer an application for
installment payments which shall include a sworn statement that the applicant
lacks available funds to pay the pro rata charges and shall be accompanied by
bona fide letters denying application for financing of the pro rata charges,
using the real property as security from at least two (2) commercial lending
institutions.
   b.   The application shall be reviewed by the Clerk-Treasurer for
sufficiency and, upon approval, the applicant, by all persons in title to the
subject property, shall execute a promissory note and recordable security
agreement for the repayment of the utility lien and promissory note, using the
benefitted real property as security for repayment.
   c.   The promissory note shall be for no longer than sixty (60) months and
shall be at an interest rate as established by the Utility.
   d.   At the time of application the owner shall deposit with the Clerk-
Treasurer funds sufficient to pay all tap in charges, security deposits and
costs to pay a private contractor to connect the unit to the water line.
(Ord. No. 1175, § 6, 3-13-91)
Sec. 9-54 through Sec. 9-59 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 6. Waterworks.
Division I. Rates and Charges  13
 
Notes
      Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 1257A passed on July 13, 1994 reaffirmed the rates and
13 charges established by ord. No. 1257 as modified by Order No. 39729.
   (Ord. No. 1257A was listed)
Sec. 9-60 Basis of Waterworks Rates and Charges - Reasonable Rate of Return.
14
   a.   There shall be and there are established for the use of and the service
rendered by the waterworks system of the Town of Schererville, the following
rates and charges, based on the use of water supplied by said waterworks
system, on an emergency and permanent basis.
(Ord. No. 1257, § 2, 11-10-93)
   b.   The Town Council, upon recommendation of its Utility board, elects to
earn a reasonable rate of return on the water utility plant of the Town of
Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1257B, § 1, 8-21-96)
 
Notes
      Editor’s Note: The rates and charges set forth in §
14 9-61 et seq. are those issued pursuant to the Indiana Utility Regulatory
   Commission Order No. 39729 on July 15, 1994.
Sec. 9-61 Monthly Metered Rates.
   The monthly metered rates shall be as follows:
   Metered Rates Per Month         Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
   First 2,000 gallons               $3.83
   Next 3,000 gallons               $3.62
   Next 10,000 gallons               $3.42
   Next 20,000 gallons               $3.22
   Next 40,000 gallons               $3.02
   Next 225,000 gallons               $2.79
   Next 300,000 gallons               $2.58
(Ord. No. 1257A, 7-13-94; Ord. No. 1661, 1-16-06)
Sec. 9-62 Minimum Monthly Charges.
   Each user shall pay a minimum charge in accordance with the following
applicable size of meter installed, for which the user will be entitled to the
quantity of water set out in the following schedule of rates:
      Meter Size            Gallons         Per Month
      5/8 - 3/4 inch meter         2,000            $ 7.66
      1 inch meter            5,000            $ 18.52
      1 1/4 inch meter         10,000            $ 35.62
      1 ½ inch meter            15,000            $ 52.72
      2 inch meter            20,000            $ 68.82
      3 inch meter            35,000            $117.12
      4 inch meter            70,000            $222.82
      6 inch meter            150,000         $447.17
(Ord. No. 1257A, 7-13-94; Ord. No. 1661, 1-16-06)
Sec. 9-63 Hydrants and Private Fire Protection.
   The following rates for fire protection and automatic sprinklers are
established:
   Municipal and private hydrants - per hydrant
      per annum               $418.20
      per month               $ 34.85
   Fire Hydrant Surcharge
   There is hereby established a fire hydrant surcharge for customers residing
outside the town limits of Schererville, Indiana, who are provided fire
hydrants by the Town of Schererville. The monthly surcharge shall be:
      5/8 - 3/4 inch meter            $ 3.80
      1 inch meter               $ 8.93
      1 1/4 inch meter            $ 13.94
      1 ½ inch meter               $ 20.08
      2 inch meter               $ 35.69
      3 inch meter               $ 80.30
      4 inch meter               $142.75
   Private Fire Protection            Per Month
   3 inch connection               $ 25.93
   4 inch connection               $ 41.82
   6 inch connection               $103.70
   8 inch connection               $157.22
   10 inch connection               $262.60
   12 inch connection               $366.30
(Ord. No. 1257A, 7-13-94; Ord. No. 1661, 1-16-06; Ord. No. 1660, 5-10-06)
Sec. 9-64 Drinking Fountain Rates.
   Annual rates for drinking fountains shall be as follows:
   Drinking Fountains               Per Annum
   Public Drinking Fountain            $ 83.62
(Ord. No. 1257A, 7-13-94; Ord. No. 1661, 1-16-06)
Sec. 9-65 Temporary Users.
   Water furnished to temporary users shall be charged on the basis of the
metered rates set forth as estimated and established by the Waterworks
Superintendent.
(Ord. No. 1257A, 7-13-94; Ord. No. 1661, 1-16-06)
Sec. 9-66 Collection of Deferred Payment Charges.  15
   All bills for water service not paid within fifteen (15) days from the due
date thereof, as stated in such bills, shall be subject to a collection or
deferred payment charge of ten percent (10%) on the first three dollars ($3.00)
and three percent (3%) on the excess over three dollars ($3.00). Should
termination of services occur due to non payment or vacancy, all unpaid amounts
plus interest, security deposit and reconnection charges shall be collected
prior to reinstituting service or placing service at that place in the name of
another person or entity.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify:
      1)   the Public Works Department; and
      2)   the user
when an account is not paid within forty-five (45) days from the date any
portion of the outstanding balance was first due to be paid but is not then
paid. The notice to the user is to be given by first class mail, with
sufficient postage attached, at the address given by the user to the Clerk-
Treasurer as the address at which bills are to be delivered. The Public Works
Department shall, upon receipt of the notice, deliver a copy of the notice to
the property by delivery to any adult found thereon and, failing to find an
adult, affix the notice to what appears to be the primary entrance to the
primary building on the premises and immediately thereafter shall certify to
the Clerk-Treasurer of the delivery. If the Department of Public Works finds
the premises vacated the Department shall so certify to the Clerk-Treasurer and
the Clerk-Treasurer shall publish notice on one (1) occasion in the newspaper
of general circulation in Lake County.
   The notice shall contain:
      a.   The name and address of the user;
      b.   A statement of the length of the delinquency and the amount of the
delinquency;
      c.   That if the arrearage is not paid in full within twenty-one (21)
days of notices’ mailing or publication, that the Town Schererville will
disconnect the water service and, thereafter, so notify the Lake County
Department of Public Health;
      d.   That the user may ask the Utility Board to reconsider termination of
service, but such request must be by certified mail, addressed to the Utility
Board, c/o Town Hall, Schererville, IN 46375, received no later than the
fourteenth (14th) day after notice is mailed or, if published, date of
publication, and include payment of all sums the Utility claims is due.
(Ord. No. 1257, § 2f, 11-10-93)
 
Notes
15    Ord. No. 1257 replaced the provisions of Ord. No. 1253 passed on 10-13-93
   which addressed collection of delinquent accounts.
Sec. 9-67 Disconnection of Service.
   Charges: If a disconnection of service is made under this Ordinance, the
following charge shall be imposed and shall be collected by the Clerk-Treasurer
prior to reinstitution of service regardless in whose name that service is
reinstituted:
      a.   For excavation of the line at or near its junction with Town lines
and installation of a shut-off valve - $500.00;
      b.   For any excavations necessary and to open shut-off valve - $50.00;
      c.   Shut off by means of an existing shut-off valve - $50.00;
      d.   To reinstitute service - $50.00;
      e.   Deposit for future service - $100.00;
      f.   Removal and replacement of meter - $100.00.
   Upon the disconnection of service, the Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately
notify the Lake County Department of Public Health that water service has been
disconnected to the premises, giving the name of the user and the address of
the location where service has been disconnected and that the reason is for
nonpayment of water charges.
   Appeal of the Notice to Disconnect shall be to the Utility Board, must be in
writing and delivered no more than fourteen (14) days after notice was mailed
or, if notice had been given by publication, date of publication. All appeals
must be accompanied by all monies the Clerk-Treasurer contends is owed, subject
to refund if appeal is granted.
   The written appeal shall set forth the facts which the user contends are the
reasons that service should not be disconnected. The grounds for appeal are
only:
      1)   that the account at the time of notice was not owed for two (2)
months or greater period of service; or
      2)   that the person receiving the service at the time of notice is a
person other than that user identified in the notice and the Clerk-Treasurer
had been properly notified of the change in ownership prior to the notice.
   It shall be insufficient grounds to have an appeal sustained that the user
is without sufficient means to pay the bill. The Board shall consider the
appeal at its next meeting.
   These charges and procedures shall go into effect immediately upon approval
by the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission. Any and all users with amounts
due as of the next billing shall have forty-five (45) days from the billing to
pay all sums owed. Thereafter, the Clerk-Treasurer shall have no discretion to
not give the notices required herein and thereby initiate these procedures. All
accounts that are within the criteria shall be mailed the notices required
herein in that month when the account first meets the criteria. The Department
of Public Works shall have not discretion in delivering and posting the notice
and certifying same to the Clerk-Treasurer or in performing the disconnection
as soon as practical after the twenty-one (21) days after notice or, if appeal
is taken, after the Utility Board act to deny the appeal and shall immediately
notify the Clerk-Treasurer when disconnection has been done.
(Ord. No. 1257, § 2f, 11-10-93)
Sec. 9-68 Disconnect /Reconnect Charge.
   The charge for disconnection and reconnection of customer service is sixty-
seven dollars ($67.00).
(Ord. 1908A, § 1, 10-11-17)
Sec. 9-69 Water Tracker Component Rates and Charges.
   a.   The utility is hereby authorized to take the necessary and appropriate
legal actions to seek and obtain approval from the IURC of an amendment to the
water tracker component of the rates and charges of the Utility to reflect the
increase in cost of its water supply purchased from Indiana-American as a
consequence of the Separate Orders issued July 20, 2016 and March 22, 2017, by
the IURC upon application of Indiana-American.
   b.   The water tracker component of the utility’s rates and charges shall be
established at the rate of $0.7891 per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water
consumed by each customer subject to its provisions. (Ord. No. 1575 § 1, 2, 3-
12-03; Ord. No. 1591 §§ 1, 2, 9-10-03; Ord. No. 1661, 1-16-06; Ord. No. 1725,
§§ 1, 2, 1-17-08; Ord. No. 1773, § 2, 7-21-10; Ord. No. 1818, §§ 1, 2, 8-8-12;
Ord. No. 1849, § 1,2, 2-12-14; Ord. No. 1901, §§ 1, 2, 5-10-17; Ord. No. 2007,
§ 2, 5-8-24)
Division II. Other Water Policies and Procedures.
Sec. 9-70 Non-Municipal Fire Hydrants.  16
   There exists within the Schererville Water District areas served by the
municipal water works, and other areas which will come to be served by the
municipal water works, and those areas do have and will have fire hydrants. The
rate for the fire hydrant usage will be the same as charged to the Town of
Schererville for each of the hydrants within its corporate limits, and shall be
chargeable to each customer in the service area at the customer's pro rata
share of all the hydrants within the local service area. The annual charge for
all hydrants in a service area, as defined from time to time by the Utility
Board, shall be totaled and each unit in the service area, in addition to the
usage charges set forth above, shall be charged and obligated to pay an equal
amount of the total annual costs of the hydrant within the service area billed
one-twelfth each month.
(Ord. No. 1257, § 3g, 11-10-93)
 
Notes
16    Editor's Note: The fees are determined by the municipal hydrant rental
   fees.
Sec. 9-71 Reserved.
Sec. 9-72 Lease of Hydrants to the Town of Schererville.
   The Utility Board of Trustees, subject to approval of the Town Council in
compliance with statutory requirements for leasing and the Indiana Utility
Regulatory Commission, will lease each and every fire hydrant within the
corporate limits of the Town of Schererville to the Town for the same charge as
the annual water charge.
(Ord. No. 1257, § 3i, 11-10-93)
Sec. 9-73 System Development Charge.
   a.   In addition to the tap in charges herein above established, each new
customer shall be assessed a charge of seven-hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) at
the time of connection, which is calculated to be a pro rata portion of the
utility's capital costs to develop the system to extend to these new customers,
so as not to have those capital costs be an inequitable burden upon existing
customers.
(Ord. No. 1257, § 3j, 11-10-93)
   b.   The system development charge rate established by Ord. No. 1257,
approved by the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission thereafter, adopted by
the provisions of Ord. No. 1257A, and which was the subject of application to
the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission for verification of legal inclusion
and implementation by the Town in said rate ordinance, and as approved by the
Order of the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission dated March 30, 2005, shall
be implemented and assessed as approved.
(Ord. No. 1257C, § 1, 4-13-05)
   (c)   The following system development charges are established by Ord. No.
1661, passed June 16, 2006:
      Meter size               Charge
      5/8 - 3/4 inch meter            $ 750.00
      1 inch meter               $ 1,875.00
      1 1/4 inch meter            $ 3,000.00
      1 ½ inch meter               $ 3,750.00
      2 inch meter               $ 6,000.00
      3 inch meter               $11,250.00
      4 inch meter               $18,750.00
      6 inch meter               $37,500.00
(Ord. No. 1661, 1-16-06)
Sec. 9-74 Rate of Return.
   The Town Council upon recommendations of its Utility Board elects to earn a
reasonable rate of return on the water utility plant of the Town of
Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1257B, § 1, 821-96)
Sec. 9-75 Illegal Connection to, Misuse of and/or Tampering with Waterworks
System.
   a.   The only connections that may be made to the Town Waterworks System are
those that are specifically authorized and approved, by valid permit, after
compliance with the then-current and applicable procedures and requirements of
the Town. All other connections are deemed to be illegal, improper,
unauthorized and violative of the right to access and/or use of water supply
from the Town Waterworks System.
   b.   Any person or entity who improperly, illegally, or without duly
approved, processed and issued permit authority connects to, misuses permitted
connections and/or tampers with the Town's Waterworks System, without legal and
proper notice or approval, shall, upon such finding, be punished by a fine of
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court costs, if any, for a
first violation of this ordinance, nor more than seven thousand five hundred
dollars ($7,500.00), plus court costs, if any, for a second or subsequent
violation hereof. Each such violation shall constitute a separate offense. Any
and all fines issued and paid pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, as
amended from time to time, shall be ordered and required to be made payable to
the Town Waterworks District General Fund, or other Waterworks Fund as deemed
appropriate by the Town Clerk-Treasurer, for deposit into the designated fund.
Notices of violation for illegal, improper, unauthorized connection to, and/or
tampering with the Town of Schererville Waterworks System may be issued by the
Town Code Enforcement Officer, the Director of Public Works or his or her duly
authorized Public Works personnel, the Town Building Commissioner, any Town Law
Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief or his or her duly authorized Fire
Department personnel.
   c.   The un-metered use of the Town Waterworks System for construction
purposes shall be deemed an authorized and permitted use provided all required
permits for construction and water tapping have been issued by the Planning and
Building Department, or a valid water tapping permit has been issued for areas
outside of the Town's Municipal Corporate boundaries but within areas inclusive
of the Waterworks District, and the volume of water taken from the Waterworks
System is used for activities directly related to the construction of a
permitted structure or structures. The unmetered use of the Town Waterworks
System for landscaping, vehicle washing and/or other such activities not
directly related to the construction of a structure shall be deemed a misuse of
the Town Waterworks System violative of the provisions of this ordinance and
shall subject any violator to the penalties and fines described in subsection
(b) above.
   d.   At the discretion of the Director of Public Works, or his or her duly
authorized delegee, the facilities located at the Public Works/Town Garage
Compound may be made available for the filling of bulk storage tanks and
equipment such as, but not necessarily limited to, tank trucks, underground
boring machines, hydro-mulching rigs, paving machinery, and other such
equipment, provided:
      1.   The petitioner has a valid water account with the Town of
Schererville, on record in the Clerk-Treasurer's Office;
      2.   The water account is not in arrears;
      3.   The Public Works Department has personnel available to supervise and
monitor the filling activities of aforementioned equipment;
      4.   The equipment presented for filling has provisions for the
prevention of the backflow of contaminants into the Town's Waterworks System in
compliance with the Backflow/Cross Connection Ordinance, as amended from time
to time;
      5.   The petitioner, his representative, employee or duly authorized
agent provides Public Works personnel with the account number, valid
identification, license plate and expiration date of the equipment to be filled
or the vehicle hauling the equipment to be filled;
      6.   The petitioner, his representative, employee or duly authorized
agent places his legal signature on an invoice provided by the Public Works
Department;
      7.   Each and every time the equipment or machinery is presented for
filling at the Public Works facility or other temporary filling station
provided and operated by the Public Works Department shall be considered a
separate occurrence for billing purposes;
      8.   The billing structure for the aforementioned services shall be as
follows:
         A.   A minimum service charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be
billed per occurrence provided the volume of water delivered does not exceed
three thousand (3,000) gallons;
         B.   A service charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be billed per
occurrence for volumes of water delivered over three thousand (3,000) gallons
but less than ten thousand (10,000) gallons;
         C.   A service charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) plus two dollars
($2.00) for each additional one thousand (1,000) gallons delivered over and
above ten thousand (10,000) gallons.
      9.   A temporary filling station may be furnished at a remote jobsite
location for the convenience of a petitioner, as determined appropriate in the
sole discretion of the Public Works Director, or his or her authorized delegee.
In such cases, the service charge and billing structure described in subsection
(d)(8) above, shall apply, in addition to the hourly rate of the employee
providing set up and monitoring services, which rates and charges shall be
added to the billing invoice required to be paid by a petitioner for such
services and water supply.
   e.   The invoices generated by the Public Works Department for the purposes
of documenting and billing services described in subsection (d), above, shall
be delivered to the Offices of the Town of Schererville, Clerk-Treasurer for
billing on the following schedule:
   Invoice Date                  Submittal Date      Billing Date
   January 1 through March 31            April 10         May
   April 1 through June 30            July 10            August
   July 1 through September 30            October 10         November
   October 1 through December 31         January 10         February
   f.   The removal or altering of any device designed and installed on a water
measuring device such as a seal wire assembly shall constitute tampering with
said device. The unauthorized operation of a service shut off valve (b-box),
system isolation valve, fire hydrant auxiliary valve or any other such
Waterworks System control valve or device shall constitute tampering with the
Waterworks System. All tampering with the Waterworks System of the Town shall
result in termination of the services and provision of water supply
contemplated herein, removal of Town equipment, billing of all amounts owed,
issuance of citation for violations of this ordinance as set forth above, and
report to the Town Police Department for investigation of such tampering and
misuse events identified.
(Ord. No. 1691, §§ 1-6, 4-11-07)
Sec. 9-76 through Sec. 9-79 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Water Meter Installation, Permits, Procedures and Fees.
Sec. 9-88 Outside Installation of Water Meters.
   From and after the legal passage and adoption of this ordinance, the Water
Works Superintendent of the Town of Schererville, shall have the power and
right to require that all water meters to be installed shall be installed
outside of the building or buildings located upon the premises to be served and
supplied with water in order to facilitate the reading, repairing, and securing
of said meters by Water Works employees.
(Ord. 1072, 686, 498, 487, 419; Schererville Town Code, § 10-1-20 [a])
Sec. 9-89 Tapping Permit and Installation Fees.
   When a new water service is requested, the Town will install the meter and
inspect all connections to its mains. The meter is the property of the Town
and, as such, property owners, lessors, or renters are not permitted to tamper
with or move the meter.
   Contact the Town Water Department for any problems with the meter or
connection.
   Meter SizTap Fee
   Meter SizeTap Fee
3/4" Multi-Jet $589.27
1" Multi-Jet   $760.77
1½" Multi-Jet $1,120.77
2" Multi-Jet   $1,474.27
2" Turbo       $1,623.27
3" Turbo       $2,330.27
4" Turbo       $3,204.27
2" Compound    $2,655.27
3" Compound    $3,552.27
4" Compound    $4,689.27
2" Octave      $2,201.27
3" Octave      $2,786.27
4" Octave      $4,341.27
 
   Special installations and/or meter sizes not listed will be billed out at
actual time and materials.
(Ord. 1908A, § 1, 10-11-17)
Sec. 9-90 Inspections Required.
   The Water Works Superintendent shall be notified by the permit applicant, or
his agent, contractor or employee, at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
time the actual tapping of the Town main is to be made, to enable said Water
Works Superintendent, or his duly authorized delegate, to be present to inspect
the tapping, all fittings and tubing and connections prior to backfilling or
otherwise removing the ability to make such inspection.
(Ord No. 498; Schererville Town Code, § 10-1-20 [c])
Sec. 9-91 Deposit Required.
   All water users shall be required to deposit the sum of fifty ($50.00)
dollars, in addition to any other fees charged, with the Clerk-Treasurer of the
Town of Schererville at the time of applying for service; however, excepting
therefrom those water users or property owners who have previously established
a payment record over a five (5) year period with no more than one (1)
delinquent late payment, which sum shall be kept by such Clerk-Treasurer as a
deposit and guarantee for the payment of water bills; provided, however, the
property owner applicants and users seeking and consuming water for personal
use on the premises described in said application shall be entitled to refund
of such deposit on demand on or after five (5) years of date.
(Ord. No. 1370, 2-12-97)
Sec. 9-92 Supplementary Regulations.
   This ordinance shall be deemed supplementary, additional and amendatory to
all other ordinances of the Town of Schererville, and the terms, provisions and
prohibitions of all such other ordinances, except as they conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance, shall remain in full force and effect. This
Ordinance specifically amends Ordinance No. 498, dated December 10, 1969.
(Schererville Town Code, § 10-1-20 [e])
Sec. 9-93 Location of Meters.  17
   All reading devices for inside meters installed after the date this
resolution is adopted shall be located on the front wall or side wall, no
further from the front wall than ten (10) feet.
(Res. No. 93-10, § 1,6-9-1993)
 
Notes
17    Editor's Note: Res. No. 93-10 passed by the Utility Board of Trustees set
   forth these regulations.
Sec. 9-94 Obstructions Prohibited-Penalties.
   No obstruction, including but not limited to fences and plants, shall be
placed so as to interfere with the employees of the Town's water utility
reading of the outside reading device of the inside meter, as that device is
approached from the front of the house. If any such obstruction is found, the
Utility shall so notify the owner of the property and the owner shall remove
all such obstructions within thirty (30) days. Upon failure to remove the
obstruction within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the notice, the Utility
shall seek injunctive relief from the courts of proper jurisdiction, and the
property owner shall be liable for all related legal expenses and court costs.
(Res. No. 93-10, § 2, 6-9-1993)
Sec. 9-95 Replacement of Pit Meters.
   As funds allow, the water utility shall replace all pit meters with
alternative metering devices.
(Res. No. 93-10, § 3, 6-9-1993)
Sec. 9-96 Pit Meters Prohibited.
   From the date of adoption of this resolution, the Town shall not install or
allow to be installed any pit meter, as replacement of existing metering device
or as a new metering device, unless there is not other feasible method of
metering.
(Res. No. 93-10, § 4, 6-9-1993)
Sec. 9-97 Reading and Billings.
   Any and all pit meters shall be read once every six (6) months, from which
an average bill will be computed, billed and collected each month thereafter.
After each reading, adjustment shall be made by the utility so that the
difference in the actual consumption in the previous six (6) months is
adequately paid, with any deficiency billed and due within twenty one (21) days
of billing, and any overpayment refunded within twenty one (21) days.
(Res. No. 93-10, § 5, 6-9-1993)
Sec. 9-98 Schererville Heights Surcharge.
   a.   The rate and charge for the use of and service rendered by the sewage
works of the Town of Schererville shall be nine-dollars and thirty-six cents
($9.36) per month per single-family dwelling unit in all areas that are
serviced by such sewage works and which are served by an unmetered water supply
system.
(Ord. No. 794, § 1,11-28-79)
   b.   For the cost of the acquisition, sanitary sewer line rehabilitation and
improvement to conform in all applicable standards with prevailing law and the
rest of the Town of Schererville's sanitary sewage system, all users connected
with the Town's sanitary sewer system or who otherwise discharge sanitary
sewage, industrial waste, or other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into
the sanitary sewer system of the Town, from the area formerly served by the
Schererville Heights Utilities Corporation sanitary sewage service system,
shall pay the additional rate of three-dollars and twenty cents. ($3.20) per
month for a term of twenty (20) years from and after the date of the first cost
of such acquisition, improvement and rehabilitation.
(Ord. No. 794, 11-28-79)
   c.   The surcharge provided for herein shall be in addition to all other
rates and charges billed to such users pursuant to any all applicable
ordinances, or parts thereof, of the Town of Schererville, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 794, § 3, 11-28-79)
Sec. 9-99 through Sec. 9-105 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Sprinkling Regulations.
Sec. 9-106 Sprinkling Rates.
   In order that domestic and residential users of sewage services shall not be
penalized for the sprinkling of lawns during the months of May, June, July, and
August, the billing for sewage service for residences and/or domestic users for
said months of May, June, July, and August, shall be based upon the water usage
for the previous months of January, February and March. In the event the water
usage for said previous months of January, February and March is greater than
the water usage for said months of May, June, July, and August, then the
billing for sewage service shall be computed on the actual water used in the
month for which the sewage service bill is being rendered. Domestic and/or
residential sewage service, as applicable to this sprinkling rate, shall apply
to each lot, parcel of real estate or building which is occupied and used as a
residence. Said sprinkling rate shall not apply to any premises which are
partially or wholly used for industrial or commercial purposes. In the event a
portion of such premises shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes,
the owner shall have privilege of separating the water service so that the
residential portion of the premises is served through a separate meter, and in
such case, the water usage as registered by the water meter serving such
portion of the premises used for residential purposes would qualify under the
sprinkling rate.
(Ord. No. 1058; Scheretwille Town Code, § 10-1-21 [g]; Ord. No. 1716, § 1, 10-
10-07)
Sec. 9-107 Authority to Impose a Sprinkling Ban.  18
   The Utility Board of Trustees of the Town shall have the authority to
declare an emergency exists and impose a sprinkling ban in conformity with the
terms hereof. Upon such declaration, the restrictions provided for in this
ordinance shall become immediately applicable. The ban on sprinkling shall be
in full force and effect until the next regular meeting of the Town Council of
the Town, who shall either continue such ban for a time certain or terminate
such ban as of a certain date. If the Town Council fails to take action at its
next regular meeting on the temporary ban, as created by the authority granted
herein, the sprinkling ban shall terminate as of the day immediately following
such regular Town Council meeting. In creating the ban provided for herein, the
Superintendent of the Water Utility Department shall post notice of the
imposition of such ban in a prominent place in each Ward or Precinct of the
Town and shall, within one (1) day after the last posting has been made,
publish notification of the imposition of such ban in two (2) newspapers of
general circulation in the Town by providing a news release to each of such
newspapers setting forth the date on which such ban shall become effective and
the reasons therefore. The sprinkling ban shall become effective on the date on
which the posting requirements provided for herein have been fully satisfied.
(Ord. No. 959, § 1, 6-27-84; Schererville Town Code, § 10-1-21 [h])
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The Town requested that "Superintendent of the Water Utility
18 Department" be deleted and that "Utility Board of Trustees" be substituted
   instead during the recodification process.
Sec. 9-108 and Sec. 9-124 Reserved for Future Use.
ARTICLE 7. SEWAGE WORKS.
Division I. Industrial Cost Recovery System.
Sec. 9-125 Definitions.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this Division shall be as follows:
   a.   Industrial User shall mean any non-governmental user of the treatment
works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office
of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions:
      1.   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
      2.   Division B - Mining
      3.    Division D - Manufacturing
      4.   Division E - Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services
      5.   Division I - Services
   A user in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that such
user will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
   b.   Segregated Domestic Wastes shall mean wastes from non-residential
sources, resulting from normal domestic activities and measurable and set apart
from industrial trade or process discharges.
   c.   Normal Domestic Strength Wastes shall mean wastes which do not exceed a
Biochemical Oxygen Demand strength of two hundred forty (240) milligrams per
liter of fluid, or a suspended solids strength in excess of two hundred forty
(240) milligrams per liter of fluid. Also, it shall mean wastewaters from
segregated domestic and/or sanitary conveniences as distinct from wastes from
industrial processes.
   d.   Non-Industrial User shall mean any governmental or residential user.
The term also includes commercial, institutional and other industrial users
where it has been determined that the wastes contributed by these users is
primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
   e.   Recovered Amounts shall mean the annual payments from industrial users
for their share of the federal grant allocable to the cost of treating
industrial waste, which is determined by dividing the amount of the total
federal grant, allocable to the treatment of industrial waste, by the recovery
period.
   f.   Industrial Cost Recovery Period shall mean that period during which the
grant amount allocable to the treatment of wastes from industrial users is
recovered from the industrial users of such works, which shall be a period of
thirty (30) years.
   g.   Project Number C-180474 01 is defined as a separate and distinct
construction project for construction of the Schererville Municipal Sewage
Works which was sponsored by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency under
the provisions of Public Law 92-500. This project does not include past or
future construction, equipment or other services not included under the
specific project number and the approved plans, specifications and approved
change orders for the project which are on file in the Town Hall, and by
reference made a part of this ordinance as fully as if same were attached
hereto or incorporated herein,
   h.   Federal Grant Amounts shall mean that portion of the total construction
costs for Project Number C-180474 01 which was sponsored by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. Total eligible construction costs will amount
to approximately $1,549,400.00. The federal grant will amount to approximately
$1,162,050.00
   i.   Retained Amounts shall mean that portion of the recovered amounts
retained by the Town. The retained amounts shall be equal to fifty percent
(50%) of the recovered amounts, together with interest earned thereon.
   j.   Payment to U.S. Treasury shall mean that portion of the recovered
amounts that must be returned to the U.S. Treasury on an annual basis. The
annual payments to the U.S. Treasury shall amount to fifty percent (50%) of the
annual recovered amounts, together with interest earned thereon.
   k.   Amounts for Reconstruction and Expansion shall mean those amounts which
represent a minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the amount retained by the Town,
together with interest earned thereon. These amounts shall be used solely for
the eligible costs of the expansion or reconstruction of treatment works
associated with the project and necessary to meet the requirements of the Act.
The Town shall obtain the written approval of the Regional Administrator of the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency prior to commitment of the retained
amounts for any expansion and reconstruction. The remaining twenty percent
(20%) of retained amounts may be used at the discretion of the Town.
   l.   Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, Public Law 92-500, adopted by the 92nd Congress on October 18, 1972.
(Ord. No. 672, § 1, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-23)
Sec. 9-126 Reimbursement Required by Industrial User.
   In order to comply with federal regulations, in the case of federal grant
assistance for the construction of waste treatment works, where it has been
determined that "industrial users" as defined in Section
9-125, above, or as amended by appropriate federal regulations, are required to
reimburse a portion of the federal grant amount allocable to the capital cost
of constructing facilities for the treatment of "industrial wastes", rates and
charges shall be collected from each industrial user connected to the municipal
sewage works or who otherwise discharges sewage, water or liquids, either
directly or indirectly, into the municipal waste treatment system, which
charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount
determinable as follows:
   a.   The industrial cost recovery charges for the treatment of industrial
wastes shall be based upon the volume of sewage flow billed to industrial
users, as determined in accordance with appropriate provisions for determining
billed flow included in Ordinance Number 648 B (Rate Ordinance) and the total
strength and character of industrial wastes which is introduced into the waste
treatment system. The strength and character of industrial wastes shall be
measured at the industrial users expense as provided for in Ordinance Number
648B (Rate Ordinance) and furnished to the Town. The owner or industrial user
shall furnish a central sampling point available to the Town at all times. In
the event that measurement of the strength and character of industrial wastes
are not provided to the Town on a timely basis, the measurements of the
strength and character of industrial wastes shall be determined by the Town on
the basis of a sample, authorized hereunder, to be taken by the Town for the
purpose of appropriate billing. The industrial cost recovery rates for the
treatment of wastes shall be as follows:
   Measurement
   Monthly volume flow, which includes
   normal domestic wastes (BOD 240 mg/l
   and suspended solids 240 mg/1)         $. 106 per 1,000 gallons
   Monthly pounds of BOD in excess of 240
   mg/l                     $.016 per pound
   Monthly pounds of suspended solids in
   excess of 240 mg/l               $.016 per pound
   b.   However, in the event an "industrial user" can and does show to the
satisfaction of the Town that a portion of the total monthly billed sewage flow
is from sanitary conveniences, then the flow and pollutant loadings to which
the industrial cost recovery charge is applied, shall be determined on the
basis of net flow and pollutant loadings excluding sanitary conveniences.
   c.   The industrial cost recovery charges for treatment services on or after
the effective date as stated in Section 9-116 shall be prepared and billed
quarterly.
(Ord. No. 672, § 2, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-24)
Sec. 9-127 Determination of Users Subject to Industrial Cost Recovery Charges.
   The Town shall determine which users are subject to paying the industrial
cost recovery charges, in the following manner:
   a.   The Town shall require appropriate employees of the Sewage works to
review billing records and prepare a list of all potential industrial users, as
identified in each of the Divisions listed in Section
9-125 above.
   b.   The list of all potential industrial users shall be analyzed on the
basis of data available at the Sewage Works billing office (i.e. type of
business, volume charges, excessive loading charges, estimated number of
employees, etc.) for the purpose of developing preliminary lists of probable
"industrial" and probable "non-industrial" users.
   c.   The Town shall conduct an immediate survey of all probable "industrial"
users in order to substantiate the validity of classifying a particular user as
an "industrial" user. Each user initially classified as an industrial user,
shall be notified as to their classification.
   d.   After completing the survey of all probable "industrial" users, the
Town shall review the list of probable "non-industrial" users to determine if
the initial classification of any of these users should be reconsidered. Where
appropriate, individual users will be contacted in order to determine the
proper classification.
   e.   After an industrial user has been notified of his classification, the
user may request reconsideration by furnishing data and measurements acceptable
to the Town for the determination of sewage discharges. The Town shall have the
right to measure and determine the strength and content of all sewage and waste
discharges, either directly or indirectly into the Town's sanitary sewage
system, in such manner and by such method as it may deem practicable in light
of the conditions and attending circumstances of each case in order to
determine the proper user classification.
   f.   Within a reasonable period of time following completion of the sewage
works construction project, the Town shall have completed the initial
classification of all industrial users. During the first calendar year of
operation, subsequent to completion of the construction project, and annually
thereafter, the Town will review, classify and reclassify all users as either
industrial or non-industrial users based upon measurements and data obtained by
the Town or furnished by individual users. Normally, each user will retain his
classification until the next succeeding classification period. However, if
there is a substantial change in the strength, volume or delivery flow rate
characteristics introduced into the treatment works by an individual user, then
the classification of that user may be reviewed and established during the year
in the light of the conditions and attending circumstances of each case.
(Ord. No. 672, § 3, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-25)
Sec. 9-128 Basis for Industrial Cost Recovery Rates.
   The basis for the industrial cost recovery rates and charges included in
Section
9-126, above, are as follows:
   a.   Total estimated federal grant amount to be awarded for the plant
improvements and interceptor sewers under Project Number C-180474 01 amounts to
approximately $1,162,050.00
   b.   The consulting engineers estimate that an equitable distribution on a
percentage basis of the total cost of construction and equipment included in
the treatment plant project would be as follows:
      Treatment of sanitary waste flow   40%
      Treatment of suspended solids   25%
      Treatment of BOD   35%
   c.   The design capacity of the treatment plant is as follows:
   Flow:                  Annual design flow capacity of 365 M.G.
   Suspended Solids:            Design capacity 200 mg/l, times annual flow
                     capacity 365 M.G., times weight will result in
                     608,820 # average annual design capacity.
   Biochemical Oxygen Demand:      Design capacity 240 mg/l, times annual flow
                     capacity 365 M.G., times weight will result in
                     729,971 # average annual design capacity.
   d.   Industrial cost recovery period will be thirty (30) years.
   e.   Average annual basis for the cost recovery charge will amount to
$38,735.00 ($1,162,050.00 federal grant, divided by thirty (30) years recovery
period).
   f.   Total annual basis for the cost recovery charge allocated to treatment
functions, is as follows:
      Treatment of waste volume ($38,735.00 x 40%.   =   $15,494.00)
      Treatment of suspended solids ($38,735.00 x 25%.   =   $ 9,683.75)
      Treatment of BOD ($38,735.00 x 35%.      =   $13,557.25)
   g.   The industrial cost recovery rates for the treatment charges are
computed on the basis of the annual functional costs of treatment, divided by
average annual design capacity in the following manner:
      Treatment of sanitary waste volume:
      Annual functional cost of $15,494.00 divided by annual capacity 365 M.G.,
equals $.042 per 1,000 gallons.
      Treatment of suspended solids:
      Annual functional cost of $9,683.75 divided by annual capacity of 729,971
pounds equals $.0159 per pound.
      Treatment of biochemical oxygen demand:
      Annual functional cost of $13,557.25 divided by annual capacity of
729,971 pounds equals $.0186 per pound.
   h.   The rates computed in subsection (g) above, would result in total
recovery of the federal grant amount if all users were subject to the
industrial cost recovery requirements, and provided that the treatment plant
was operated at capacity during the cost recovery period. Therefore, these
rates will ensure that each industrial user will pay only that portion of the
federal grant amount applicable to the costs of the treatment facilities
actually utilized to treat industrial wastes, as determined by each industrial
users flow and pollutant loadings.
(Ord. No. 672, § 4, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-26)
Sec. 9-129 Accounting Procedures - Sewage Works Industrial Cost Recovery Fund.
   The Town shall account for all industrial cost recovery payments in the
following manner:
   a.   All revenues derived from the industrial cost recovery rates and
charges shall be segregated and kept in a special fund, separate and apart from
all other funds of the Town. The special fund shall be designated the "Sewage
Works Industrial Cost Recovery Fund" and payment of said amount into said fund
shall be deemed a reasonable expense of operation of the sewage works for the
purpose of computing net operating revenue.
   b.   Within forty five (45) days following the end of the first calendar
year after completion of construction of the sewage facilities and annually
thereafter, the Town shall return fifty percent (50%) of the amounts recovered
through the industrial cost recovery charges, together with any interest earned
thereon, to the U.S. Treasury. Pending use, the Town shall invest the retained
amounts for reconstruction and expansion in:
      1.   Obligations of the U.S. Government; or
      2.   obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S.
Government or any agency thereof; or
      3.   shall deposit such amounts in accounts fully collateralized by
obligations of the U.S. Government or by obligations fully guaranteed as to
principal and interest by the U.S. Government or any Agency thereof.
   c.   Eighty percent (80%) of the funds retained by the Town in the "Sewage
Works Industrial Cost Recovery Fund" or authorized investments and the interest
earned thereon, shall be expended only for the purpose of eligible costs of
expansion or reconstruction of the treatment works. The Town shall obtain the
written approval of the Regional Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency prior to commitment of the retained amounts for any expansion
and reconstruction. The remaining twenty percent (20%) of the funds retained by
the Town may be utilized for any authorized use associated with the sewage
works.
(Ord. No. 672, § 5, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-27)
Sec. 9-130 Reviews by EPA.
   Upon request from EPA, the Town shall encourage each industrial user to
permit representatives of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to review
appropriate industrial sewage records for the purpose of independently
verifying the flow and characteristics of industrial wastes which are
introduced into the treatment works. No waste introduced into the waste
treatment system shall interfere with the operation or performance of the
sewage treatment works. All users are subject to the requirements of
pretreatment standards established by federal and state law.
(Ord. No. 672, § 6, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-28)
Sec. 9-131 Billing and Collections.
   The industrial cost recovery rates and charges shall be prepared, billed and
collected in the manner provided by law and ordinance.
   The industrial cost recovery charges for treatment services shall become
effective for services rendered during the calendar month following completion
of construction and shall be prepared and billed monthly.
(Ord. No. 672, § 7, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-29)
Sec. 9-132 through Sec. 9-139 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Schedule of Rates and Charges.
Sec. 9-140 Definitions.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
   (a)   "Operation and Maintenance Costs" include all costs, direct and
indirect, necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport, and
treatment on a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that
conform with all related Federal, State, and local requirements. (These costs
include replacement.)
   (b)   "Replacement Costs" shall mean the expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
   (c)   "Useful or Service Life" shall mean a period of 17.5 years for
equipment and thirty-five (35) to fifty (50) years for real property, other
than land.
(Ord. No. 648 B, § 1 (a)-(c), 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-4)
   (d)   "Normal Domestic Sewage" (for the purpose of determining surcharges)
shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily concentration as
follows:
      BOD not more than 240 mg/l. S.S. not more than 240 mg/l. NH3-N not more
than 25 mg/l. As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated domestic and/or
sanitary conveniences as distinct from wastes from industrial processes.
(Ord. No. 974; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-4 (d)
   (e)    "Sewer Industrial Cost Recovery Ordinance" shall mean a separate and
companion enactment to this Ordinance, which provides for recovery from
industrial users of the sewage works of a portion of the Federal grant amount
allocable to the construction of sewage facilities for treating industrial
waste pursuant to Section 204 (b) of PL 92-500 and 40 CFR Part 35.928(1) and
(2).
   (f)    "B.O.D. (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) and Suspended Solids"
shall have the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance.
   (g)   "Sewer Use Ordinance" shall mean a separate and companion enactment to
this Ordinance, which regulates the connection to and use of public and private
sewers.
   (h)   "User Class" shall mean the division of wastewater treatment customers
by source, function, waste characteristics, and process or discharge
similarities (i.e., residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and
governmental in the User Charge System and as industrial and non-industrial in
the Industrial Cost Recovery System).
      Residential User - shall mean a user of the treatment works whose
premises or building is used primarily as a single family residence for one (1)
or more persons.
      Commercial User - shall mean any establishment listed in the Office of
Management and Budget's "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" (1972
Edition) involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based
on a determination by the Town, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes
or wastes from sanitary conveniences. This includes all multiple family
dwelling units, apartments, condominiums, duplexes, mobile home courts, etc.,
which are served by only one (1) sewer connection.
      Institutional User - shall mean any establishment listed in the "SICM"
involved in a social, charitable, religious, and/ or educational function
which, based on a determination by the Town, discharges primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
      Governmental User - shall mean any Federal, State, or local governmental
user of the wastewater treatment works.
      Industrial User - shall mean any manufacturing or processing facility
that discharges industrial waste to a publicly owned treatment works.
Industrial users shall be as identified in the "SICM" under Divisions A, B. D,
E, or I.
   (i)   "User Charge" shall mean a charge levied on users of the wastewater
treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such works
pursuant to Section 204(b) of Public Law 92-500.
   (j)    "Debt Service Costs" shall mean the average annual principal and
interest payments on all outstanding revenue bonds or other long-term capital
debt.
   (k)    "Excessive Strength Surcharges" shall mean an additional charge which
is billed to users for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in
excess of "normal domestic sewage.
   (l)    "Other Service Charges" shall mean tap charges, connection charges,
area charges, and other identifiable charges, other than User Charges, debt
service charges and excessive strength surcharges.
   (m)    "Sewage" shall mean the combination of the liquid and water carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, (including polluted cooling water). The three most common types
of sewage are:
      Sanitary sewage - shall mean the combination of liquid and water carried
wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
      Industrial sewage - shall mean a combination of liquid and water carried
wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the
wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water).
      Combined sewage - shall mean wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial
sewage, stormwater, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater treatment
facilities by a combined sewer.
   (n)    "NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) Permit"
shall have the same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance.
   (o)    "Shall" is mandatory; "May" is permissive.
   (p)    "Industrial Wastes" shall mean the wastewater discharges from
industrial, trade or business processes as distinct from employees wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
(Ord. No. 648 B, § 1 (e) - (p), 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-4)
   (q)    "NH 3-N" shall mean the same as Ammonia Nitrogen measured as
Nitrogen. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in "Standard Methods."
(Ord. No. 974; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-4)
Sec. 9-141 Classes of Users of the Treatment Works.
   Every person whose premises are served by said sewage works shall be charged
for the services provided. These charges are established for class, as defined,
in order that the sewage works shall recover, from each user and user class,
revenue which is proportional to its use of the treatment works in terms of
volume and load. User charges are levied to defray the cost of operation and
maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment works. User charges shall
be uniform in magnitude within a user class.
   (a)   User charges are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency, published in the Federal
Register August 21, 1973 (38 CFR 22523) and on February 11, 1974 (39 CFR 5252).
Replacement costs, which are recovered through the system of user charges,
shall be based upon the expected service life of the sewage works plant and
equipment.
   (b)   The various classes of users of the treatment works for the purposes
of this Ordinance, shall be as follows:
      Class I - Residential
      Class II - Commercial
      Class III - Institutional
      Class IV - Governmental
      Class V - Industrial
(Ord. No. 648 B, § 2, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-5)
Sec. 9-142 Basis of Sewage Rates and Charges.
   For the use of and the service rendered by said sewage works, rates and
charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of
real estate or building that is connected with the Town Sanitary System or
otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other
liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewerage system of
the Town of Schererville. Such rates and charges include User Charges, Debt
service costs, excessive strength surcharges, an other service charges which
rates and charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an
amount determinable as follows:
(Ord. No. 648B, § 3, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-5)
   a.   The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity of water
used on or in the property or premises subject to such rates and charges as the
same is measured by the water meter there in use, plus a base charge based on
the size of the water meter installed, except as herein otherwise provided. For
sewage service, the purpose of billing and collection the charges for water
meters shall be read monthly and the users shall be billed monthly (Or period
equaling a month).
   b.   The Town of Schererville shall notify each User, annually, in
conjunction with a bill of that portion of the sewer service charge
attributable to wastewater treatment services.
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 9-12-84)
Sec. 9-143 Sewage Rates and Charges.  19
   The following schedule of rates and charges shall be collected by the Town
from owners of property served by the Waste Water Treatment Works and the
existing rates and charges shall be amended hereby to reflect increases
sufficient to raise funds sufficient to pay all indebtedness and costs incurred
by the Town for the conduct of the provision of sewage service and operation of
the utility in compliance with industry standards and requirements of
applicable legal statutes, namely:
   a.   All Metered Users: The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the
quantity of water used on or in the property or premises subject to such rates
and charges, as the same is measured by the water meter in use at such property
or properties, plus a base charge based on the size of the water meter
installed, except as herein otherwise provided. For the purpose of billing and
collecting the charges for sewage service, the water meters shall be read
monthly and the users shall be billed monthly (or for a period equaling a
month). The water usage schedule on which the amount of said rates and charges
shall be determined is as follows:
      1.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per month:
 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Phase 5
$3.81   $3.92   $4.04   $4.16   $4.28
 
      2.   Base Rate:   - PLUS -
Meter Size Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Phase 5
Meter Size Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Phase 5
5/8 - 3/4" $6.16   $6.34   $6.53   $6.73   $6.93
1"         13.94   14.36   14.79   15.23   15.69
1-1/4"     21.70   22.35   23.02   23.71   24.42
1-1/2"     31.02   31.95   32.91   33.90   34.92
2"         52.78   54.36   55.99   57.67   59.40
3"         120.12  123.72  127.43  131.25  135.19
4"         208.18  214.43  220.86  227.49  234.31
6"         472.36  486.53  501.13  516.16  531.64
 
(Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 7-13-94)
   b.   All Unmetered Users: For users of the sewage works that are unmetered
water users or accurate meter readings are not available, the monthly charge
shall be determined as an average of single-family dwelling units, except as
herein provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or
period equaling a month). The schedule on which said rates and charges shall be
determined is as follows:
 
Monthly Base Rate (1)
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Phase 5
$32.85  $33.84  $34.86  $35.91  $36.99
(1) For Single family residential unit
 
Effective date of each phase is as follows:
Phase 1 - Billing for November 2022
Phase 2 - Billing for January 2024
Phase 3 - Billing January 2025
Phase 4 - Billing January 2026
Phase 5 - Billing January 2027
(Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 7-13-94; Ord. No. 1271A, § 1, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 1271B, §
1, 9-14-22)
 
Notes
19    Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1271 stated that it was amending Ord. No. 648B,
   however the last ordinance was Ord. No. 952.
Sec. 9-144 Quantity of Water Discharged into System and Corresponding Charges.
   The quantity of water discharged into the sanitary sewerage system and
obtained from sources other than the utility that serves the Town shall be
determined by the Town in such manner as the Town shall reasonably elect, and
the sewage service shall be billed at the above appropriate rates. Further, as
is hereinafter provided in this Section, the Town may make proper allowances in
determining the sewage bill for quantities of water shown on the records to be
consumed, but which are also shown to the satisfaction of the Town that such
quantities do not enter the sanitary sewage system.
   a.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the Town
sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, is not a user of water
supplied by the water utility serving the Town, and the water used thereon or
therein is not measured by a water meter, or is measured by a water meter not
acceptable to the Town then the amount of water used shall be otherwise
measured or determined by the Town. In order to ascertain the rate or charge
provided in this ordinance, the owner or other interested party shall, at his
expense, install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices or
any adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the Town for the
determination of sewage discharge.
   b.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the Town’s
sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, is a user of water
supplied by the water utility serving the Town and, in addition, is a user of
water from another source which is not measured by a water meter or is measured
by a meter not acceptable to the Town, then the amount of water used shall be
otherwise measured or determined by the Town, In order to ascertain the rates
or charges, the owner or other interested parties, shall, at his expense,
install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices or any
adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the Town for the
determination of sewage discharge.
(Ord. No. 648B, § 4(a)-(c), 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-6 (a) -
(c))
   c.   In the event two (2) or more dwelling units, such as mobile homes,
apartments or housekeeping rooms, discharging sanitary sewage, water or other
liquids into the Town’s sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly,
are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water
meter, then in such case billing shall be for a single service in the manner
set out elsewhere herein, except that there will be an additional charge of
three-dollars and twenty-five cents. ($3.25) per month for each additional
unit. In the case of mobile home courts, the number of dwelling units shall be
computed and interpreted as the total number of mobile home spaces available
for rent, plus any other dwelling units served through the meter. A dwelling
unit shall be interpreted as a room or rooms, or any other space or spaces in
which cooking facilities are provided.
(Ord. No. 1271, § 2, 7-13-94)
   d.   In the event two (2) or more dwelling units such as mobile homes,
apartments or housekeeping rooms discharging sanitary sewage, water or other
liquids into the Town’s sanitary sewerage system, either directly or
indirectly, are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a
single water meter then in such case billing shall be for a single service in
the manner set out elsewhere herein, except that there will be an additional
charge of two-dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per month for each additional
unit. In the case of mobile home courts, the number of dwelling units shall be
computed and interpreted as the total number of mobile home spaces available
for rent plus any other dwelling units served through the meter. A dwelling
unit shall be interpreted as a room or rooms or any other space or spaces in
which cooking facilities are provided.
(Ord. No. 974, Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-6(d))
   e.   In order that the single family domestic and residential users or
sewage service shall not be penalized for sprinkling lawns during the summer
months of June, July, August and September the billing for sewage service for
residences and/or domestic users for said months shall be based upon the water
usage for the previous months of December, January, February, and March. In the
event the water usage for said previous months is greater than the water usage
for said summer months then the billing for sewage services shall be computed
on the actual water used in the month for which the sewage service bill is
being rendered. Domestic and/or residential sewage service as applicable to the
sprinkling rate shall apply to each lot, parcel of real estate or building
which is occupied and used as a single family residence. Said sprinkling rate
shall not apply to any premises which are partially or wholly used for
commercial or industrial purposes. In the event a portion of such premises
shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes, the owner shall have the
privilege of separating the water service so that the residential portion of
the premises is served through a separate meter and in such case the water
usage as registered by the water meter serving such portion of the premises
used for residential purposes would qualify under the sprinkling rate.
   f.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate of building discharges
sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the Town’s
sanitary sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in
excess of thirty-five thousand (35,000) gallons per month, and it can be shown
to the satisfaction of the Town that a portion of water as measured by the
water meter or meters does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewage system,
then the owner other interested party shall install and maintain meters, weirs,
volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the Town for the determination of sewage discharge.
(Ord. No. 648B, § 4, (e)(F), 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-6 (e)(F))
Sec. 9-145 Strength and Character of Industrial Discharges.
   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably adjusted to
the service rendered to industrial users, the Town shall base its charges not
only on the volume, but also on strength and character of the stronger-than-
normal domestic sewage and wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of.
The Town shall require the industrial user to determine the strength and
content of all sewage and wastes discharge, either directly or indirectly into
the sanitary sewage system, in such manner and by such method as the Town may
deem practicable in the light of the conditions and attending circumstances of
the case, in order to determine the proper charge. The industrial user shall
furnish a central sampling point available to the Town at all times.
(Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-7)
   a.   Normal sewage domestic waste strength should not exceed a biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) of two-hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter of fluid or
suspended solids in excess of two-hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter of
fluid or ammonia nitrogen measured as nitrogen (NH3-N) in excess of twenty-five
(25) milligrams per liter of fluid. Additional charges for treating stronger-
than-normal domestic waste shall be made on the following basis:
      1.   Rate Surcharge Based Upon Suspended Solids: There shall be an
additional charge of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per pound of suspended solids
for suspended solids received in excess of two-hundred fifty (250) milligrams
per liter of fluid.
      2.   Rate Surcharge Based Upon BOD: There shall be an additional charge
of thirty-one cents ($0.31) per pound of biochemical oxygen demand for BOD
received in excess of two-hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter of fluid.
      3.   Rate Surcharge Based Upon NH3-N: There shall be an additional charge
of one dollar and seventy-eight cents ($1.78) per pound of ammonia nitrogen
measured as nitrogen for NH3-N received in excess of twenty-five (25)
milligrams per liter of fluid.
   b.   The determination of Suspended Solids, five-day biochemical oxygen
demand and ammonia nitrogen measured as nitrogen contained in the waste shall
be in accordance with the current edition of “Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes”, as written by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Waste
Pollution Control Federation.
(Ord. No. 1271, § 3,7-13-94; Ord. No. 1271A, § 2, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 1271B, §
1, 9-14-22)
Sec. 9-146 Monthly Billings and Collection of Delinquent Accounts.
   Such rates and charges shall be prepared, billed and collected by the Town
in the manner provided by law and ordinance.
   a.   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and billed
monthly.
   b.   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants occupying
the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owner, but
such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability in event
payment is not made as herein required. The owners of properties served, which
are occupied by a tenant or tenants, shall have the right to examine the
collection records of the Town for the purpose of determining whether bills
have been paid by such tenant or tenants, provided that such examination shall
be made at the office at which said records are kept and during the hours that
such office is open for business.
   c.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify:
      1.   the Public Works Department; and
      2.   the user when an account is past due more than thirty (30) days
after the grace period for payment. Past due shall mean non-payment of any and
all charges and surcharges, including but not limited to charges under the
schedule of rates and charges, within the twenty-one (21) day grace period from
the date of billing. The notice to the user is to be given by first class mail,
with sufficient postage attached, at the address given by the user to the
Clerk-Treasurer as the address at which bills are to be delivered. The Public
Works Department shall, upon receipt of the notice, deliver a copy of the
notice to the property by delivery to any adult found thereon and, failing to
find an adult, affix the notice to what appears to be the primary entrance to
the primary building on the premises and immediately thereafter shall certify
to the Clerk-Treasurer of the delivery. If the Department of Public Works finds
the premises vacated the Department shall so certify to the Clerk-Treasurer and
the Clerk-Treasurer shall publish notice on one (1) occasion in a newspaper of
general circulation ins Lake County.
(Ord. No. 1248, § 2, 10-13-93)
   d.   The notice given, as described in paragraph b, shall contain:
      1.   The name and address of the user;
      2.   A statement of the length of the delinquency and the amount of the
delinquency;
      3.   That if the arrearage is not paid in full within twenty-one (21)
days of notice’s mailing or publication, then the Town of Schererville will
disconnect the sewer service and, thereafter, so notify the Lake County
Department of Public Health and, if the customer billing is for combined water
and sewer, disconnect water service.
      4.   That the user may ask the Utility Board to reconsider termination of
service, but such request must be by certified mail, addressed to the Utility
Board, do Town Hall, Schererville, IN 46375, and received no later than the
fourteenth (14th) day after notice is mailed or, if published, date of
publication.
(Ord. No. 1248, § 3,10-13-93)
Sec. 9-147 Annual Study of Rates and Charges.
   In order that the rates and charges for sewage services may remain fair and
equitable and be in proportion to the cost of providing services to the various
users of user classes, the Town shall cause a study to be made within a
reasonable period of time following the first twelve (12) months of operation,
following the date on which this ordinance goes into effect. Such study shall
include, but not be limited to, an analysis of the costs associated with the
treatment of excessive strength effluents from industrial users or user
classes, the financial position of the sewage works and the adequacy of its
revenue to provide reasonable funds for operation and m maintenance,
replacements, debt service requirements and capital improvements to the waste
treatment systems.
   Thereafter, on an annual basis, within a reasonable period of time following
the normal accounting period, the Town shall cause a similar study to be made
for the purpose of reviewing the fairness and equity of the rates and charges
for sewage services on a continuing basis. Said studies shall be conducted by
officers or employees of the Town or by a firm of certified public accountants,
or a firm of consulting engineers which firms shall have experience in such
studies, or by such combination of officers, employees, certified public
accountant, or engineers as the Town shall determine to be best under the
circumstances.
(Ord. No. 648 B, § 7, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-8)
Sec. 9-148 Tap-In Fees.  20
   Each and every person and property owner of any lot, parcel, building or
other connection to the sanitary sewer system that shall connect to the
sanitary sewer system of the Town of Schererville from the date this rate
ordinance is adopted and published shall pay, in place of the tap-in fee
previously established and as might hereafter be amended, capital buy in charge
and tap in fee combined as follow:
   Single family dwelling unit            1.0               $1,362.00
   Duplex - 2 family units            2.0                2,724.00
   Multiple Family dwelling units
      one bedroom               0.55               749.10
      two bedrooms               0.80               1,089.60
      three or more bedrooms         1.0               1,362.00
   Gasoline service stations
      per island               0.70               953.40
   Nursing homes and hospitals
      per bay                  0.50               681.00
   Car wash, manual - per bay            1.0               1,362.00
   Car wash, automatic - per bay            8.0               10,896.00
   Hotels and motels - per bed            0.60               817.20
   Rooming houses-per room for rent         0.30               408.60
   Churches, lodges, veterans
      organizations and similar
      groups without eating or
      drinking facilities - per member      0.005               6.81
   Bars, cocktail lounges and/or
      restaurants-per seat            0.10               136.20
   Barber shops - per chair            0.30               408.60
   Beauty shops - per chair            0.90               1,225.80
   Bowling alley - per alley            0.40               544.80
   Dentist offices - per chair            1.40               1,906.80
   Drive-in eating and drinking
      establishments-per car space         0.40               544.80
   Restaurants - per seat               0.10               136.20
   Drive-in theaters - per car space         0.05               68.10
   Theaters - per seat               0.01               13.62
   Retail establishments
      per 1,000 sq. ft.            1.0               1,362.00
   Washeterias and laundromats
      per washer               1.0               1,362.00
   Office buildings-per 1,000 sq.ft.         0.5               681.00
   Condominiums               1.0               1,362.00
   Mobile homes                  1.0               1,362.00
   Townhouses                  1.0               1,362.00
   Physicians offices-per examining
      room                  0.6               817.20
   Schools - per pupil               0.05               68.10
   Industries (exclusive of industrial
      discharge) - per employee         0.2               272.40
   Industrial Strip Malls - per use
      warehousing - per 1,000 sq.ft.         1.00               1,362.00
      service shops -per employee         0.20               272.40
      processing - per industrial         0.20               272.40
   Funeral homes -
      per preparation facility         0.60               817.20
      per 1,000 sq.ft. viewing chapel      0.50               681.00
   Veterinarians offices -
      per examining room            0.60               817.20
      per grooming room            0.30               408.60
      Warehouse               0.10               136.20
   Multi-unit retail strip malls
      per unit use.
   In the event a single user shall have the usage falling in more than one
category, the total of the categories shall apply. The following is set forth
as an example only.
   Example:
      Lodge with 200 members   =   1.0
      With 20 seat cocktail lounge   =   2.0
                  Total   3.0”
   These charges are based upon determination of the average user equity in the
existing system by dividing the value of the system carried on the books by the
number of existing users. This determination shall be annually reviewed and
amended.
   This provision and charge excludes only that class of customers which is the
class of customers for which the Schererville utility provides only treatment,
but not collection, of waste under terms of written contract.
(Ord. No. 1239, 6-9-93; Ord. No. 1595, § 1, 11-21-03)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1085 passed October 12, 1988 established a minimum
20 charge of $545.00. Said Ordinance is on file in the Office of the Clerk-
   Treasurer and is available for public inspection during regular business hours.
   Ord. No. 1239 amended Ord. Nos. 648 (b), 1084 and 1131.
Sec. 9-149 Reserved.  21
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: The Town requested that the language addressing the
21 collection charges for Interceptor Sewer Facilities from Ord. No. 648B, § 9,
   10-27-76 be deleted during the recodification process.
Sec. 9-150 By-Laws, Regulations and Authority to Prohibit Dumping.
   The Town shall make and enforce such by-laws and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management of the
Town's sewerage system, pumping stations and sewage treatment works, for the
construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewerage system,
and for the regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such rates and
charges.
   The Town is authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes into the Town's sewage
system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful to the operation of the
sewage treatment works of said Town, or to require methods affecting
pretreatment of said wastes to comply with the pretreatment standards included
in the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to
the sewage works.
(Ord. No. 648 B, § 10, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-11)
Sec. 9-151 through Sec. 9-154 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Public Sewer System Regulations.
Sec. 9-155 Definitions.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this Division shall be as follows:
   a.   Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen
expressed in mg/1, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Centigrade (20° C).
   b.   Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building
sewer beginning three (3) feet outside the building wall.
      Building drain - sanitary - a building drain which conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.
      Building drain - storm - a building drain which conveys storm water or
other Clearwater drainage, but no wastewater.
   c.   Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal. (Also called house connection.)
      Building sewer - sanitary - a building sewer which conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.
      Building sewer - storm - a building sewer which conveys stormwater or
other Clearwater drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage.
   d.   Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater
and storm or surface water.
   e.   Compatible pollutant shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids. pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified
in the NPDES Permit if the treatment works was designed to treat such
pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
The term substantial degree is not subject to precise definition, but generally
contemplates removals in the order of eighty (80%) percent or greater. Minor
incidental removals in the order of ten (10%) to thirty (30%) percent are not
considered substantial. Examples of the additional pollutants which may be
considered compatible includes: (a) chemical oxygen demand, (b) total organic
carbon, (c) phosphorus and phosphorus compounds (d) nitrogen and nitrogen
compounds, and (e) fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin
(except as prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation
of the treatment works).
   f.   Compliance shall, wherever necessary, mean compliance with the
provisions of Ordinance No. 671, Section 2(b), and any amendments thereto and/
or the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 951, 4-25-84; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-14)
   g.   Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of
land owned by others.
   h.   Fecal coliform - (E-coli) shall mean any of a number of organism common
to the intestinal tract of man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage
is an indicator of pollution.
   i.   Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such
that will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment
facility approved by the City.
   j.   Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
   k.   Incompatible pollutant shall mean any pollutant that is not defined as
a compatible pollutant, including non biodegradable dissolved solids.
   l.   Industrial wastes shall mean the wastewater discharges from industrial,
trade or business processes as distinct from employees' wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
   m.   Infiltration shall mean the water entering a sewer system, including
building drains and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not
limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls
(infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow).
   n.    Infiltration/Inflow shall mean the total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.
   o.   Inflow shall mean the water discharge into a sewer system, including
building drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to: roof
leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling
water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross
connections from storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters,
surface run-off, street wash waters or drainage, (inflow does not include, and
is distinguished from, infiltration).
   p.    Inspector shall mean the person or persons duly authorized by the
Town, through its Town Council, to inspect and approve the installation of
building sewers and their connection to the public sewer system.
   q.      Major contributing industry shall mean an industry that:
      1.   has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      2.   has a flow greater than five (5%) percent of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste;
      3.   has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under Section 307 (a) of PL 92-500; or
      4.   is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the
waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   r.   Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and
combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body
of surface or groundwater.
   s.   Normal domestic sewage shall have the same meaning as defined in the
Sewage Rate Ordinance.
   t.   NPDES Permit shall mean a permit issued under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable
waters of the United States pursuant to Section 402 of PL 92-500.
   u.   Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group discharging any wastewater to WWTW.
   v.   pH shall mean the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per
liter of solution.
   w.   Pretreatment shall mean the treatment of industrial sewage from
privately owned industrial sources prior to introduction into a public
treatment works.
   x.   Private sewer shall mean a sewer which is not owned by a public
authority.
   y.   Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely undo" the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one half (½) inch in
any dimension.
   z.   Public Sewer shall mean a sewer which is owned and controlled by the
public authority and will consist of the following increments.
      Collector sewer - shall mean a sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewaters from individual point source-discharges.
      Force main - shall mean a pipe in which wastewater is carried under
pressure.
      Interceptor sewer - shall mean a sewer whose primary purpose is to
transport wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      Pumping station - shall mean a station positioned in the public sewer
system at which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.
   aa.   Sanitary Board of Appeals or Board shall mean the Town of Schererville
Sanitary Board of Appeals to be comprised of the Building Commissioner,
Plumbing Inspector and Electrical Inspector. Whoever shall be serving in such
capacity shall automatically be a member of the Board and shall serve thereon
for so long as he shall occupy such capacity in the Town. The Clerk-Treasurer
shall keep all minutes and records of the meetings of the Board. All meetings
of the Board shall be governed by the rules of procedure then in effect
governing the conduct of business by the Town Council of the Town, or such
other rules as are specifically adopted by the Council from time to time.
(Ord. No. 951, 4-25-84, Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-14)
   bb.   Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sanitary and
industrial wastes, and to which storm, surface, and ground water are not
intentionally admitted.
   cc.   Sewage shall mean the combination of the liquid and water carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, (including polluted cooling water). The three most common types
of sewage are:
      Combined sewage - shall mean wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial
sewage, stormwater, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater treatment
facilities by a combined sewer.
      Industrial sewage - shall mean a combination of liquid and water carried
wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the
wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water).
      Sanitary Sewage - shall mean the combination of liquid and water carried
wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
   dd.   Sewage Works shall mean the structures, equipment and process required
to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent and accumulated residual solids.
   ee.     Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   ff.   Shall is mandatory: May is permissive.
(Ord. No. 671, § 1, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-13)
   gg.   Slug shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than ten (10) minutes more than three (3) times the
average twenty four (24) hours concentration or flows during normal operation
and shall adversely affect the collection system.
   hh.   Standard methods shall mean the laboratory procedures set forth in the
latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, The American Water Works Association and
the Water Pollution Control Federation, and "Guide-lines Establishing Test
Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants," Regulation 40 CFR Part 136, published
in the Federal Register on October 16, 1973.
   ii.   Storm sewer shall mean a sewer for conveying water, ground water or
unpolluted water from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes
are not intentionally admitted.
   jj.   Superintendent shall mean the Superintendent of the municipal sewage
works of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
   kk.   Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface
of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
   ll.   System shall mean all of the facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage owned by the Town within the sanitary service
area of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 951, 4-25-84; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-14)
   mm.   Total solids shall mean the sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   nn.   Town shall mean the Town of Schererville, Indiana. "Town Official"
shall, wherever necessary, mean and include such employees or designated
representatives or officials of the Town as the Utility Board of Trustees of
the Town of Schererville shall, from time to time, designate and utilize in
making the inspections and/or tests hereafter described and in carrying out the
other duties as prescribed herein to be performed on behalf of the Town.
(Ord. No. 951, 4-25-84; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-14)
   oo.   Toxic amount shall mean concentrations of any pollutant or combination
of pollutants, which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will
cause adverse effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations, and physiological
manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307 (a) of
PL 92-500.
   pp.   Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   qq.   User shall mean the owner of the property on which the buildings and/
or appurtenances that are connected to the System of the Town are located.
(Ord. No. 951, 4-25-84; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-14)
   rr.   Utility Board of Trustees or Utility Board shall mean the elective or
appointed Town Council charged with the legal responsibility of overseeing,
managing and/or operating the Sanitary Sewer Utility of the Town of
Schererville, and shall be the Board charged with enforcing the terms of this
Ordinance and where deemed necessary, shall be deemed to be the branch of the
government of the Town charged with the decision making requirements prescribed
herein, although the same may be delegated to a Town Official by proper action
of this Board.
   ss.   Volatile organic matter shall mean the material in the sewage solids
transformed to gases or vapors when heated at five hundred fifty (550°) degrees
C for fifteen (15) to twenty (20) minutes.
   tt.   Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage
of water either continuously or intermittently.
   Throughout this Ordinance, the masculine gender shall be deemed to include
the feminine and/or the neuter, the singular the plural, and vice versa,
wherever required by the context.
(Ord. No. 951, 4-25-84; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-14)
Sec. 9-156 Specific Sewage Regulations - Mandatory Connection.
   a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Town or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   b.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary
sewer, either directly or indirectly, stormwater, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water, or
unpolluted industrial process water. The Town shall require the removal of
unpolluted water from any wastewater collection or treatment facility if such
removal is cost effective and is in the best interest of all users of those
facilities.
   c.   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial process
water may be admitted to storm sewers which have adequate capacity for their
accommodation. No person shall use such sewers, however, without the specific
permission of the Town. No new connection shall be made unless there is
capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and
the sewage treatment plant including capacity for BOD and suspended solids.
   d.   No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the jurisdiction of the
Town, any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this ordinance and the NPDES
Permit.
   e.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural
outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this ordinance and the NPDES
Permit
   f.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   g.   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the Town
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the Town is required at his
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance, within ninety (90) days after date of official
notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100)
feet of the property line.
(Ord. No. 671, § 2, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-14)
Sec. 9-157 Permits and Inspection Fees.
   a.   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provision of Sec.
9-156 (g) the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 671, § 3, 10-27-76)
   b.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Town which
the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A permit and
inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the Town at the time
the application is filed.
(Ord. No. 1370, 2-12-97)
   c.   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-
eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
   d.   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board of Health of
the State of Indiana. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   e.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system as provided in sub-paragraph (d), a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this ordinance,
and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
   f.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town.
   g.   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
   h.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or
dirt.
(Ord. No. 671, § 3, 10-27-76; Schererville Town Code, § 10-2-13)
Sec. 9-158 Pre-Treatment of Industrial Wastes.
   Pretreatment of industrial wastes from major contributing industries prior
to discharge to the treatment works is required and is subject to the Rules and
Regulations adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) and published in the Federal Register on November 8, 1973 (40 CFR Part
128), and "Federal Guideline Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of
Pollutants" published in the Federal Register on October 16, 1973 (40 CFR Part
136), in addition to any more stringent requirements established by the Town,
and any subsequent Stat, or Federal Guideline, Rules, Regulations and/or laws,
as the same may be amended from time to time hereafter. All major contributing
industries shall be in compliance with pretreatment requirements no later than
June 30, 1977, and shall commence construction of pretreatment facilities no
later than December 31, 1976, except as provided for in Section 128.140 (40 CFR
Part 128) where effluent guideline pursuant to Section 301 (b) and 304 (b) of
Public Law 92-500 were not promulgated prior to December 10, 1873. In such
cases, major contributing industries shall be in compliance within three (3)
years and construction shall be commenced within eighteen (18) months of the
date of promulgation.
(Ord. No. 967, § 1, 9-12-84) [See §
9-170 et seq. of this Code .]
Sec. 9-159 through Sec. 9-169 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 8. Pretreatment Regulations.  22
 
Notes
22    Editor's Note: Utility Board Res. No. 92-36 recommended the passage of the
   regulations incorporated in Ord. No. 1224.
Division I. General Provisions.
Sec. 9-170 Purpose of Policy.
   This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly
Owned Treatment Works (POTW) or Waste Water Treatment Plant (WWTP) Facility of
the Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, and enables the Town to comply
with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of
the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 403). The objectives of this
ordinance are:
   a.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
   b.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass
through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
   c.   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
   d.   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
   e.   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from
the POTW;
   f.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and
   g.   To enable the Town to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (“NPDES”) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW is subject.
   This ordinance shall apply to all users (substitute “users” for “industrial
users”) of the POTW. The Ordinance authorizes the issuance of individual
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires
user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
   This ordinance will hereafter be known as, and may be cited as, Town of
Schererville Sewer Use Regulations Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 1.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-171 Administration.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to
or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the
Superintendent to duly authorized and designated Town personnel.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 1.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-172 Definitions.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used hereafter in this ordinance, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated.
   a.   Act or “the Act”. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   b.   Approval Authority. The State of Indiana, with an approved State
Pretreatment Program, which currently is under the Commissioner of
Environmental Management.
   c.   Authorized or Duly Authorized Representative of the User.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. (Definition
revised per Specimen Ordinance).
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), inclusive,
above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible
for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates
or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the Town.
   d.   Biochemical Oxygen Demand or BOD5. The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
   e.   Best Management Practices or BMPs. The schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in  §
9-178 a. and b. [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
   f.   Categorical Industrial User. An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
   g.   Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that
apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   h.   Town. The Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, its Utility Board
of Trustees, or its duly elected Legislative Body, the Town Council.
   i.   Color. The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%)
transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
   j.   Composite Sample. The sample resulting from combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
   k.   Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may be used as a designation
for the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized
Official of said agency.
   l.   Daily Maximum. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   m.   Daily Maximum Limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course
of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   n.   Existing Source. (Definition revised per Specimen Ordinance) Any source
of discharge that is not a “New Source”.
   o.   Grab Sample. (Definition revised per Specimen Ordinance) A sample that
is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and
over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   p.   Indirect Discharge or Discharge. (Definition revised per Specimen
Ordinance)The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic
source.
   q.   Industrial User or User. A source of indirect discharge.
   r.   Instantaneous Limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed
to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
   s.   Interference. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Town’s NPDES permit or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any
more stringent State or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
   t.   Local Limit. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
Town upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and
specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
   u.   Medical Waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   v.   New Source.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act that will be applicable to such source if such Standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of division (l)(b) or (c) of this definition but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source, as defined under this paragraph, has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            (i)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            (ii)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this paragraph.
   w.   Noncontact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling that does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product,
or finished product.
   x.   Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement the Town’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   y.   Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
   z.   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   aa.   Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, Medical Wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   bb.   Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
   cc.   Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   dd.   Pretreatment Standards or Standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean
prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local
limits.
   ee.   Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
9-178.
   ff.   Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined
by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the state or
the Town. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.
   gg.   Septic Tank Waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   hh.   Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, and the like).
   ii.   Significant Industrial User (SIU). A significant industrial user is:
      (1)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
and
      (2)   An industrial user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the Town or the Superintendent on the
basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   jj.   Slug Load or Slue Discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in §
9-178 or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not
limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a
Reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way
violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   kk.   Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
   ll.   Superintendent. The person designated by the Town to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this ordinance. The term also means a duly authorized
representative, of the Superintendent.
   mm.   Total Suspended Solids or Suspended Solids. The total suspended matter
that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other
liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
   nn.   Toxic Pollutant. One of 126 pollutants, or combination of those
pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPS under the
provisions of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. § 1317) of the Act.
   oo.   Treatment Plant Effluent. Any discharge of pollutants from the POTW
into the waters of the state.
   pp.   Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   qq.   Wastewater Treatment Plant or Treatment Plant (WWTP). That portion of
the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 1.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-173 Abbreviations.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this ordinance, shall have the
designated meanings:
      BOD5   -   Five (5) day Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      BMP   -   Best Management Practice
      BMR   -   Baseline Monitoring Report
      CFR   -   Code of Federal Regulations
      CIU   -   Categorical Industrial User
      COD   -   Chemical Oxygen Demand
      EPA   -   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
      gpd   -   gallons per day
      IAC   -   Indiana Administrative Code
      IC      Indiana Code
      IU      Industrial User
      mg/l   -   milligrams per liter
      NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      NSCIU   Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
      POTW   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
      RCRA   -   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
      SIU   -   Significant Industrial User
      SNC   -   Significant Noncompliance
      TSS   -   Total Suspended Solids
      U.S.C.   -   United States Code
(Ord. No. 1862, § 1.4, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-174 through Sec. 9-177 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. General Sewer Use Requirements.
Sec. 9-178 Prohibited Discharge Standards.
   a.   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   b.   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 9.0 or otherwise
causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW. or equipment or collection
system, or endangering Town personnel;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, tar, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
plastics, wood, grass clippings and other yard waste, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch, manure, entrails, paper, dishes, cups, milk containers, drink
containers, any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, and the
like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
Interference with the POTW which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65
degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees
F (40 degrees C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the Superintendent in accordance with § 9-191;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent, thereby violating the Town’s NPDES permit;
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Superintendent;
      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in an individual wastewater discharge permit;
      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail toxicity test;
      (16)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other
substances which that might cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (17)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees
Fahrenheit, or zero and 65 degrees Centigrade;
      (18)   At no time shall two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the
point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, be more than
150% nor any single reading over 175% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter;
      (19)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements or agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters;
      (20)   Any substance which will cause the wastewater treatment plant to
violate its NPDES permit; and
      (21)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, permit or
cause to be deposited, or discharged in any manner whatsoever, any substance
into a sewer at a point different than the permitted sewer connection to the
sanitary sewer system.
   c.   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this Section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must
discharge to the user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 2.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-179 Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and the same are hereby incorporated
into this ordinance by reference.
   a.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with divisions e. and f. of this section.
   b.   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Superintendent
may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users.
   c.   When Wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Superintendent shall
impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
   d.   A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard in accordance with the following paragraphs of this section.
      (1)   Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the industrial user’s intake water in accordance with
this section. Any industrial user seeking to obtain credit for intake
pollutants shall apply to the Town. Upon request of the industrial user, the
applicable standard will be calculated on a “net” basis (i.e., adjusted to
reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of
division d.(2) of this section are met.
      (2)   Criteria.
         (a)   Either (I) The applicable categorical pretreatment standards
contained in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be
applied on a net basis; or (ii) the industrial user demonstrates that the
control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment
standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the
absence of pollutants in the intake waters.
         (b)   Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and grease should not be granted
unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic
measure in the user’s effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of
the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits
are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.
         (c)   Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum value equal to
the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine
eligibility for credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this
section.
         (d)   Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the
intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the POTW
discharges. The Town or Superintendent may waive this requirement if it finds
that no environmental degradation will result.
   e.   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the Town convert
the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert
concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the
Superintendent. The Town may establish equivalent mass limits only if the
industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in divisions e.(1)(a)
through e.(1)(e) below.
      (1)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user
must:
         (a)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of
its individual wastewater discharge permit;
         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility’s
actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility’s long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user’s request
for equivalent mass limits.
      (2)   An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
         (b)   Continue to record the facility’s flow rates through the use of
a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
         (c)   Continue to record the facility’s production rates and notify
the Town and Superintendent whenever production rates are expected to vary by
more than 20% from its baseline production rates determined in division f.(l)
(c) of this section. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the
[Superintendent] will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit
as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to division e.(l)(a) of
this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
      (3)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Superintendent:
         (a)   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial
user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for
the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharger permit terms if the industrial user’s actual
average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of
water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow
rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not
based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to § 9-184.
The industrial user must also be in compliance with § 9-266 regarding the
prohibition of bypass.
   f.   The Superintendent may convert the mass limits of the categorical
pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration
limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual
industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Superintendent.
   g.   Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the
equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the promulgated
categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.
   h.   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where
such Standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be
used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation.
   i.   Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall
notify the Superintendent within two business days after the user has a
reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the Superintendent of
such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration
limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long term
average production rate.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 2.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-180 State Pretreatment Standards.
   Users must comply with the State of Indiana pretreatment standards.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 2.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-181 Specific Pollutant Limitations.  24
   a.   The Superintendent is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to
40 CFR 403.5(c).
   b.   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in
excess of the following daily maximum limit.
      0.5      mg/l aldrin
      25.0      mg/l ammonia nitrogen (total)
      0.5      mg/l arsenic
      250.0      mg/l BOD5
      0.6      mg/I benzene
      0.5      mg/l benzo(a)pyrene
      0.5      mg/l beryllium
      0.1      mg/l cadmium
      0.3      mg/l Carbon tetrachloride
      0.3      mg/l chlordane
      0.3      mg/l chromium
      0.1      mg/l copper
      0.3      mg/l cyanide
      0.5      mg/l dieldrin
      0.5      mg/l fluoride
      0.04      mg/l heptachlor
      0.05      mg/l hexachlorobenzene
      0.4      mg/l hexavalent chromium
      25.0      mg/l iron
      0.5      mg/l lead
      0.05      mg/l lindane
      0.004      mg/l mercury
      0.05      mg/l molybdenum
      0.5      mg/l nickel
      100.0      mg/l fats, oil and grease (FOG)
      0.5      mg/l PCSs
      0.05      mg/l selenium
      0.05      mg/l silver
      1.0      mg/l tin
      2.0      mg/l total chromium
      1.0      mg/l total phenols
      250.0      mg/l total suspended solids
      0.5      mg/l toxaphene
      0.5      mg/l trichloroethylene
      0.5      mg/l zinc
   c.   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal
unless indicated otherwise. The Superintendent may impose mass limitations in
addition to the concentration-based limitations above.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 2.4, 2-11-15)
 
Notes
      Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1406, § 8 deleted two hundred and fifty (250.0)
24 milligrams per liter Total Suspended Solids from the Specific Pollutant
   Limitations List.
   (Ord. No. 1406, § 8, 1-14-98)
Sec. 9-182 Town's Right of Revision.
   The Town reserves the right to establish, by enabling ordinance or in
individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in §
9-170, or the general and specific prohibitions in §
9-178.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 2.5, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-183 Special Agreement.
   The Town reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users
setting out special terms under which they may discharge into the POTW. In no
case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirements. However, the user may request a net gross adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a
variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the EPA or Approval
Authority. Such a request will be approved only if the user can prove that
factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by the EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. A user
requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the
procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. 403.13.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 2.6, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-184 Dilution.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to
meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when
the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 2.7, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-185 through 9-187 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Pretreatment of Wastewater.
Sec. 9-188 Pretreatment Facilities.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §
9-178 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the Approval Authority, or
the Superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense.
Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the
Superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans
and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge
acceptable to the Superintendent under the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 3.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-189 Additional Pretreatment Measures.
   a.   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams,
and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user’s compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
   b.   The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   c.   Each user discharging flow into the POTW greater than 40,000 gallons
per day shall install and maintain, on its property and at its expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to insure equalization of flow over
a 24 hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least 50% of the
daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of
discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the
Superintendent. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
   d.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall
be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at its expense.
   e.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   f.   Flow meters can and shall be required of each permitted user - at its
expense.
   g.   The Town of St. John and its Sanitary District shall abide by the
conditions of its contract with the Town of Schererville, if different that
those stated in this subsection.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 3.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-190 Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans..
   The Superintendent shall evaluate whether each (industrial user) SIU needs
an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control
slug discharges. The Superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be
necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the Superintendent may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
   a.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   b.   Description of stored chemicals;
   c.   Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
9-220. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would
violate any of the prohibited discharges in § 9-178; and
   d.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 3.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-191 Tenant Responsibility.
   Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant
under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is a
user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with provisions of
this ordinance, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 3.4, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-192 Hauled Wastewater.
   a.   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Superintendent, and at such times as are established by the
Superintendent. Such waste shall not violate Division II this Article or any
other requirements established by the Town. The Superintendent may require
septic tank waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits.
   b.   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as “industrial septage”
requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the Town. The
Superintendent shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such wastes, if
such disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operation. Waste haulers
are subject to all other sections of this ordinance, as amended from time to
time.
   c.   Fees for dumping septage will be established as part of the industrial
user fee system as authorized in Division XIV.
   d.   The Superintendent may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits. The Superintendent may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge
permits. The Superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial
waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other
requirements of this ordinance, as amended from time to time.
   e.   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the Superintendent. The Superintendent may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable Standards. The Superintendent
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.
   f.   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 3.5, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-193 Vandalism.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance or equipment, or any other part of the POTW. Any person, entity,
or user found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the
sanctions set out in Divisions X through XII, below. (Ord. No. 1862, § 3.6, 2-
11-15)
Sec. 9-194 and Sec. 9-195 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Eligibility.
Sec. 9-196 Wastewater Analysis.
   When requested by the Superintendent, a user must submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 14 days of the request. The
Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 4.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-197 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit.
   a.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
Superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a
timely application pursuant to § 9-198 may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.
   b.   The Superintendent may require other users to obtain individual
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
ordinance.
   c.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Divisions X through
XII. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements, or with any other requirements of applicable
federal, state and local law.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 4.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-198 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections.
   Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit which
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
ordinance and who seeks to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within 60 days after said date, apply to the Superintendent for an individual
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
9-201, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
180 days of the effective date of this ordinance except in accordance with an
individual wastewater discharge permit issued by the Superintendent.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 4.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-199 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections.
   Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such
permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with §
9-201, shall be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 4.4, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-200 Industrial Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting Extra
Jurisdictional Industrial Users.
   a.   Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the Town limits
shall submit an industrial wastewater discharge permit application, in
accordance with §
9-201, within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance. New significant
industrial users located beyond the Town limits shall submit such applications
to the Superintendent 90 days prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW.
   b.   Alternately, the Superintendent may enter into an agreement with the
neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is located to
provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program
requirements against the significant industrial user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 4.5, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-201 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents.
   a.   All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application. The Superintendent may require users to
submit all or some of the following information as part of a permit
application:
      (1)   Identifying information:
         (a)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
         (b)   Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and
plant production processes on the premises;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      (3)   Description of operations.
         (a)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
         (b)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         (c)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
      (4)   Time and duration of discharges;
      (5)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
      (6)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in §
9-179  c. (40 CFR 403.6(e)).
      (7)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources.
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process.
         (c)   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
         (d)   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
9-224. Where the Standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the
Superintendent or the applicable Standards to determine compliance with the
standard.
         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
9-225.
      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the permit application.
   b.   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision and reapplication.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 4.6, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-202 Application Signatories and Certifications.
   a.   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the
user and contain the certification statement in §
9-229 a.
   b.   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the Superintendent prior to
or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 4.7, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-203 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions.
   The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete permit
application, the Superintendent will determine whether to issue an individual
wastewater discharge permit. The Superintendent may deny any application for an
individual wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 4.8, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-204 and Sec. 9-205 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process.
Sec. 9-206 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration.
   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the
permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period
less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the Superintendent. Each
individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which
it will expire.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 5.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-207 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents.
   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as
are deemed reasonably necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass through
or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   a.   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date and effective date;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the Town in accordance with §
9-210, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      (3)   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law.
      (5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
      (6)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Superintendent to be necessary.
   b.   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties;
      (3)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (4)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine
discharges;
      (5)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (7)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      (8)   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the individual
wastewater discharge permit;
      (9)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
nonresidential wastes shall install a suitable control manhole(s) together with
such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole(s),
when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent but in no case shall
the manholes be constructed so as to violate local, state or federal
regulations or laws. The manhole(s) shall be installed by the owner at his
expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe an accessible at all
times. Agents of the Town, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management
and the EPA shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing;
      (10)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to
ensure compliance with this ordinance, and all applicable state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 5.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-208 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals.
   The Superintendent shall provide public notice of the issuance of an
individual wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may
petition the Superintendent to reconsider the terms of an individual wastewater
discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance.
   a.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   b.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the individual
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
individual wastewater discharge permit.
   c.   The effectiveness of the individual wastewater discharge permit shall
not be stayed pending the appeal.
   d.   In the event that the Superintendent fails to act within 30 days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider an individual wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an
individual wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify an individual
wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions
for purposes of judicial review.
   e.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
individual wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Circuit or Superior Court of Lake County, Indiana for review
within the time period set by statute for judicial review of administrative
decisions.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 5.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-209 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification.
   a.   The Superintendent may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the Town’s POTW, Town personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual
wastewater discharge permit; or
      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator.
   b.   The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 5.4, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-210 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer.
   a.   Individual wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or
transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60
days advance notice to the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the
individual wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the
Superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or
operator which:
      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility’s operations and processes;
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
individual wastewater discharge permit.
   b.   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 5.5, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-211 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation.
   a.   The Superintendent may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the Superintendent of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Superintendent of
changed conditions pursuant to §
9-219;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to grant or authorize the Superintendent timely access to
the facility premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines;
      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.
   b.   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 5.6, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-212 Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance.
   A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply
for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with §
9-201, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing
individual wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 5.7, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-213 and Sec. 9-214 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Reporting Requirements.
Sec. 9-215 Baseline Monitoring Reports.
   a.   Within either one hundred and eighty (180) days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative
decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Superintendent a report
which contains the information listed in paragraph b., below. At least 90 days
prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the Superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in paragraph b., below. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   b.   The users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
      (1)   All information required in §§
9-201a.(1)(a),
9-201a.(2),
9-201a.(3)(a), and
9-200a.(6).
      (2)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The user shall provide the information required in §
9-201a.(7)(a) through (d).
         (b)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
         (c)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the Pretreatment Standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40
CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted
to the Control Authority;
         (d)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with §
9-224;
         (e)   The Superintendent may allow the submission of a baseline report
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures;
         (f)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
Discharges to the POTW.
      (3)   Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      (4)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §
9-216 .
      (5)   Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with §
9-229  a. and signed by an authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-216 Compliance Schedule Progress Reports.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
9-215 b.(4):
   a.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   b.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   c.   The user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   d.   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Superintendent.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-217 Report on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadlines.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report containing the information described in §
9-201 a.(6) and (7) and §
9-215 b.(2). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in §
9-179, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
9-229 a.. All sampling will be done in conformance with §
9-225.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-218 Periodic Compliance Reports.
   [Note: All SIUs are required to submit periodic compliance reports even if
they have been designated a non-significant categorical industrial user under
the provisions of §
9-218 c.]
   a.   All significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the
Superintendent submit no less than two times per year (June and December)
submit reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases
where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management
practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit
documentation required by the Superintendent or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
9-229 a.
   b.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   c.   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently
than required by the Superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in §
9-225, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.4, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-219 Reports of Changed Conditions.
   Each user must notify the Superintendent of any significant changes to the
user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of
its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
   a.   The Superintendent may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
9-201.
   b.   The Superintendent may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit
under §
9-207 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
9-209 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
   c.   No user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and
unless the Superintendent has responded to the user’s notice.
   d.   For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of 10% or greater, and
the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed
significant.
   e.   For purposes of this requirement, solid concentration (or strength)
increases of ten 10% or greater shall be deemed significant.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.5, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-220 Reports of Potential Problems.
   a.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of
the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.
   b.   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance.
   c.   Failure to notify the Town of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this ordinance.
   d.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in paragraph a., above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   f.   Significant industrial users are required to notify the Superintendent
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.6, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-221 Reports from Unpermitted Users/Nonpermitted Users.
   All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the Superintendent as the Superintendent
may require.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.7, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-222 Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the Town
performs sampling at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the Town
performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was
conducted and the time when the user or the Town receives the results of this
sampling, or if the Town has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
Industrial user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.8, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-223 Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste.
   a.   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known
and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once
for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under §
9-219. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
9-215,
9-217, and
9-218.
   b.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph a. of this
section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   c.   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90
days of the effective date of such regulations.
   d.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
   e.   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.9, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-224 Analytical Requirements.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments
thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical Pretreatment
Standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques
for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures,
including procedures required by the Superintendent or other parties approved
by EPA.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.10, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-225 Sample Collection.
   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
   a.   Except as indicated in divisions b. and c. of this section, the user
must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the Superintendent. Where time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Town, the samples must be
representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior
to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the
samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile
organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures
as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Town, as
appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits.
   b.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   c.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90 day
compliance reports required in §§
9-215 and
9-217 [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used
for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the Superintendent
may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs in §
9-218 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to
collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.11, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-226 Determination of Noncompliance.
   The Superintendent may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance with
pretreatment standards as well as any other investigation method deemed
appropriate.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.12, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-227 Date of Receipt of Reports.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.13, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-228 Recordkeeping.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation
associated with best management practices established under §
9-181 c. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the Town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Superintendent.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.14, 2-11-15)
§ 9-229 Certification Statements.
   a.   Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial
monitoring waiver- the following Certification statement is required to be
signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with
§
9-202; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under §
9-215 b.(5) [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12 (I)]; users submitting reports on
compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under §
9-217 [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(d)]; users submitting periodic compliance
reports required by §
9-218 a. through c. [Note: See 40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)], [Note: See 40 CFR
403.12(e)(2)(iii)]. The following certification statement must be signed by an
authorized representative as defined in §
9-172 c.:
      I certify, under penalty of perjury, that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6.15, 2-11-15)
Division VII. Compliance Monitoring.
Sec. 9-230 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling.
   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance
and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. users
shall grant and authorize the Superintendent ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
   a.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the Superintendent shall be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   b.   The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user’s
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.
   c.   The Superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment
as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at
its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall
be calibrated at a frequency specified by the Superintendent to ensure their
accuracy.
   d.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.
   e.   Unreasonable delays in granting and authorizing the Superintendent
access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 7.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-231 Search Warrants.
   If the Superintendent has been refused or declined access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the Town designed to verify compliance with this
ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the Town, the Superintendent may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the Superior or Circuit Courts of Lake
County, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 7.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-232 and Sec. 9-233 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VIII. Confidential Information.
Sec. 9-234 Information Policies.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Superintendent’s inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at
the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies
for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR
2.302 shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be
available to the public without restriction.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 6, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-235 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance.
Sec. 9-236 Annual Publication.
   The Superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous
12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be
applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user
that violates paragraphs c., d. or h. of this section) and shall mean:
   a.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter taken during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined
in Section 2;
   b.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
by Section 2, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   c.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by Section 2 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the Superintendent determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   d.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Superintendent’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   e.   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   f.   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   g.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   h.   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Superintendent determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 9, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-237 Reserved for Future Use.
Division X. Administrative Enforcement Remedies.
Sec. 9-238 Notification of Violation.
   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. Within five days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of
the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user
to the Superintendent. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of
Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Superintendent or the Town to take any action, including emergency actions or
any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 10.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-239 Consent Orders.
   The Superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance,
or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible
for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by
the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to §§
9-241 and
9-242, and shall be judicially enforceable.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 10.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-240 Show Cause Hearing.
   The Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the Superintendent and show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least five days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user as defined in §
9-172 c. and required by §
9-202 a. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 10.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-241 Compliance Orders.
   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a three days
from the date of the order. If the user does not come into compliance within
the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the
user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 10.4, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-242 Cease and Desist Orders.
   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the
Superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist
all such violations and directing the user to:
   a.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   b.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 10.5, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-243 Administrative Fines.
   a.   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to exceed
the maximum fine allowed under applicable Indiana law. Such fines shall be
assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other
long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during
the period of violation.
   b.   Assessments may be added to the user’s next scheduled sewer service
charge and the Superintendent shall have such other collection remedies as may
be available for other service charges and fees.
   c.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty of 18% of the unpaid balance, and interest shall
accrue thereafter at a rate of ½% per month. A lien may be recorded against the
user’s property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
   d.   Users seeking to dispute such fines must file a written request for the
Superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the Superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of
receiving the request from the user. In the event that the user’s appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be
returned to the user. The Superintendent may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   e.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 10.6, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-244 Emergency Suspensions.
   a.   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after
informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.
The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a User’s discharge, after
notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to
the environment.
      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent
may permit the User to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless termination proceedings as set forth in §
9-245 are initiated against the user.
      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the Superintendent prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under §§
9-240 or
9-245.
   b.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 10.7, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-245 Termination of Discharge.
   a.   In addition to the provisions in §
9-211, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
      (1)   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in Division II of this
Article.
   b.   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
9-240 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by
the Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 10.8, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-246 and Sec. 9-247 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XI. Judicial Enforcement Remedies.
Sec. 9-248 Injunctive Relief.
   When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent may petition the Circuit or Superior Courts of
Lake County, Indiana, through the Town’s attorney, for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, order,
or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The
Superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/
or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 11.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-249 Civil Penalties.
   a.   A user who violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable
to the Town for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000, but not less than $1,000
per violation, per day of violation. In the case of a monthly or other long-
term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the
period of the violation.
   b.   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs,
and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling
and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
Town in enforcement of this ordinances and its terms and provisions.
   c.   In determining the amount of civil liability, a court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by
the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice
requires.
   d.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 11.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-250 Remedies Nonexclusive.
   The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive. The
Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the Town’s enforcement response plan. However, the
Superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the Superintendent is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken
concurrently.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 11.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-251 through Sec. 9-253 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XII. Supplemental Enforcement Action.
Sec. 9-254 Performance Bonds.
   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this ordinance, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless
such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the Town, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the Superintendent to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 12.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-255 Liability Insurance.
   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this
ordinance, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user
first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 12.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-256 Water Supply Severances.
   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to
the user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user’s expense, only
after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 12.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-257 Public Nuisances.
   A violation of any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be corrected or abated
as directed by the Superintendent, or his/her designee. Any person(s), entity/
entities creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the
Town Code
Chapter 6, Article 11 governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the Town
for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 12.4, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-258 Informant Rewards.
   The Town may pay up to $500 for information leading to the discovery of
noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information provided results in
a civil penalty or an administrative fine levied against the user, the Town may
disburse up to 10% of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However,
a single reward payment may not exceed $500.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 12.5, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-259 Contractor Listing.
   Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for
the sale of goods or services to the Town. Existing contracts for the sale of
goods or services to the Town held by a user found to be in significant
noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at
the discretion of the Superintendent or the Town.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 12.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-260 through Sec. 9-263 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations.
Sec. 9-264 Upset.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   b.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of paragraph c., below, are met.
   c.   A user who seeks to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset [if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five says]:
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   d.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   e.   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   f.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 13.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-265 Prohibited Discharge Standards/General/Specific Prohibitions.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
9-178a. or the specific prohibitions in §§
9-178b.(3)-(7), (9)-(20), specifically excluding §
9-178b.(l ), (2) and (8), of this ordinance if it can prove that it did not
know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference, and
that either:
   a.   A Local Limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   b.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the Town was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 13.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-266 Bypass.
   a.   For the purposes of this section:
      (1)   Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility.
      (2)   Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   b.   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of paragraphs c. and d. of this section.
   c.   Bypass notifications.
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the Superintendent, at least ten days before the date of
the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Superintendent of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Superintendent may waive the written report on
a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
   d.   Bypass.
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Superintendent may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under paragraph c. of
this section.
      (2)   The Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the Superintendent determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in paragraph d.(1) of this section.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 13.3, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-267 and 9-268 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XIV. Surcharge Costs.
Sec. 9-269 Nominal Domestic Sewage Waste Strength.
   Normal domestic sewage waste strength should not exceed a five day
biological oxygen demand (BOD5) of250 milligrams per liter of fluid, or
suspended solids in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid, or ammonia
nitrogen measured as nitrogen (NH3-N) in excess of 25 milligrams per liter of
fluid. Surcharges, in addition to monthly base rates and volume charges
established under Town Sewer user Rate Fee Ordinance, as amended from time to
time, shall be calculated accordingly.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 14.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-270 Surcharge Rates Based on Suspended Solids.
   Surcharge rates will be established under the Sewer user Fee Ordinance, as
amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 14.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-271 and Sec. 9-272 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XV. Miscellaneous Provisions.
Sec. 9-273 Pretreatment Charges and Fees.
   The Town may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating its pretreatment program, which may include:
   a.   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
   b.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
   c.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   d.   Fees for filing appeals;
   e.   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs not included in § 9-
273b. associated with the enforcement activity taken by the Superintendent to
address IU noncompliance; and
   f.   Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the Town.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 15.1, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-274 Severability.
   In the event that any term or provision of this ordinance is invalidated by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining terms and provisions shall
not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 15.2, 2-11-15)
Sec. 9-275 Conflicts.
   All other Town ordinances and provisions therein, or parts of other
ordinances inconsistent or in conflict with any part of this ordinance,
including Town Sewer Use Ordinance No. 1224, and all amendments thereto, are
hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 15.3, 2-11-15)
§ 9-276 Effective Date.
   This ordinance shall take effect, and be in full force and effect
immediately following its passage and adoption by the Town Council of the Town
of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, and publication in conformance with
applicable law.
(Ord. No. 1862, § 16, 2-11-15)
Article 9. Storm Water Collection and Disposal System.  26
 
Notes
   26   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1283. passed August I. 1994 addressing the
26 replacement of storm sewers and is on file in the Office of the Clerk-
   Treasurer and available for public inspection during regular business hours.
Sec. 9-280 through Sec. 9-299 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 10. Fats, Oils, and Greases Discharge Regulations Into the Sanitary
Sewage Collection System.  27
 
Notes
27 27   Editor's Note: Res. No. 99-31 adopted on October 13, 1999 recommended the
   passage of this type of ordinance.
Division I. General Provisions.
Sec. 9-300 Provisions and Policy.
   a.   In an effort to curb problems with the sanitary sewer collection system
and the possibility of pass through or interference with the Wastewater
Treatment Plant serving the Town of Schererville caused by fats, oils and
grease accumulations and petroleum or mineral oil discharges in it's sanitary
sewer mains. The Schererville Town Council hereby adopts the following Fats,
Oils and Greases Control Ordinance.
   b.   Any non-residential facility connected to the Town of Schererville
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system involving the preparation or
serving of foods or any process discharging fats, oils and greases will be
subject to the conditions of this ordinance.
   c.   Any non-residential facility connected to the Town of Schererville
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system involving the servicing or
machining of equipment involving petroleum, non-biodegradable cutting or
mineral based oils (or derivatives), or any process discharging petroleum, non-
biodegradable cutting or mineral based oils or derivatives will be subject to
the conditions of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1471, § 1.1, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-301 Definitions.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   a.   Fats, Oils and Greases - Organic polar or non-polar compounds derived
from animal and or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain
triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using
analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136 as may be amended
from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease", "greases",
"fats, oils and greases", or "FOG".
   b.   Grease Trap or Interceptor - A device for separating and retaining
waterborne grease or greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary
sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect
settable solids generated by and from food preparation activities prior to the
water entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps
and interceptors are sometimes referred to herein as "grease interceptors".
   c.   Cooking Establishments - Those establishments primarily engaged in the
activities of preparing, serving or otherwise making available for consumption
food stuffs and that use one or more of the following preparatory activities:
Cooking by Frying (all methods), Baking, Grilling, Sauteing, Rotisserie
Cooking, Broiling, Boiling, Blanching, Roasting, Toasting, or Poaching. Also
included are Infrared Heating, Searing, Barbecuing, and any other food
preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a
receptacle that requires washing.
   d.   Non-Cooking Establishments - Those establishments primarily engaged in
the preparation of pre-cooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of
cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen food stuffs preparation and
serving establishments.
   e.   Minimum Design Capacity - The design features of a grease interceptor
and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases
from grease laden wastewater discharged into the public sanitary sewer.
   f.   Equipment Servicing Establishment - Those establishments primarily
engaged in the servicing, repairing, rebuilding, maintaining, cleaning, steam
cleaning, washing, fueling or refueling of vehicles or equipment.
   g.   Water/Oil Separator - A device for separating and containing non-
aqueous oils and other lightweight materials from water or wastewater prior to
discharge to the sanitary sewer collection system.
   h.   User - Any person, including those located inside or outside the
jurisdictional limits of the Town of Schererville, but within the sanitary
boundaries who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of
wastewater from mobile sources such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
   i.   Town of Schererville - The Town of Schererville, its Utility Board of
Trustees, the Town Council of Schererville, as its Sanitary Board.
   j.   Publicly Owned Treatment or POTW - A "treatment works" as defined by
Section 212 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (United States Code, §
1292) which is owned by the State or municipality. This definition includes any
devices or systems used in the wastes and any conveyances which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity
having jurisdiction over the industrial users and responsibility for the
operation and maintenance of the treatment works.
   k.   Superintendent - The person designated by the town to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this ordinance or his duly authorized representative.
   I.   Wastewater - Liquid and water-carried wastes, and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTWS.
   m.   Wastewater Treatment Plant or Treatment Plant/Facility - That portion
of this POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.
(Ord. No. 1471, § 1.1, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-302 Abbreviations.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
   POTW      Publicly Owned Treatment Works
   EPA      U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
   mg/l      Milligrams per liter
   FOG      Fats, Oils and Greases
   TPH      Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons
(Ord. No. 1471, § 1.2, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-303 through Sec. 9-304 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. General Requirements.
Sec. 9-305 through Sec. 9-309 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Grease Interceptor Specifications and Requirements.
Sec. 9-310 Specifications and Requirements.
   a.   Users as required by the Superintendent or his designee shall install
grease interceptors.
   b.   Grease interceptors shall be installed at the Users expense when such
User operates a cooling establishment.
   c.   Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooling or cold dairy
and frozen food stuffs establishments and other industrial or commercial
establishments when the Superintendent, for the proper handling of liquid waste
containing grease, deems them necessary.
   d.   No User shall allow any wastewater discharge concentrations from the
subject grease interceptor of FOG to exceed 100 mg/l as identified by EPA
Method 1664 or EPA Method 413.
   e.   All grease interceptors shall be of a food design and capacity as
approved by the Superintendent or his designee and shall be readily and easily
accessible for user cleaning and Town of Schererville inspection.
   f.   All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of
accumulated waste contents as required in order to maintain minimum design
capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor but not less than
every thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. 1471,§ 3.1, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-311 Grease Interceptor Criteria.
   a.   Users who are required to pass water through the grease interceptor
shall follow this criteria:
      1.   Location of Interceptors
         All grease interceptors shall be located outside of the building in
such a manner that personnel from the Town of Schererville can inspect the
Interceptors from time to time and can be maintained.
      2.   Size of Interceptors
   b.   All grease interceptors shall be sized to insure that the Town of
Schererville sanitary sewer collection system is protected from excessive
grease which may cause clogging or damage and that the facility is capable of
meeting all discharge requirements.
      1.   Establishments which provide eat-in services that do not sue a
commercial dishwasher shall utilize the following formula to determine the
minimum size interceptor required. The Town of Schererville may require the
establishment to utilize a larger interceptor than the minimum.
         a.   Twelve (12) hour operation or less
            Seating capacity times (x) seven (7) gallons equals (=) minimum
size of interceptor.
         b.   Over twelve (12) hour operation
            Seating capacity times (x) seven (7) gallons times (x) two (2)
equals (=) minimum size of interceptor.
      2.   Establishments which provide eat-in services and utilize a
commercial dishwasher shall utilize the following formula to determine the
minimum size interceptor required. The Town of Schererville may require the
establishment to utilize a larger interceptor than the minimum.
         a.   Twelve (12) hour operation or less
            Seating capacity times (x) nine(9) gallons equals minimum size of
interceptor
         b.   Over twelve (I 2) hour operation
            Seating capacity times (x) nine (9) gallons times (x) two (2)
equals minimum size of interceptor
      3.   Establishments that provide take-out service only but does not use a
commercial dishwasher shall meet the requirements found in Section B,l of this
policy except peak hour meals served shall be utilized in lieu of seating
capacity.
      4.   Establishments that provide take-out service only and utilizes a
commercial dishwasher shall meet the requirements found in Section B,2 of this
policy except peak hour meals served shall be utilized in lieu of seating
capacity.
      5.   The Town of Schererville shall be notified of any changes in
operation or process prior to any change whereby the establishment may be
required to upgrade their interceptor.
   c.    Sampling Port Required.
      A sampling port shall be installed in an approved location to allow
sampling by the Town of Schererville and the user.
   d.   Issuance of Permit for Installation of Interceptor
      The following shall be submitted to the Town of Schererville for review
and approval prior to the issuance of a permit for installation of an
interceptor. Any changes to the approved plan shall be pre-approved by the
Superintendent prior to the changes being implemented.
      1.   A site plan showing the location of the interceptor, lines, and
clean-out or manhole
      2.   Details of the interceptor, lines, and clean-out manhole
      3.   Formula and calculations used to determine the interceptor capacity
   e.   Existing Interceptors
      All interceptors currently in use or in existence at the time of this
ordinance will be considered sized sufficiently unless analyses performed on
the discharge shows that the user is in violation of the aforementioned
standard for FOG concentrations. All new interceptors or interceptors to
replace or upgrade existing interceptors will be required to meet all criteria
as stated under this ordinance.
      Establishments with existing interceptors are still required to meet all
discharge requirements as stated under this ordinance and Ordinance 1224 of the
Town of Schererville.
   f.   Exceptions.
      Under certain circumstances the interceptor size and location may need
special exceptions from this ordinance. If an exception to this ordinance is
requested, the user must demonstrate that the size and location will not cause
the sanitary sewage collection system or the Wastewater Treatment Plant any
problems in meeting the discharge requirements of this ordinance or Ordinance
1224 of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1471, § 3.2, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-312 through Sec. 9-314 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Oil/Water Separator Specifications and Requirements.
Sec. 9-315 Specifications and Requirements.
   a.   Oil/Water Separators shall be installed by Users required by the
Superintendent or his designee.
   b.   Oil/Water Separators shall be installed at the Users expense when such
user operates an Equipment Servicing Establishment.
   c.   No User shall allow any wastewater discharge concentrations on the
subject grease interceptor of FOG to exceed I 00 mg/i as identified by EPA
Method 166 or EPA Method 413.
   d.   No User shall allow any wastewater discharge petroleum oils, non-
biodegradable cutting oils or mineral based oils (or their derivatives) to be
discharged from the subject oil/water separator in excess of 30 mg/l of oil
droplets 30 microns and larger of non-emulsified, free and dispersed oils.
Sec. 9-316 through Sec. 9-319 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Maintenance and Record Keeping.
Sec. 9-320 Record Keeping Requirements.
   The user shall maintain a written record of interceptor maintenance for
three (3) years. All such records shall be available for inspection by the Town
of Schererville at all times.
(Ord. No. 1471, § 5.1, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-321 Interceptor Maintenance.
   a.   The user shall operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to
maintain the device in such a manner that the attainment of the grease limit is
consistently achieved. Consistently shall mean any wastewater sample taken from
said grease interceptor shall be subject to the terms as prescribed in this
ordinance and Ordinance 1224 of the Town of Schererville.
   b.   The user shall understand and agree that the use of biological
additives such as grease degradation agents is conditionally permissible upon
prior written approval of the superintendent. Any establishment using this
method of grease abatement shall maintain the interceptor in such a manner that
attainment of grease wastewater discharge limits as measured from the
interceptors outlet is consistently achieved.
   c.   The user shall remove any accumulated grease caps and sludge pockets as
required by the intervals of not longer than thirty (30) days at the users
expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials
such as grit, rock, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels,
rags, etc. which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective
volume of the grease interceptor.
(Ord. No. 1471, § 5.2, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-322 through Sec. 9-327 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Penalties.
Sec. 9-328 Penalty Provisions.
   Except as herein provided, any user who violates this ordinance or any part
thereof shall be subject to enforcement actions as stipulated in Ordinance 1224
of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1471, § 6, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-329 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Applicability.
Sec. 9-330 User Applicability.
   All that is contained herein within this ordinance shall be applicable to
either the user in the situation of a tenant-type establishment or the owner of
said establishment at the discretion of the Superintendent.
(Ord. No. 1471, § 7, 10-13-99)
Sec. 9-331 through Sec. 9-339 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 11. Stormwater Technical Standards.
Division I. General Provisions.
Sec. 9-340 Abbreviations.
BFE       Base flood elevation.
BMP       Best management practice.
CFS       Cubic feet per second.
CLOMR     Conditional letter of map revision (from FEMA).
CLOMR-F   Conditional letter of map revision based on fill (from FEMA).
CN        Curve number.
COE       United States Army Corps of Engineers.
CSMP      Comprehensive stormwater management program.
CSO       Combined sewer overflow.
CWA       Clean Water Act.
ERM       Elevation reference mark.
E&SC      Erosion and sediment control.
EPA       Environmental Protection Agency.
ETJ       Extraterritorial jurisdiction.
FBFM      Flood boundary and floodway map.
FEH       Fluvial erosion hazard.
FEMA      Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FHBM      Flood hazard boundary map.
FIRM      Flood insurance rate map.
FIS       Flood insurance study.
FPG       Flood protection grade.
FPS       Feet per second.
GIS       Geographical information system.
GPS       Global positioning system.
HGL       Hydraulic grade line.
HHW       Household hazardous waste.
HUC       Hydrologic unit code.
IDEM      Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
IDNR      Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
INDOT     Indiana Department of Transportation.
LAG       Lowest adjacent grade.
LID       Low impact development.
LOMA      Letter of map amendment (from FEMA).
LOMR      Letter of map revision.
LOMR-F    Letter of map revision based on fill (from FEMA).
MCM       Minimum control measure.
MS4       Municipal separate storm sewer system.
NAVD      North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
NFIP      National Flood Insurance Program.
NGVD 1929 National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
NRCS      USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service.
NPDES     National pollutant discharge elimination system.
NPS       Non-point source.
POTW      Publicly owned treatment works.
SFHA      Special flood hazard area.
SWCD      Soil and water conservation district.
SWPPP     Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
SWQMP     Stormwater quality management plan.
Tc        Time of concentration.
TMDL      Total maximum daily load.
TN        Total nitrogen.
TP        Total phosphorous.
TSS       Total suspended solids.
USCS      Unified soil classification system.
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture.
USFWS     United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-341 Definitions.
   Acre-Foot (AF). A measure of water volume equal to the inundation of a flat
one (1) acre area to a depth of one (1) foot (43,560 cubic feet).
   Administering Authority. The designated unit of government given the
authority to issue permits.
   Agricultural Land Disturbing Activity. Tillage, planting, cultivation, or
harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or nursery vegetative
crops. The term also includes pasture renovation and
establishment, the construction of agricultural conservation practices, and the
installation and maintenance of agricultural drainage tile.
   Agricultural Land Use Conservation Practices. Use of land for the production
of animal or plant life, including forestry, pasturing or yarding of livestock,
and planting, growing, cultivating, and harvesting crops for human or livestock
consumption. Practices that are constructed on agricultural land for the
purposes of controlling soil erosion and sedimentation. These practices include
grass waterways, sediment basins, terraces, and grade stabilization structures.
   Amortization Period. The length of time used to repay a debt or mortgage or
to depreciate an initial cost.
   Antecedent Runoff Condition. The index of runoff potential before a storm
event. The index, developed by the Soil Conservation Service (SCS), is an
attempt to account for the variation of the SCS runoff curve number (CN) from
storm to storm.
   Backflow Preventer. Device that allows liquids to flow in only one direction
in a pipe. Backflow preventers are used on sewer pipes to prevent a reverse
flow during flooding situations.
   Backwater. The rise in water surface elevation caused by some obstruction
such as a narrow bridge
opening, buildings or fill material that limits the area through which the
water shall flow.
   Base Flood Elevation. The water surface elevation corresponding to a flood
having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given
year.
   Base Flood. See "regulatory flood".
   Base Flow. Stream discharge derived from groundwater sources as
differentiated from surface runoff. Sometimes considered to include flows from
regulated lakes or reservoirs.
   Basement. A building story that is all or partly underground but having at
least one-half (0.5) of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height
regulations.
   Benchmark. A marked point of known elevation from which other elevations may
be established.
   Best Management Practices. Design, construction, and maintenance practices
and criteria for stormwater facilities that minimize the impact of stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, prevent erosion, and capture pollutants.
   Buffer Strip. An existing, variable width strip of vegetated land intended
to protect water quality and habitat.
   Building. See "structure".
   Capacity of a Storm Drainage Facility. The maximum flow that can be conveyed
or stored by a storm drainage facility without causing damage to public or
private property.
   Catch Basin. A chamber usually built at the curb line of a street for the
admission of surface water to a storm drain or subdrain, having at its base a
sediment sump designed to retain grit and detritus below the point of overflow.
   Centerline of Channel. The thalweg of a channel.
   Channel Improvement. Alteration, maintenance, or reconstruction of the
channel area for the purpose of improving the channel capacity or overall
drainage efficiency. The noted "improvement" does not necessarily imply water
quality or habitat Improvement within the channel or its adjacent area.
   Channel Modification. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation,
debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel
modification typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
   Channel Stabilization. Protecting the sides and bed of a channel from
erosion by controlling flow velocities and flow directions using jetties,
drops, or other structures and/or by fining the channel with vegetation,
riprap, concrete, or other suitable lining material.
   Channel. A portion of a natural or artificial watercourse which periodically
or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between
two bodies of water. It has a defined bed and banks which serve to confine the
water.
   Class V Injection Well. A type of well, which typically has a depth greater
than its largest surface dimension, emplaces fluids into the subsurface, and
does not meet the definitions of Class I through Class IV wells as defined
under 40 CFR 146,5. While the term includes the specific examples described in
40 CFR 144.81, septic systems that serve more than one (1) single-family
dwelling or provide service for non-domestic waste, dug wells, bored wells,
improved sinkholes, trench drains, infiltration sumps, and infiltration
galleries, it does not include surface impoundments, trenches, or ditches that
are wider than they are deep.
   Closed Conduit. A pipe, lube, or tile used for transmitting water.
   Combined Sewer Overflow. A system designed and used to receive and transport
combined sewage so that during dry periods the wastewater is carried to a
treatment facility. During storm events, the excess water is discharged
directly into a river, stream, or lake without treatment.
   Compensatory Storage. An artificial volume of storage within a floodplain
used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill
or substructures are placed within the floodplain.
   Compost. Organic residue (or a mixture of organic residue and soil) that has
undergone biological
decomposition until it has become relatively stable humus.
   Comprehensive Stormwater Management Program. A comprehensive stormwater
program for effective management of stormwater quantity and quality throughout
the community.
   Constructed Wetland. A manmade shallow pool that creates growing conditions
suitable for wetland vegetation and is designed to maximize pollutant removal.
   Construction Activity. Land disturbing activities, and land disturbing
activities associated with the
construction of infrastructure and structures. This term does not include
routine ditch or road maintenance or minor landscaping projects.
   Construction Plan. A representation of a project site and all activities
associated with the project. The plan includes the location of the project
site, buildings and other infrastructure, grading activities, schedules for
implementation and other pertinent information related to the project site. A
stormwater pollution prevention plan is a part of the construction plan.
   Construction Site Access. A stabilized stone surface at all points of
ingress or egress to a project site, for the purpose of capturing and detaining
sediment carried by tires of vehicles or other equipment entering or exiting
the project site.
   Construction Support Activities. Include but are not limited to the
following: concrete or asphalt batch plants, equipment staging yards, material
storage areas, excavated material disposal areas, borrow areas. Such activities
must not support multiple, unrelated projects, be a commercial industrial
operation, or continue to operate beyond the completion of the construction
activity for the project it supports.
   Contiguous. Adjoining or in actual contact with.
   Contour Line. Line on a map which represents a contour or points of equal
elevation.
   Contour. An imaginary line on the surface of the earth connecting points of
the same elevation.
   Contractor or Subcontractor. An individual or company hired by the project
site or individual lot owner, their agent, or the individual lot operator to
perform services on the project site.
   Control Structure. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   Conveyance. Any structural method for transferring stormwater between at
least two (2) points. The term includes piping, ditches, swales, curbs,
gutters, catch basins, channels, storm drains, and roadways.
   Convolution. The process of translating precipitation excess into a runoff
hydrograph.
   Crawl Space. Low space below first floor of a house where there has not been
excavation deep enough for a basement, usually less than seven (7) feet in
depth, but where there is access for pipes, ducts, utilities and similar
equipment.
   Critical Duration Analysis. The process of testing different rainfall
durations to find that "critical duration," which produces the highest peak
runoff or the highest storage volume.
   Cross-Section. A graph or plot of ground elevation across a stream valley or
a portion of it, usually along a line perpendicular to the stream or direction
of flow.
   Crown of Pipe. The elevation of top of pipe.
   Cubic Feet Per Second (CFS). Used to describe the amount of flow passing a
given point in a stream channel. One cubic foot per second is equivalent to
approximately seven and a half (7.5) gallons per second.
   Culvert. A closed conduit used for the conveyance of surface drainage water
under a roadway, railroad, canal or other impediment.
   Curve Number (CN). The soil conservation service index that represents the
combined hydrologic effect of soil, land use, land cover, hydrologic condition
and antecedent runoff condition.
   Dam. A barrier to confine or impound water for storage or diversion, to
prevent gully erosion, or to retain soil, sediment, or other debris.
   Damage. Measurable rise in flood heights on buildings currently subject to
flooding, flooding of buildings currently not subject to flooding and increases
in volume or velocity to the point where the rate of land lost to erosion and
scour is substantially increased.
   Datum. Any level surface to which elevations are referred, usually mean sea
level.
   Dechlorinated Swimming Pool Discharge. Chlorinated water that has either sat
idle for seven (7) days following chlorination prior to discharge to the MS4
conveyance, or, by analysis, does not contain detectable concentrations (less
than five-hundredths (0.05) milligram per liter) of chlorinated residual.
   Depressional Storage Areas. Non-riverine depressions in the earth where
stormwater collects. The
volumes are often referred to in units of acre-feet.
   Design Storm. A selected storm event, described in terms of the probability
of occurring once within a given number of years, for which drainage or flood
control improvements are designed and built.
   Detention Basin. A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow of
stormwater to a prescribed maximum rate, and to detain concurrently the excess
waters that accumulate behind the outlet.
   Detention Facility. A facility designed to detain a specified amount of
stormwater runoff assuming a specified release rate. The volumes are often
referred to in units of acre-feet.
   Detention Storage. The temporary detaining of storage of stormwater in
storage facilities, on rooftops, in streets, parking lots, school yards, parks,
open spaces or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions, with
the rate of release regulated by appropriately installed devices.
   Detention Time. The theoretical time required to displace the contents of a
tank or unit at a given rate of discharge (volume divided by rate of
discharge).
   Detention. Managing stormwater runoff by temporary holding and controlled
release.
   Detritus. Dead or decaying organic matter; generally contributed to
stormwater as fallen leaves and sticks or as dead aquatic organisms.
   Developer. Any person financially responsible for construction activity, or
an owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or lease, any lots
in a subdivision.
   Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including but not limited to:
      1.   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building or any
addition to a building;
      2.   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes, dams
or channel improvements;
      3.   Construction or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
one hundred and eighty (180) days;
      5.   Installing utilities, erection of walls, construction of roads, or
similar projects;
      6.   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
      7.   Storage of materials; or
      8.   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      9.   Development does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing buildings and facilities such as painting, re-roofing, resurfacing
roads, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
buildings.
   Direct Release. A method of stormwater management where runoff from a part
or the entire development is released directly to the receiving stream without
providing detention.
   Discharge. In the context of water quantity provisions, usually the rate of
water flow, i.e., a volume of fluid passing a point per unit time commonly
expressed as cubic feet per second, cubic meters per second, gallons per
minute, or millions of gallons per day. In the context of water quality
provisions, the discharge means any addition of liquids or solids to a water
body or a flow conveyance facility.
   Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, spilling, leaking, or placing
of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land/or water so that the
solid waste or hazardous waste, or any constituent of the waste, may enter the
environment, be emitted into the air, or be discharged into any waters.
   Ditch. A man-made, open drainage way in or into which excess surface water
or groundwater drained from land, stormwater runoff, or floodwaters flow either
continuously or intermittently.
   Drain. A buried slotted or perforated pipe or other conduit (subsurface
drain) or a ditch (open drain) for carrying off surplus groundwater or surface
water.
   Drainage Area. The area draining into a stream at a given point. It may be
of different sizes for surface runoff, subsurface flow and base flow, but
generally the surface runoff area is considered as the drainage area.
   Drainage Classification (soil). As a natural condition of the soil, drainage
refers to both the frequency and duration of periods when the soil is free of
saturation. Soil drainage conditions are defined as:
      1.   Well-drained. Excess water drains away rapidly, and no mottling
occurs within thirty- six (36) inches of the surface.
      2.   Moderately well drained. Water is removed from the soil somewhat
slowly resulting in small but significant periods of wetness, and mottling
occurs between eighteen (18) and thirty-six (36) inches.
      3.   Poorly drained. Water is removed so slowly that it is wet for a
large part of the time, and mottling occurs between zero (0) and eight (8)
inches.
      4.   Somewhat poorly drained. Water is removed from the soil slowly
enough to keep it wet for significant periods but not all of the time, and
mottling occurs between eight (8) to eighteen (18) inches.
      5.   Very poorly drained. Water is removed so slowly that the water table
remains at or near the surface for the greater part of the time; there may also
be periods of surface ponding; the soil has a black to gray surface layer with
mottles up to the surface.
   Drainage. The removal of excess surface water or groundwater from land by
means of ditches or subsurface drains. Also see “natural drainage.”
   Drop Manhole. Manhole having a vertical drop pipe connecting the inlet pipe
to the outlet pipe. The vertical drop pipe shall be located immediately outside
the manhole.
   Dry Well. A type of infiltration practice that allows stormwater runoff to
flow directly into the ground via a bored or otherwise excavated opening in the
ground surface.
   Dry-Bottom Detention Basin. A basin designed to be completely dewatered
after having provided its planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
   Duration. The time period of a rainfall event.
   Earth Embankment. A man-made deposit of soil, rock, or other material often
used to form an impoundment.
   Elevation Certificate. A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify the one hundred (100) year or base flood
elevation and the lowest elevation of usable space to which a building has been
constructed.
   Elevation Reference Mark (ERM). Elevation benchmark tied to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 and identified during the preparation of a
flood insurance study prepared for the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   Emergency Spillway. Usually, a vegetated earth channel used to safely convey
flood discharges around an impoundment structure.
   Energy Dissipater. A device to reduce the energy of flowing water.
   Environment. The sum total of all the external conditions thal may act upon
a living organism or community to influence its development or existence.
   Erosion and Sediment Control Measure. A practice, or a combination of
practices, to control erosion and resulting sedimentation, and/or off-site
damages.
   Erosion and Sediment Control System. The use of appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures to minimize sedimentation by first reducing or
eliminating erosion at the source and then as necessary, trapping sediment to
prevent it from being discharged from or within a project site.
   Erosion Control Plan. A written description and site plan of pertinent
information concerning erosion control measures designed to meet the
requirements of these standards.
   Erosion. The wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice, gravity,
or other geological agents. The following terms are used to describe different
types of water erosion:
      1.   Accelerated Erosion. Erosion much more rapid than normal or geologic
erosion, primarily as a result of the activities of man.
      2.   Channel Erosion. An erosion process whereby the volume and velocity
of flow wears away the bed and/or banks of a well-defined channel.
      3.   Gully Erosion. An erosion process whereby runoff water accumulates
in narrow channels and, over relatively short periods, removes the soil to
considerable depths, ranging from one (1) to two (2) feet to as much as
seventy-five (75) to one hundred (100) feet.
      4.   Rill Erosion. An erosion process in which numerous small channels
only several inches deep are formed; occurs mainly on recently disturbed and
exposed soils.
      5.   Splash Erosion. The spattering of small soil particles caused by the
impact of raindrops on wet soils; the loosened and spattered particles may or
may not be subsequently removed by surface runoff.
      6.   Sheet Erosion. The gradual removal of a fairly uniform layer of soil
from the land surface by runoff water.
   Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Areas located outside the corporate
limits of a community over which the community has statutory development
authority.
   Farm or Field Tile. A pipe installed in an agricultural area to allow
subsurface drainage of farmland for the purpose of agricultural production.
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   Filter Strip. Usually a long, relatively narrow area (usually, twenty (20)
to seventy-five (75) feet wide) of undisturbed or planted vegetation used near
disturbed or impervious surfaces to filter stormwater pollutants for the
protection of watercourses, reservoirs, or adjacent properties.
   Final Stabilization. The establishment of permanent vegetative cover or the
application of a permanent non-erosive material to areas where all land
disturbing activities have been completed and no additional land disturbing
activities are planned under the current permit.
   Floatable. Any solid waste that will float on the surface of the water.
   Flood (or Flood Waters). A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual
and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). A map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency depicts the FEMA designated ftoodways within a
community. This map also includes delineation of the one hundred (100) year and
five hundred (500) year floodplain boundaries and the location of the flood
insurance study cross-sections.
   Flood Crest. The maximum stage or elevation reached or expected to be
reached by the waters of a specific flood at a given time.
   Flood Duration. The length of time a stream is above flood stage or
overflowing its banks.
   Flood Easement. Easement granted to identify areas inundated by the one
hundred (100) year flood and prohibit or severely restrict development
activities.
   Flood Elevation. The elevation at all locations delineating the maximum
level of high waters for a flood of given return period.
   Flood Fighting. Actions taken immediately before or during a flood to
protect human life and to reduce flood damages such as evacuation, emergency
sandbagging and diking.
   Flood Forecasting. The process of predicting the occurrence, magnitude and
duration of an imminent flood through meteorological and hydrological
observations and analysis.
   Flood Frequency. A statistical expression of the average time period between
floods equaling or exceeding a given magnitude. For example, a one hundred
(100) year flood has a magnitude expected to be equaled or exceeded on the
average of once every hundred years; such a flood has a one-percent (1%) chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Often used interchangeably with
"recurrence    Flood Hazard Area. Any floodplain, floodway, floodway fringe, or
any combination thereof which is subject to inundation by the regulatory flood;
or any flood plain as delineated by Zone X on a flood hazard boundary map.
   Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts special flood hazard areas as a Zone A within a
community. There are no study text, base flood elevations, or floodways
associated with this map.
   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts special flood hazard areas within a community.
This map also includes the one hundred (100) year or base flood elevation at
various locations along the watercourses. More recent versions of the FIMR may
also show the FEMA designated floodway boundaries and the location of the flood
insurance study cross-sections.
   Flood Insurance Study (FIS). A study prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management agency to assist a community participating in the National Flood
Insurance Program in its application of the program regulations. The study
consists of a text which contains community background information with respect
to flooding, a floodway data table, summary of flood discharges, flood
profiles, a flood insurance rate map, and a flood boundary and floodway map.
   Flood Profile. A graph showing the relationship of water surface elevation
to a specific location, the latter generally expressed as distance above the
mouth of a stream of water flowing in a channel. It is generally drawn to show
surface elevation for the crest or a specific magnitude of flooding, but may be
prepared for conditions at any given time or stage.
   Flood Protection Grade (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory or one hundred
(100) year flood plus two (2) feet of freeboard if the flooding source is a
lake, pond, stream, or an open channel/ditch (or one (1) foot of freeboard if
the flooding source is an overflow path/ponding area provided that the
elevation of the overflow path/ponding area is calculated based on the
assumption of fully plugged storm pipe system).
   Flood Resistant Construction (Flood Proofing). Additions, changes or
adjustments to structures or property that are designed to reduce or eliminate
the potential for flood damage.
   Flood Storage Areas. Depressions, basins, or other areas that normally stand
empty or partially empty, but fill with rainfall runoff during storms to hold
the runoff and reduce downstream flow rates. The volumes are often referred to
in units or acre-feet.
   Floodplain Management. The operation of a program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
flood control projects, floodplain land use regulations, flood proofing of
buildings, and emergency preparedness plans.
   Floodplain Regulations. General term applied to the full range of codes,
ordinances and other regulations relating to the use of land and construction
within floodplain limits. The term encompasses zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building and housing codes, encroachment laws and open area
(space) regulations.
   Floodplain. The channel proper and the areas adjoining the channel which
have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory or one hundred (100)
year flood. Any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated
by water from any natural source. The floodplain includes both the floodway and
the floodway fringe districts.
   Floodway Fringe. That portion of the flood plain lying outside the floodway,
which is inundated by the regulatory flood.
   Floodway. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   Fluvial Erosion Hazard (FEH) Corridor. Fluvial (riverine) erosion hazard
corridors represent the areas along the streams (including the channel and
immediate overbanks areas) that are believed to be subject to stream movement
or streambank erosion. These corridors have been delineated for most actively
migrating and relatively stationary streams in Indiana through an Indiana
Silver Jackets initiative, with data for Town of Schererville currently
contained on the Town of Schererville GIS website, more detailed mapping than
that used as part of the Indiana Silver Jackets erosion hazard mapping program
may be provided by the applicant if it is based on detailed field assessment
acceptable to the Town of Schererville.
   Footing Drain. A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a basement wall
foundation to relieve water pressure caused by high groundwater elevation.
   Forebay (or Sediment Forebay). A small pond placed in front of a larger
retention/detention structure such as a wet pond, dry pond, or wetland to
intercept and concentrate a majority of sediment that is coming into the system
before it reaches the larger structure.
   Freeboard. An increment of height added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown local
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
   French Drain. A drainage trench backfilled with a coarse, water-transmitting
material; may contain a perforated pipe.
   Gablon. An erosion control structure consisting of a wire cage or cages
filled with rocks.
   Garbage. All putrescible animal solid, vegetable solid, and semisolid wastes
resulllng from the processing, handling, preparation, cooking, serving, or
consumption of food or food materials.
   Geographical Information System. A computer system capable of assembling,
storing, manipulation, and displaying geographically referenced information.
This technology can be used for resource management and development planning.
   Geotextile Fabric. A woven or non-woven, water-permeable synthetic material
used to trap sediment particles, prevent the clogging of aggregates with fine
grained soil particles, or as a separator under road aggregate.
   Geotextile Liner. A synthetic, impermeable fabric used to seal impoundments
against leaks.
   Global Positioning System. A system that provides specially coded satellite
signals that is processed by a receiver, which determines position, velocity,
and time. The system is funded and controlled by the U.S. Department of
Defense.
   Grade.
      1.   The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit, etc., or
natural ground surface usually
expressed in terms of the percentage the vertical rise (or fall) bears to the
corresponding horizontal distance.
      2.   The finished surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment, or
bottom of excavation; any surface prepared to a design elevation for the
support of construction, such as paving or the laying of a conduit.
      3.   To finish the surface of a canal bed, roadbed, top of embankment, or
bottom of excavation, or other land area to a smooth, even condition.
   Grading. The cutting and filling of the land surface to a desired slope or
elevation.
   Grass. A member of the botanical family Graminae, characterized by blade-
like leaves that originate as a sheath wrapped around the stem.
   Grassed Swale. A type of vegetative practice used to filter stormwater
runoff via a vegetated, shallow channel conveyance.
   Grassed Waterway. A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion resistant grasses and used to conduct surface
water from an area.
   Ground Cover (Horticulture). Low-growing, spreading plants useful for low-
maintenance landscape areas.
   Groundwater Recharge. The infiltration of water into the earth. It may
increase the total amount of water stored underground or only replenish
supplies depleted through pumping or natural discharge.
   Groundwater. Accumulation of underground water, natural or artificial. The
term does not include
   Habitat. The environment in which the life needs of a plant or animal are
supplied.
   Hard Surface. See "impervious surface."
   High Water. Maximum designed permitted, or regulated water level for an
impoundment.
   Household Hazardous Waste. Solid waste generated by households that is
ignitable, toxic, reactive,
corrosive, or otherwise poses a threat to human health or the environment.
   Hydraulic Grade Line (HGL). For channel flow, the HGL is equal to the water
surface whereas for pressure flow it is the plezometric surface.
   Hydraulics. A branch of science that deals with the practical application of
the mechanics of water
movement. A typical hydraulic study is undertaken to calculate water surface
elevations.
   Hydrodynamic Loads. Forces imposed on structures by floodwaters due to the
impact of moving water on the upstream side of the structure, drag along its
sides, and eddies or negative pressures on its downstream side.
   Hydrograph. For a given point on a stream, drainage basin, or a lake, a
graph showing either the discharge, stage (depth), velocity, or volume of water
with respect to time.
   Hydrologic Unit Code. A numeric United States Geologic Survey code that
corresponds to a watershed area. Each area also has a text description
associated with the numeric code.
   Hydrology. The science of the behavior of water in the atmosphere, on the
surface of the earth, and
underground. A typical hydrologic study is undertaken to compute flow rates
associated with specified flood events.
   Hydrometeorologic. Water-related meteorological data such as rainfall or
runoff.
   Hydrostatic Loads. Those loads or pressures resulting from the static mass
of water at any point of flood water contact with a structure. They are equal
in all direction and always act perpendicular to the surface on which they are
applied. Hydrostatic loads can act vertically on structural members such as
floors, decks and roofs, and can act laterally on upright structural members
such as walls, piers, and foundations.
   IDNR. Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
   Illicit Discharge. Any discharge to a conveyance that is not composed of
stormwater except naturally occurring floatables, such as leaves or tree limbs.
   Impact Areas. Areas defined or mapped that are unlikely to be easily drained
because of one or more factors including but not limited to any of the
following: soil type, topography, land where there is not adequate outlet, a
floodway or floodplain, land within seventy-five (75) feet of each bank of any
regulated drain or within seventy-five (75) feet from the centerline of any
regulated tile ditch.
   Impaired Waters. Waters that do not or are not expected to meet applicable
water quality standards,
as included on IDEM's CWA Section 303(d) List of Impaired Waters.
   Impervious Surface. Surfaces, such as pavement and rooftops, which prevent
the infiltration of stormwater into the soil.
   Individual Building Lot. A single parcel of land within a multi-parcel
development.
   Individual Lot Operator. A contractor or subcontractor working on an
individual lot.
   Individual Lot Owner. A person who has financial control of construction
activities for an individual lot.
   INDOT. Indiana Department of Transportation. Generally used here to refer to
specifications contained in the publication "INDOT Standard Specifications."
   Infiltration Practices. Any structural BMP designed to facilitate the
percolation of run-off through the soil to ground water. Examples include
infiltration basins or trenches, dry wells, and porous pavement.
   Infiltration. Passage or movement of water into the soil.
   Infiltration Swales. A depressed earthen area that is designed to promote
infiltration.
   Inlet. An opening into a storm drain system for the entrance of surface
stormwater runoff, more completely described as a storm drain inlet.
   Intermittent Stream. A stream which carries water a considerable portion of
the time, but which ceases to now occasionally or seasonally because bed
seepage and evapotranspiration exceed the available water supply.
   Invert. The inside botlom of a culvert or other conduit.
   Junction Chamber. A converging section of conduit, usually large enough for
a person to enter, used to facilitate the flow from one or more conduits into a
main conduit.
   Land Surveyor. A person licensed under the laws of the State of Indiana to
practice land surveying.
   Land-Disturbing Activity. Any man-made change of the land surface, including
removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying soil, excavating,
filling, transporting and grading.
   Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale. A plan, undertaken by a single
project site owner or a group of project site owners acting in concert, to
offer lots for sale or lease; where such land is contiguous, or is known,
designated, purchased or advertised as a common unit or by a common name, such
land shall be presumed as being offered for sale or lease as part of a larger
common plan. The term also includes phased or other construction activity by a
single entity for its own use.
   Lateral Storm Sewer. A drain that has inlets connected to it but has no
other storm drain connected.
   Life Cycle Cost. Cost based on the total cost incurred over the system life
including research, development, testing, production, construction, operation,
and maintenance. Costs are normally determined on present worth or equivalent
annual cost basis.
   Low Entry Elevation. The elevation in a structure where overbank flooding
can enter the structure.
   Lowest Adjacent Grade. The elevation of the lowest grade adjacent to a
structure, where the soil meets the foundation around the outside of the
structure (including structural members such as basement walkout, patios,
decks, perches, support posts or piers, and rim of the window well).
   Lowest Floor. Refers to the lowest of the following:
      1.   The top of the basement floor;
      2.   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the building;
      3.   The top of the first floor of buildings constructed on a slab or of
buildings elevated on pilings or constructed on a crawl space with permanent
openings; or
      4.   The top of the floor level of any enclosure below an elevated
building where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of
flood waters unless:
         a.   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters,
by providing a minimum of two (2) opening (in addition to doorways and windows)
having a total area of one (1) square foot for every two (2) square feet of
enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all such openings shall be no
higher than one (1) foot above grade.
         b.   Such enclosed space shall be usable only for the parking of
vehicles or building access.
   Low Impact Development. LID is a land planning and engineering design
approach with a goal of replicating the pre-development hydrologlc regime of
urban and developing watersheds. The primary goal of LID is to mimic a site's
predevelopment hydrology by reducing the impervious surface, infiltrating,
filtering, storing, evaporating, and detaining runoff close to its source.
   Major Drainage System. Drainage system carrying runoff from an area of one
or more square miles.
Management Measures. Those physical or engineering measures employed to modify
the way foods behave, (e.g., dams, dikes, levees. channel enlargements and
diversions).
   Manhole. Storm drain structure through which a person may enter to gain
access to an underground storm drain or enclosed structure.
   Manning Roughness Coefficient or Manning's "n" Value. A dimensionless
coefficient ("n") used in the Manning's equation to account for channel wall
frictional losses in steady uniform flow.
   Measurable Storm Event. A precipitation event that results in a total
measured precipitation accumulation equal to, or greater than, one-half (0.5)
inch of rainfall.
   Minimum Control Measure. Minimum measures required by the NPDES Phase II
program. The six (6) MCMs are: public education and outreach, public
participation and involvement, illicit discharge detection and elimination,
construction site runoff control, post-construction runoff control, and
pollution prevention and good housekeeping.
   Minor Drainage Systems. Drainage system carrying runoff from an area of less
than one (1) square mile.
   Minor Subdivision. See “subdivision, minor.”
   Mulch. A natural or artificial layer of plant residue or other materials
covering the land surface which conserves moisture, holds soil in place, aids
in establishing plant cover, and minimizes temperature fluctuations.
   Multi-Family. Any structure which contains three (3) or more dwelling units.
A dwelling unit is any structure, or part of a structure, which is constructed
to a house a family.
   Municipal Separate Storm Sewers. An MS4 meets all the following criteria:
(1) is a conveyance or system of conveyances owned by the state, county, city,
or other public entity; (2) discharges to waters of the U.S.; (3) is designed
or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; (4) is not a combined sewer;
and (5) is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
   Municipal, State, Federal, or Institutional Refueling Area. An operating
gasoline or diesel fueling area whose primary function is to provide fuel to
either municipal, state, federal, or institutional equipment or vehicles.
   Mutual Drain. A drain that: (1) is located on two (2) or more tracts of land
that are under different ownership; (2) was established by the mutual consent
of all the owners; and (3) was not established under or made subject to any
drainage statute.
   National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP is a federal program
enabling property owners to purchase flood insurance. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency administers the NFIP in communities throughout the Unites
States. The NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the
federal government which states that if a community will implement floodplain
management measures to reduce future flood risks to new construction and
substantially improved structures in flood hazard areas, the federal government
will make flood insurance available within the community as a financial
protection against flood losses that do occur.
   National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. The nationwide, federal elevation
datum used to reference topographic elevations to a known value.
   National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). A permit developed
by the U.S. EPA through the Clean Water Act. In Indiana, the permitting process
has been delegated to IDEM. This permit covers aspects of municipal stormwater
quality.
   Natural Drainage. The flow patterns of stormwater run-off over the land in
its pre-development state.
   Non-agricultural Land Use. Commercial use of land for the manufacturing and
wholesale or retail sale of goods or services, residential or institutional use
of land intended primarily to shelter people, highway use of land including
lanes, alleys, and streets, and other land uses not included in agricultural
land use.
   Non-point Source Pollution. Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse
origins on the watershed and does not result from discernable, confined, or
discrete conveyances.
   Normal Depth. Depth of flow in an open conduit during uniform flow for the
given conditions.
   North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVO 1988). The nationwide, federal
elevation datum used to reference topographic elevations to a known value.
   Nutrient(s).
      1.   A substance necessary for the growth and reproduction of organisms.
      2.   In water, those substances (chiefly nitrates and phosphates) that
promote growth of algae and bacteria.
   Off-site. Everything not located at or within a particular site.
   Off-site Land Areas. Those areas that by virtue of existing topography
naturally shed surface water onto or through the developing property.
   One Hundred (100) Year Frequency Flood. See "regulatory flood".
   On-Site. Located within the controlled or urbanized area where runoff
originates.
   Open Drain. A natural watercourse or constructed open channel that conveys
drainage water.
   Open Space. Any land area devoid of any disturbed or impervious surfaces
created by industrial,
commercial, residential, agricultural, or other manmade activities.
   Orifice. A device which controls the rate of flow from a detention basin.
   Outfall Scouring. The deterioration of a streambed or lakebed from an
outfall discharge to an extent that the excessive settling of solid material
results and suitable aquatic habitat is diminished.
   Outfall. The point, location, or structure where a pipe or open drain
discharges to a receiving body of water.
   Outlet. The point of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater,
or artificial drain.
   Overland Flow. Consists of sheet flow, shallow concentrated flow and channel
flow.
   Peak Discharge (or Peak Flow). The maximum instantaneous now from a given
storm condition at a specific location.
   Percolation. The movement of water through soil.
   Perennial Stream. A stream that maintains water in its channel throughout
the year.
   Permanent Stabilization. The establishment, at a uniform density of seventy
percent (70%) across the disturbed area, of vegetative cover or permanent non-
erosive material that will ensure the resistance of the soil to erosion,
sliding, or other movement.
   Permeability (Soil). The quality of a soil that enables water or air to move
through it. Usually expressed in inches per hour or inches per day.
   Pervious. Allowing movement of water.
   Pesticides. Chemical compounds used for the control of undesirable plants,
animals, or insects. The term includes insecticides, herbicides, algaecides,
rodenticides, nematicides, fungicides, and growth regulators.
   pH. A numerical measure of hydrogen ion activity, the neutral point being
7.0. All pH values below 7.0 are acid, and all above 7.0 are alkaline.
   Phasing of Construction. Sequential development of smaller portions of a
large project site, stabilizing each portion before beginning land disturbance
on subsequent portions, to minimize exposure of disturbed land to erosion.
   Phosphorus (available). Inorganic phosphorus that is readily available for
plant growth.
   Piping. The formation of "pipes" by underground erosion. Water in the soil
carries the fine soil particles away, and a series of eroded tubes or tunnels
develop. These openings will grow progressively larger and can cause a dam
failure.
   Planimetric Data. Horizontal measurements involving distances or dimensions
on a diagram, map, Plat of survey or topographic map. Normally in units of
feet.
   Plat of Survey. A scaled diagram showing boundaries of a tract of land/or
subdivision. This may constitute a legal description of the land and be used in
lieu of a written description.
   Point Source. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance including
but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, or container from which pollutants are or maybe discharged (P.L. 92-
500, Section 502[14]).
   Pollutant of Concern. Any pollutant that has been documented via analytical
data as a cause of impairment in any waterbody.
   Porosity. The volume of pore space in soil or rock.
   Porous Pavement. A type of infiltration practice to improve the quality and
reduce the quantity of stormwater run-off via the use of manmade, pervious
pavement which allows run-off to percolate through the pavement and into
underlying soils.
   Private Drain. A drain that: (1) is located on land owned by one (1) person
or by two (2) or more persons jointly; and (2) was not established under or
made subject to any drainage statute.
   Professional Engineer. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Indiana to practice professional engineering.
   Programmatic Indicator. Any data collected by an MS4 entity that is used to
indicate implementation of one (1) or more minimum control measures.
   Project Site Owner. The person required to submit a stormwater permit
application and required to comply with the terms of these technical standards,
including a developer or a person who has financial and operational control of
construction activities, and project plans and specifications, including the
ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications.
   Project site. The entire area on which construction activity is to be
performed.
   Probable Maximum Flood. The most severe flood that may be expected from a
combination of the most critical meteorological and hydrological conditions
that are reasonably possible in the drainage basin. It is used in designing
high-risk flood protection works and citing of structures and facilities that
shall be subject to almost no risk of flooding. The probable maximum flood is
usually much larger than the one hundred (100) year flood.
   Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). A municipal operation that breaks
down and removes
contaminants in the wastewater prior to discharging to a stream through primary
and/or secondary treatment systems.
   Qualified Professional. An individual who is trained and experienced in
stormwater treatment techniques and related fields as may be demonstrated by
state registration, professional certification, experience, or completion of
coursework that enable the individual to make sound, professional judgments
regarding stormwater control or treatment and monitoring, pollutant fate and
transport, and drainage planning.
   Radius of Curvature. Length of radius of a circle used to define a curve.
   Rain Garden. A vegetative practice used to alter impervious surfaces, such
as roofs, into pervious surfaces for absorption and treatment of rainfall.
   Rainfall Intensity. The rate at which rain is falling at any given instant,
usually expressed in inches per hour.
   Reach. Any length of river, channel or storm drain.
   Receiving Stream or Receiving Water. The body of water into which runoff or
effluent is discharged. The term does not include private drains, unnamed
conveyances, retention and detention basins, or constructed wetlands used as
treatment.
   Recharge. Replenishment of groundwater reservoirs by infiltration and
transmission from the outcrop of an aquifer or from permeable soils.
   Recurrence Interval. A statistical expression of the average time between
floods equaling or exceeding a given magnitude.
   Redevelopment. Alterations of a property that change a site or building in
such a way that there is disturbances of one (1) acre or more of land. The term
does not include such activities as exterior remodeling.
   Regional Pond. A detention/retention basin sized to detain/retain the runoff
from the entire watershed, onsite and off-site, tributary to the pond's outlet.
   Regulated Area. Area under the stormwater regulatory jurisdiction of the
Town of Schererville.
   Regulated Drain. A drain subject to the provisions of the Indiana Drainage
Code, I.C.36-9-27.
   Regulatory or 100-Year Flood. The discharge or elevation associated with the
one hundred (100) year flood as calculated by a method and procedure which is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The “regulatory flood" is also known
as the "base flood".
   Regulatory Floodway. See “floodway.”
   Release Rate. The amount of stormwater release from a stormwater control
facility per unit of time.
   Reservoir. A natural or artificially created pond, lake or other space used
for storage, regulation or control of water. May be either permanent or
temporary. The term is also used in the hydrologic modeling of storage
facilities.
   Retail Gasoline Outlet. An operating gasoline or diesel fueling facility
whose primary function is the resale of fuels, The term applies to facilities
that create five thousand (5,000) or more square feet of impervious surfaces,
or generate an average daily traffic count of one hundred (100) vehicles per
one thousand (1,000) square feet of land area.
   Retention Basin. A type of storage practice that has no positive outlet,
used to retain stormwater run-off for an indefinite amount of lime. Runoff from
this type of basin is removed only by infiltration through a porous bottom or
by evaporation.
   Retention. The storage of stormwater to prevent it from leaving the
development site. May be temporary or permanent.
   Retention Facility. A facility designed to completely retain a specified
amount of stormwater runoff without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration or pumping. The volumes are often referred to in units of acre-
feet.
   Return Period. The average interval of time within which a given rainfall
event will be equaled or exceeded once. A flood having a return period of one
hundred (100) years has a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any one (1) year.
   Revetment. Facing of stone or other material, either permanent or temporary,
placed along the edge of a stream to stabilize the bank and protect it from the
erosive action of the stream.
   Right-of-Way for a County Drain. The statutory right of way as defined by
Indiana Code for a regulated drain.
   Riparian Habitat. A land area adjacent to a waterbody that supports animal
and plant life associated with that waterbody.
   Riparian Zone. Of, on, or pertaining to the banks of a stream, river, or
pond.
   Riprap. Broken rock, cobble, or boulders placed on earth surfaces, such as
the face of a dam or the bank of a stream, for protection against the action of
water (waves). Revetment riprap is material graded such that: (1) no individual
piece weighs more than one hundred and twenty (120) pounds. and (2) ninety to
one hundred percent (90-100%) will pass through a twelve (12) inch sieve,
twenty to sixty percent (20-60%) through a six (6)-inch sieve, and not more
than ten percent (10%) through a twelve (12) inch sieve.
   River Restoration. Restoring the channel of a stream or ditch to its
perceived original, non-obstructed capacity by means of clearing and snagging,
obstruction removal, and inexpensive streambank protection measures. The term
"restoration", as noted, does not necessarily imply restoration or improvement
of water quality or habitat within the channel or its adjacent area.
   Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a stream (including creeks
and rivers).
   Runoff Coefficient. A decimal fraction relating the amount of rain which
appears as runoff and reaches the storm drain system to the total amount of
rain falling. A coefficient of one half (0.5) implies that fifty percent (50%)
of the rain falling on a given surface appears as stormwater runoff.
   Runoff. That portion of precipitation that flows from a drainage area on the
land surface, in open channels, or in stormwater conveyance systems.
   Sand.
      1.   Soil particles between five hundredths (0.05) and two (2.0) mm in
diameter.
      2.   A soil textural class inclusive of all soils that are at least
seventy percent (70%) sand and fifteen percent (15%) or less clay.
   Sanitary Backup. The condition where a sanitary sewer reaches capacity and
surcharges into the lowest area.
   Scour. The clearing and digging action of flowing water.
   Sediment. Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.
   Sediment Forebay. See "forebay".
   Sedimentation. The process that deposits soils, debris and other
unconsolidated materials either on the ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.
   Seepage. The passage of water or other fluid through a porous medium, such
as the passage of water through an earth embankment or masonry wall.
   Sensitive Water. A water body in need of priority protection or remediation
base on its: providing habitat for threatened or endangered species, usage as a
public water supply intake, relevant community value, usage for full body
contact recreation, exceptional use classification as found in 327 IAC 2-1-11
(b), outstanding state resource water classification as found in 327 IAC 2-1-2
(3) and 327 IAC 2-1.5-19(b).
   Settling Basin. An enlargement in the channel of a stream to permit the
settling of debris carried in suspension.
   Silt Fence. A fence constructed of wood or steel supports and either natural
(e.g. burlap) or synthetic fabric stretched across area of non-concentrated
flow during site development to trap and retain on-site sediment due to
rainfall runoff.
   Silt.
      1.   Soil fraction consisting of particles between two thousandths
(0.002) and five hundredths (0.05) mm in diameter.
      2.   A soil textural class indicating more than eighty percent (80%)
silt.
   Siphon. A closed conduit or portion of which lies above the hydraulic grade
line, resulting in a pressure less than atmospheric and requiring a vacuum
within the conduit to start flow. A siphon utilizes atmospheric pressure to
effect or increase the flow of water through a conduit. An inverted siphon is
used to carry stormwater flow under an obstruction such as a sanitary sewer.
   Site. The entire area included in the legal description of the land on which
land disturbing activity is to be performed.
   Silvicultural. The practice of controlling the establishment growth,
composition, health, and quality of forests to meet diverse needs and values.
      1.   Non-point activities include source silvicultural activities such as
nursery operations, site preparation, reforestation and subsequent cultural
treatment, thinning, prescribed burning, pest and fire control, harvesting
operations, surface drainage, or road construclion and maintenance from which
there is natural runoff. Some of these activities (such as stream crossing for
roads) may involve the placement of dredged or fill material which may require
a CWA Section 404 Permit and a 401 Water Quality Certification.
      2.   Point source activities include any discernible, confined and
discrete conveyance related to rock crushing, gravel washing, log sorting, or
log storage facilities which are operated in connection with silvicultural
activities and from which pollutants are discharged into waters of the United
States or the state.
   Slope. Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, measured is a
numerical ratio or percent. Expressed as a ratio, the first number is commonly
the horizontal distance (run) and the second is the vertical distance (rise)-
e.g., two to one (2:1). However, the preferred method for designation of slopes
is to clearly identify the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) components (length
(L) and width (W) components for horizontal angles). Also note that according
to international standards (metric), the slopes are presented as the vertical
or width component shown on the numerator-e.g., 1V:2H. Slope expressions in
technical standards follow the common presentation of slopes--e.g., two to one
(2:1) with the metric presentation shown in parenthesis-e.g., (1V:2H). Slopes
can also be expressed in “percent”. Slopes given in percent are always
expressed as (100'V/H)--e.g., a 2:1 (1V:2H) slope is a fifty percent (50%)
slope.
   Soil and Water Conservation District. A public organization created under
state law as a special-purpose district to develop and carry out a program of
soil, water, and related resource conservation, use, and development within its
boundaries. A subdivision of state government with a local governing body,
established under I.C. 14-32.
   Soil. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate
surface of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land
plants.
   Solid Waste. Any garbage, refuse, debris, or other discarded material.
   Special Flood Hazard Area. An area that is inundated during the one hundred
(100) year flood.
   Spill. The unexpected, unintended, abnormal, or unapproved dumping, leakage,
drainage, seepage, discharge, or other loss of petroleum, hazardous substances,
extremely hazardous substances, or objectionable substances. The term does not
include releases to impervious surfaces when the substance does not migrate off
the surface or penetrate the surface and enter the soil.
   Spillway. A waterway in or about a hydraulic structure for the escape of
excess water.
   Standard Project Flood. A term used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to
designate a flood that may be expected from the most severe combination of
meteorological and hydrological conditions that are considered reasonable
characteristics of the geographical area in which the drainage basin is
located, excluding extremely rare combinations. The peak flow for a standard
project flood is generally forty to sixty percent (40-60%) of the probable
maximum flood for the same location.
   Stilling Basin. A basin used to slow water down or dissipate its energy.
   Storage Practices. Any structural BMP intended to store or detain stormwater
and slowly release it to receiving waters or drainage systems. The term
includes detention and retention basins.
   Storm Drain Signing. Any marking procedure that identifies a storm sewer
inlet as draining directly to a receiving waterbody so as to avoid dumping
pollutants. The procedures can include painted or cast messages and adhesive
decals.
   Storm Duration. The length of time that water may be stored in any
stormwater control facility, computed from the time water first begins to be
stored.
   Storm Event. An estimate of the expected amount of precipitation within a
given period of time, For example, a ten (10) year frequency, twenty-four (24)
hour duration storm event is a storm that has a ten percent (10%) probability
of occurring in any one (1) year. Precipitation is measured over a twenty-four
(24) hour period.
   Storm Frequency. The time interval between major storms of predetermined
intensity and volumes of runoff--e.g., a five (5) year, ten (10) year or twenty
(20) year storm.
   Storm Sewer. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater, while
excluding sewage and industrial wastes. Also called a storm drain.
   Stormwater Drainage System. All means, natural or man-made, used for
conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to any of the
following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches,
storage facilities, swales, streams, culverts, streets and pumping stations.
   Stormwater Facility. All ditches, channels, conduits, levees, ponds, natural
and manmade impoundments, wetlands, tiles, swales, sewers and other nature/or
artificial means of draining surface and subsurface water from land.
   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. A plan developed to minimize the
impact of stormwater pollutants resulting from construction activities.
   Stormwater Quality Management Plan. A comprehensive written document that
addresses stormwater runoff quality.
   Stormwater Quality Measure. A practice, or a combination of practices, to
control or minimize pollutants associated with stormwater runoff.
   Stormwater Runoff. The water derived from rains falling within a tributary
basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   Stormwater. Water resulting from rain, melting or melted snow, hail, or
sleet.
   Stream Gauging. The quantitative determination of streamflow using gauges,
current meters, weirs, or other measuring instruments at selected locations.
   Stream Length. The length of a stream or ditch, expressed in miles, from the
confluence of the stream or ditch with the receiving stream to the upstream
extremity of the stream or ditch, as indicated by the solid or dashed, blue or
purple line depicting the stream or ditch on the most current edition of the
seven and one-half (7.5) minute topographic quadrangle map published by the
United States Geological Survey, measured along the meanders of the stream or
ditches depicted on the map.
   Stream. See “intermittent stream,” “perennial stream,” “receiving stream.”
   Streambanks. The usual boundaries (not the flood boundaries) of a stream
channel. Right and left banks are named facing downstream.
   Strip Development. A multi-lot project where building lots front on an
existing road.
   Structure. Refers to a structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes but is not limited to, a gas or
liquid storage tank, a manufactured home or a prefabricated building, and
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than one hundred and
eighty (180) days.
   Structural Engineer. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Indiana to engage in the designing or supervising of construction, enlargement
or alteration of structures or any part thereof.
   Subarea/Sub-basin. Portion of a watershed divided into homogenous drainage
units which can be modeled for purposes of determining runoff rates. The
subareas/sub-basins have distinct boundaries, as defined by the topography of
the area.
   Subdivision. Any land that is divided or proposed to be divided into lots,
whether contiguous or subject to zoning requirements, for the purpose of sale
or lease as part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
   Subdivision, Minor. The subdivision of a parent parcel into any combination
of not more than three (3) contiguous or non-contiguous new residential,
commercial, or industrial building sites. The parcel shall front upon an
existing street which is an improved right-of-way maintained by the county or
other governmental entity and not involve any new street.
   Subsoil. The B horizons of soils with distinct profiles. In soils with weak
profile development, the subsoil can be defined as the soil below which roots
do not normally grow.
   Subsurface Drain. A pervious backfield trench, usually containing stone and
perforated pipe, for intercepting groundwater or seepage.
   Subwatershed. A watershed subdivision of unspecified size that forms a
convenient natural unit. See also “subarea.”
   Sump Failure. A failure of the sump pump that results in inundation of crawl
space or basement.
   Sump Pump. A pump that discharges seepage from foundation footing drains.
   Surcharge. Backup of water in a sanitary or storm sewer system in excess of
the design capacity of the system.
   Surface Runoff. Precipitation that flows onto the surfaces of roofs,
streets, the ground, etc., and is not absorbed or retained by that surface but
collects and runs off.
   Suspended Solids. Solids either floating or suspended in water.
   Swale. An elongated depression in the land surface that is at least
seasonally wet, is usually heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing
water. Swales conduct stormwater into primary drainage channels and may provide
some groundwater recharge.
   Tallwater. The water surface elevation at the downstream side of a hydraulic
structure (i.e. culvert, bridge, weir, dam, etc.).
   Temporary Stabilization. The covering of soil to ensure its resistance to
erosion, sliding, or other
movement. The term includes vegetative cover, anchored mulch, or other non-
erosive material applied at a uniform density of seventy percent (70%) across
the disturbed area.
   Thalweg. The deepest point (or centerline) of a channel.
   Tile Drain. Pipe made of perforated plastic, burned clay, concrete, or
similar material, laid to a designed grade and depth, to collect and carry
excess water from the soil.
   Tile Drainage. Land drainage by means of a series of tile lines laid at a
specified depth, grade, and spacing.
   Time of Concentration (tc). The travel time of a particle of water from the
most hydraulically remote point in the contributing area to the point under
study. This can be considered the sum of an overland flow line and times of
travel in street gutters, storm sewers, drainage channels, and all other
drainage ways.
   Topographic Map. Graphical portrayal of the topographic features of a land
area, showing both the horizontal distances between the features and their
elevations above a given datum.
   Topography. The representation of a portion of the earth's surface showing
natural and man-made features of a give locality such as rivers, streams,
ditches, lakes, roads, buildings and most importantly, variations in ground
elevations for the terrain of the area.
   Topsoil.
      1.   The dark-colored surface layer, or a horizon, of a soil; when
present it ranges in depth from a fraction of an inch to two through three (2-
3) feet.
      2.   Equivalent to the plow layer of cultivated soils.
      3.   Commonly used to refer to the surface layer(s), enriched in organic
matter and having textural and structural characteristics favorable for plant
growth.
   Total Maximum Daily Load. Method used to establish allowable loadings for
specified pollutants in a surface water resource to meet established water
quality standards.
   Toxicity. The characteristic of being poisonous or harmful to plant or
animal life. The relative degree or severity of this characteristic.
   TP-40 Rainfall. Design storm rainfall depth data for various durations
published by the National Weather Service in their Technical Paper 40 dated
1961.
   Trained Individual. An individual who is trained and experienced in the
principles of stormwater quality, including erosion and sediment control as may
be demonstrated by state registration, professional certification (such as
CESSWI and/or CPESC certification), or other documented and applicable
experience or coursework as deemed sufficient by the Town of Schererville that
enable the individual to make judgments regarding stormwater central or
treatment and monitoring.
   Transition Section. Reaches of the stream of floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice-versa.
   Tributary. Based on the size of the contributing drainage area, a smaller
watercourse which flows into a larger watercourse.
   Turbidity.
      1.   Cloudiness of a liquid, caused by suspended solids.
      2.   A measure of the suspended solids in a liquid.
   Underdrain. A small diameter perforated pipe that allows the bottom of a
detention basin, channel or swale to drain.
   Unified Soil Classification System. A system of classifying soils that is
based on their identification
according to particle size, gradation, plasticity index. and liquid limit.
   Uniform Flow. A state of steady flow when the mean velocity and cross-
sectional area remain constant in all sections of a reach.
   Unit Hydrograph. A unit hydrograph is the hydrograph that results from one
(1) inch of precipitation excess generated uniformly over the watershed at a
uniform rate during a specified period of time.
   Urban Drain. A drain defined as "urban drain" in Indiana Drainage Code.
   Urbanization. The development, change or improvement of any parcel of land
consisting of one (1) or more lots for residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, recreational or public utility purposes.
   Vegetative Practices. Any non-structural or structural BMP that, with
optimal design and good soil
conditions, utilizes various forms of vegetation to enhance pollutant removal,
maintain and improve natural site hydrology, promote healthier habitats, and
increase aesthetic appeal. Examples include grass swales, filter strips, buffer
strips, constructed wetlands, and rain gardens.
   Vegetative Stabilization. Protection of erodible or sediment producing areas
with: permanent seeding (producing long-term vegetative cover), short-term
seeding (producing temporary vegetative cover), or sodding (producing areas
covered with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass).
   Water Course. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or man-made
drainage way in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow either
regularly or intermittently.
   Water Quality. A term used to describe the chemical, physical, and
biological characteristics of water, usually in respect to its suitability for
a particular purpose.
   Water Resources. The supply of groundwater and surface water in a given
area.
   Water Table.
      1.   The free surface of the groundwater.
      2.   That surface subject to atmospheric pressure under the ground,
generally rising and failing with the season or from other conditions such as
water withdrawal.
   Waterbody. Any accumulation of water, surface, or underground, natural or
artificial.
   Watercourse. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or man-made
drainage way in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow either
continuously or intermittently.
   Watershed Area. All land and water within the confines of a drainage divide.
See also “watershed.”
   Watershed. The region drained by or contributing water to a specific point
that could be along a stream, lake or other stormwater facilities, watersheds
are often broken down into subareas for the purpose of hydrologic modeling.
   Waterway. A naturally existing or manmade open conduit or channel utilized
for the conveyance of water.
   Weir. A channel-spanning structure for measuring or regulating the flow of
water.
   Wellhead Protection Area. Has the meaning set forth at 327 IAC 8-4.1-1(27).
   Wet-Bottom Detention Basin (Retention Basin). A basin designed to retain a
permanent pool of water after having provided its planned detention of runoff
during a storm event.
   Wetlands. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-342 Sec. 9-342   through Sec. 9-349 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Methodology for Determination of Runoff Rates. .
Sec. 9-350. General.
   Runoff rates shall be computed for the area of the parcel under development
plus the area of the watershed flowing into the parcel under development. The
rate of runoff which is generated as the result of a given rainfall intensity
may be calculated as follows. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-351 Development Sites Less Than or Equal to Five Acres in Size, With a
Contributing Drainage Area Less Than or Equal to Twenty-Five Acres and No
Depressional Storage.
   a.   The Rational Method may be used. A computer model, such as TR-55
(NRCS), TR-20 (NRCS), HEC-HMS (COE), and HEC-1 (COE), that can generate
hydrographs based on the NRCS TR-55 time of concentration and curve number
calculation methodologies may also be used along with a twenty-four (24) hour
duration NRCS Type 2 storm. Note that for the purpose of determining the post-
developed conditions curve numbers, due to significant disturbance to the upper
soil layers during the construction activities, the initially determined
hydrologic soil group for disturbed areas should be changed to the next less
infiltrating capacity category (i.e., A to B, B to C, and C to D).
   b.   LID Exception. If low impact development (LID) approach is pursued in
satisfying the requirements noted in Division VIII Post-Construction Stormwater
Quality Management Standards, the post-developed CN for the protected
undisturbed or restored disturbed areas meeting the requirements described in
Division VIII and BMP fact sheets may be determined based on pre-development
underlying soil layer.
   c.   1.   In the Rational Method, the peak rate of runoff, Q, in cubic feet
per second (cfs) is computed as:
   Q=CIA
      2.   Where: “C” runoff coefficient, representing the characteristics of
the drainage area and defined as the ratio of runoff to rainfall. I = average
intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a
duration equal to the time of concentration (t,) for a selected rainfall
frequency. A= tributary drainage area in acres. Values for the runoff
coefficient "C" are provided in Tables
9-351.1 and
9-351.2, which show values for different types of surfaces and local soil
characteristics. The composite "C" value used for a given drainage area with
various surface types shall be the weighted average value for the total area
calculated from a breakdown of individual areas having different surface types.
Table
9-351.3 provides runoff coefficients and inlet times for different land use
classifications.
   d.   Rainfall intensity shall be determined from the rainfall frequency data
shown in Table
9-352.1.
   e.   In general, the time of concentration (tc) methodology to be used for
all stormwater management projects within Town of Schererville shall be as
outlined in the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) - NRCS TR-55 Manual. In
urban or developed areas, the methodology to be used shall be the sum of the
inlet time and flow time in the stormwater facility from the most remote part
of the drainage area to the point under consideration. The flow time in the
storm sewers may be estimated by the distance in feet divided by velocity of
flow in feet per second. The velocity shall be determined by the Manning's
Equation (see Division IV). Inlet time is the combined time required for the
runoff to reach the inlet of the storm sewer. It includes overland flow time
and flow time through established surface drainage channels such as swales,
ditches, and sheet flow across such areas as lawns, fields, and other graded
surfaces.
 
TABLE 9-351.1
URBAN RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
Type of Surface Runoff Coefficient C
                (by Storm Recurrence Interval)
               <25 year 25 year 50 year 100 year
TABLE 9-351.1
URBAN RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
Type of Surface                  Runoff Coefficient C
                                 (by Storm Recurrence Interval)
                                <25 year 25 year 50 year 100 year
Hard surfaces
   Asphalt                    0.82     0.90    1.00    1.00
   Gravel                     0.85     0.94    1.00    1.00
   Concrete                   0.85     0.94    1.00    1.00
   Roof                       0.85     0.94    1.00    1.00
Lawns (sandy)
   Flat (0-2% slope)          0.07     0.08    0.09    0.12
   Rolling (2-7% slope)       0.12     0.13    0.16    0.20
   Steep (greater than 7% slop0.17     0.19    0.22    0.28
Lawns (clay)
   Flat (0-2% slope)          0.16     0.18    0.21    0.26
   Rolling (2-7% slope)       0.21     0.23    0.28    0.35
   Steep (greater than 7% slop0.30     0.33    0.40    0.50
Source: HERPICC Stormwater Drainage Manual, July 1995, and other sources.
TABLE 9-351.2
RURAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
Type of Surface Runoff Coefficient C
                (by Storm Recurrence Interval)
                <25 year 25 year 50 year 100 year
TABLE 9-351.2
RURAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
Type of Surface                  Runoff Coefficient C
                                 (by Storm Recurrence Interval)
                                 <25 year 25 year 50 year 100 year
Woodland (sandy)
   Flat (0-2% slope)          0.10     0.11    0.13    0.17
   Rolling (2-7% slope)       0.25     0.28    0.33    0.41
   Steep (greater than 7% slop0.30     0.33    0.40    0.50
Woodland (clay)
   Flat (0-2% slope)          0.30     0.33    0.40    0.50
   Rolling (2-7% slope)       0.35     0.39    0.46    0.58
   Steep (greater than 7% slop0.50     0.55    0.66    0.83
Pasture (sandy)
   Flat (0-2% slope)          0.10     0.11    0.13    0.17
   Rolling (2-7% slope)       0.16     0.16    0.21    0.26
   Steep (greater than 7% slop0.22     0.24    0.29    0.36
Pasture (clay)
   Flat (0-2% slope)          0.30     0.33    0.40    0.50
   Rolling (2-7% slope)       0.36     0.40    0.48    0.59
   Steep (greater than 7% slop0.42     0.46    0.55    0.69
ultivated (sandy)
   Flat (0-2% slope)          0.30     0.33    0.40    0.50
   Rolling (2-7% slope)       0.40     0.44    0.53    0.66
   Steep (greater than 7% slop0.52     0.57    0.69    0.86
Cultivated (clay)
   Flat (0-2% slope)          0.50     0.55    0.66    0.83
   Rolling (2-7% slope)       0.60     0.66    0.79    0.99
   Steep (greater than 7% slop0.72     0.79    0.95    1.00
Source: HERPICC Stormwater Drainage Manual, July 1995, and other sources.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3509.jpg]
 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-352 Development Sites Greater than Five Acres in Size or Contributing
Drainage Area Greater than Twenty-Five Acres or With Significant Depressional
Storage.
   a.   The runoff rate for these development sites and contributing drainage
areas shall be determined by a computer model that can generate hydrographs
based on the NRCS TR-55 time of concentration and curve number calculation
methodologies. Note that for the purpose of determining the post-developed
conditions curve numbers, due to significant disturbance to the upper soil
layers during the construction activities, the initially determined hydrologic
soil group for disturbed areas should be changed to the next less infiltrating
capacity category (i.e., A to B, B to C, and C to D).
   b.   LID Exception. If low impact development (LID) approach is pursued in
satisfying the requirements noted in Division VIII (Post-Construction
Stormwater Quality Management Standards), the post-developed CN for the
protected undisturbed or restored disturbed areas meeting the requirements
described in Division VIII and BMP fact sheets may be determined based on pre-
development underlying soil layer.
   c.   The twenty-four (24) hour NRCS Type 2 Rainfall Distribution shall be
utilized for runoff calculations. Twenty-four (24) hour rainfall depth for
various frequencies shall be taken from Table 9-352.2.
   d.   The NRCS Type 2 distribution ordinates are found in Table 9-352.3. This
table should be used only when the rainfall distribution is not a default
option in the computer program. Examples of computer models that can generate
such hydrographs include TR-55 (NRCS), TR-20 (NRCS), and HECHMS (COE). These
programs may be downloaded free of charge from the associated agencies' web
sites, other models may be acceptable on a case by case basis.
 
TABLE 9-352.1
RAINFALL INTENSITIES FOR VARIOUS RETURN PERIODS AND STORM DURATIONS
         Intensity (inches/hour)
Duration Return Period (years)
         2 5 10 25 50 100
TABLE 9-352.1
RAINFALL INTENSITIES FOR VARIOUS RETURN PERIODS AND STORM DURATIONS
         Intensity (inches/hour)
Duration Return Period (years)
         2 5 10 25 50 100
5 min             
10 min            
15 min            
30 min            
1 hr              
2 hr              
3 hr              
6 hr              
12 hr             
24 hr             
Source: NOAA, National Weather Service, Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of
the United States, NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 4, rev 2006, for Town
of Schererville, Indiana. (Values for intermediate durations can be
logarithmically interpolated.) (All rainfall intensities are based on
Annual Maximum series)
 
 
TABLE 9-352.2
RAINFALL DEPTHS FOR VARIOUS RETURN PERIODS
Duration Depth (inches)
         Return Period (years)
         2 5 10 25 50 100
24 hrs            
Source: NOAA, National Weather Service, “Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of
the United States,” NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 4, rev 2006, for Town
of Schererville, Indiana. (Rainfall depths for 2 through 100-year storm are
based on annual maximum series. 1-year rainfall depth is based on partial
duration series)
 
TABLE 9-352.3
NRCS TYPE II RAINFALL DISTRIBUTION ORDINATES
Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative
Storm Time Percent of Storm Time Percent of Storm Time Percent of Storm Time Percent of
(hr)       Storm      (hr)       Storm      (hr)       Storm      (hr)       Storm
           Depth                 Depth                 Depth                 Depth
TABLE 9-352.3
NRCS TYPE II RAINFALL DISTRIBUTION ORDINATES
Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative Cumulative
Storm Time Percent of Storm Time Percent of Storm Time Percent of Storm Time Percent of
(hr)       Storm      (hr)       Storm      (hr)       Storm      (hr)       Storm
           Depth                 Depth                 Depth                 Depth
0.00       0.0        6.25       8.5        12.25      70.7       18.25      92.6
0.25       0.2        6.50       9          12.50      73.5       18.50      93
0.50       0.5        6.75       9.5        12.75      75.8       18.75      93.4
0.75       0.8        7.00       10         13.00      77.6       19.00      93.8
1.00       1.1        7.25       10.5       13.25      79.1       19.25      94.2
1.25       1.4        7.50       11         13.50      80.4       19.50      94.6
1.50       1.7        7.75       11.5       13.75      81.5       19.75      95
1.75       2          8.00       12         14.00      82.5       20.00      95.3
2.00       2.3        8.25       12.6       14.25      83.4       20.25      95.6
2.25       2.6        8.50       13.3       14.50      84.2       20.50      95.9
2.50       2.9        8.75       14         14.75      84.9       20.75      96.2
2.75       3.2        9.00       14.7       15.00      86.6       21.00      96.5
3.00       3.5        9.25       15.5       15.25      86.3       21.25      96.8
3.25       3.8        9.50       16.3       15.50      86.9       21.50      97.1
3.50       4.1        9.75       17.2       15.75      87.5       21.75      97.4
3.75       4.4        10.00      18.1       16.00      88.1       22.00      97.7
4.00       4.8        10.25      19.1       16.25      88.7       22.25      98
4.25       5.2        10.50      20.3       16.50      89.3       22.50      98.3
4.50       5.6        10.75      21.8       16.75      89.8       22.75      98.6
4.75       6          11.00      23.6       17.00      90.3       23.00      98.9
5.00       6.4        11.25      25.7       17.25      90.8       23.25      99.2
5.25       6.8        11.50      28.3       17.50      91.3       23.50      99.5
5.50       7.2        11.75      38.7       17.75      91.8       23.75      99.8
5.75       7.6        12.00      66.3       18.00      92.2       24.00      100
6.00       8                                                             
Source: National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), TR-2- Computer Program for
Project Formulation Hydrology , page F9, May 1982.
Note: For use only when SCS Type II rainfall distribution is not a default option in
the computer program.
 
 
Sec. 9-353 Development Sites with Drainage Areas Greater Than or Equal to One
Square Mile.
   For the design of any major drainage system, as defined in Sec.
9-341, the discharge must be obtained from, or be accepted by, the IDNR. Other
portions of the site must use the discharge methodology in the applicable
section of this Article.   (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-354   Reserved for Future Use.
 
Division III. Methodology for Determination of Retention/Detention Storage
Volumes.
Sec. 9-355 General.
   The required volume of stormwater storage for all development sites shall be
computed using a computer model that can generate hydrographs based on the NRCS
TR-55 time of concentration and curve number calculation methodologies.
Examples of computer models that can generate such hydrographs include TR-55
(NRCS), TR-20 (NRCS), and HEC-HMS (COE). Other models may be acceptable on a
case by case basis.   (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-356 Post-Development Hydrologic Parameters.
   a.   Note that for the purpose of determining the post-developed conditions
curve numbers, due to significant disturbance to the upper soil layers during
the construction activities, the initially determined hydrologic soil group for
disturbed areas should be changed to the next less infiltrating capacity
category (i.e., A to B, B to C, and C to D).
   b.   LID Exception. If low impact development (LID) approach is pursued in
satisfying the requirements noted in Division VIII (Post-Construction
Stormwater Quality Management Standards), the post-developed CN for the
protected undisturbed or restored disturbed areas meeting the requirements
described in Division VIII and BMP fact sheets may be determined based on pre-
development underlying soil layer.   (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-357 Design Storm and Allowable Release Rates for Development Sites With
On-Site Detention Facilities.
   The twenty-four (24) hour NRCS Type 2 Rainfall Distribution shall be
utilized to determine the required storage volume. The allowable release rates
shall be determined based on methodologies provided in Division VI.   (Ord. No.
2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-358 Design Storm and Allowable Rates for Development Sites Within a
Designated Drainage Area Serviced by a Regional Detention Facility.
   a.   Development sites within designated drainage areas making use of
regional detention ponds are typically not required to provide on-site
detention.
   b.   Where a regional detention facility is servicing or is planned to
service a sub-watershed area, and that sub-watershed has been declared a
designated drainage area to raise the necessary infrastructure development fees
in lieu of providing on-site detention, the following method shall be used to
determine the size of storage space that would have been required onsite. This
estimated storage volume will be used to determine the fee based on the
development site's proportionate share of regional detention storage.
   c.   The twenty-four (24) hour NRCS Type 2 Rainfall Distribution shall be
utilized to determine the required storage volume. The stormwater model should
not include an on-site detention facility. The outflow hydrograph at the
downstream-most point in the site's stormwater system shall be compared to the
allowable release rate for the designated drainage area to determine the
required storage volume. The allowable release rate for a designated drainage
area shall be as defined by the resolution forming the designated drainage
area.
   d.   The storage volume shall be determined by calculating the volume of
outflow from the site that exceeds the given allowable release rate. For
example, if a fifty (50) acre site is located in a designated drainage area
that has an allowable post-development one hundred (100) year release rate of
two tenths (0.2) cfs/acre, the required storage volume for the site would be
equal to the volume of water represented by the cross-hatched area in Figure 9-
358. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Figure 9-358.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3752.jpg]
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-359 through Sec. 9-364 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Storm Sewer Design Standards and Specifications.
Sec. 9-365 General.
   All storm sewers, whether private or public, and whether constructed on
private or public property shall conform to the design standards and other
requirements contained herein. Proposed storm sewer systems must be sized and
designed to convey at least the ten (10) year frequency on-site stormwater
runoff, as well as the anticipated ten (10) year frequency tributary off-site
stormwater runoff based on the future developed condition (using Table 9-398).
An analysis of the emergency routing of stormwater runoff through the subject
development must be provided to confirm that the development will not obstruct
the free flow of floodwaters from the tributary offsite property in its current
condition and after development. In addition, the drainage system overflow
design must be completed in accordance with Sec. 9-378 to ensure the safe
routing of flood waters through the subject development with the tributary off-
site property in its current condition and after development. (Ord. No. 2009, §
1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-366 Design Storm Frequencies.
   a.   All storm sewers, inlets, catch basins, and street gutters shall
accommodate (subject to the "allowable spread" provisions discussed later in
this section), as a minimum, peak runoff from a ten (10) year return frequency
storm calculated based on methodology described in Division II. Additional
discharges to storm sewer systems allowed in Sec.
9-377 must be considered in all design calculations.
   b.   Culvert capacities for conveyance under interior local, collector, or
arterial streets without roadway overtopping shall be the runoff resulting from
the twenty-five (25) year, fifty (50) year, and one hundred (100) year
frequency storms, respectively, for off-site areas under existing condition and
on-site areas under post-developed conditions. Driveway culvert capacities
shall be capacities required for the street classification to which the
driveway connects. Greater culvert capacity shall be required to protect the
finished floor elevation of buildings from the post-developed one hundred (100)
year frequency storm when, in the opinion of the design engineer or the Town of
Schererville, the finished floor elevation is threatened. If the street or road
provides the only access to or from any portion of any commercial or
residential development, the crossing shall be designed for a minimum of one
hundred (100) year frequency storm.
   c.   For portions of the system considered minor drainage systems, the
allowable spread of water on collector streets for the design storm is limited
to maintaining two (2) clear ten (10) foot moving lanes of traffic. One lane is
to be maintained on local roads, while other access lanes (such as a
subdivision cul-de-sac) can have a water spread equal to one-half (0.5) of
their total width.
   d.   To ensure access to buildings and allow the use of the roadway by
emergency vehicles during storms larger than the design storm, an overflow
channel/swale between sag inlets and overflow paths or basin shall be provided
at sag inlets so that the maximum depth of water that might be ponded in the
street sag shall not exceed seven (7) inches measured from elevation of gutter.
All water shall be contained in the right-of-way for a one hundred (100) year
storm.
   e.   Facilities functioning as a major drainage system as defined in Sec.
9-341 must also meet IDNR design standards in addition to the Town of
Schererville standards. In case of discrepancy, the most restrictive
requirements shall apply.
   f.   New drain tiles and pipes, smaller than twenty-four (24) inches in
diameter, shall be placed in a twenty (20) foot easement (ten (10) feet from
centerline on each side) and shall be designated on the record plat as twenty
(20) foot drain easement. Pipes that are twenty-four (24) inches or larger in
diameter, shall be placed in a thirty (30) foot easement (fifteen (15) feet
from centerline on each side) and shall be designated on the record plat as
thirty (30) foot drain easement. Wider easements may be required by the Town of
Schererville or designee when the depth of pipe is greater than six (6) to ten
(10) feet, depending on the pipe size. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-367 Determination of Hydraulic Capacity for Storm Sewers Using Manning’s
Equation.
   a.   Determination of hydraulic capacity for storm sewers sized by the
Rational Method analysis must be done using Manning's Equation, where: V=
(1.486/n)(R2/3)(S1/2), then Q=(V)(A). Where:
      Q = capacity in cubic feet per second.
      V = means velocity of flow in feet per second.
      A = cross sectional area in square feet.
      R = hydraulic radius in feet.
      S = slope of the energy grade line in feet per foot.
      n = Manning’s “n” or roughness coefficient.
   b.   The hydraulic radius, R, is defined as the cross-sectional area of flow
divided by the wetted flow surface or wetted perimeter. Allowable "n" values
and full-flow maximum permissible velocities for storm sewer materials are
listed in Table 9-367.
TABLE 9-367
TYPICAL VALUES OF MANNING’S “n”
Material Manning’s �Maximum Velocities (feet/second)
TABLE 9-367
TYPICAL VALUES OF MANNING’S “n”
Material                   Manning’s �Maximum Velocities (feet/second)
Closed conduits
   Concrete             0.013         10
   Vitrified clay       0.013         10
   HDPE and polypropylen0.012         10
   PVC                  0.02          10
Circular CMP, annular corrugations, 2 2/3 x 1/2 inch
   Unpaved              0.024         7
   25% paved            0.021         7
   50% paved            0.018         7
   100% paved           0.013         7
   Concrete culverts    0.013         10
   HDPE or PVC          0.012         10
Open channels
   Concrete, trowel fini0.013         10
   Concrete, broom finis0.015         10
   Gunite               0.018         10
   Riprap placed        0.030         10
   Riprap dumped        0.035         10
   Gabion               0.028         10
   New earth1           0.025         4
   Existing earth2      0.030         4
   Dense growth of weeds0.040         4
   Dense weeds and brush0.040         4
   Swale with grass     0.035         4
Source of Manning “n” values: HERPICC Stormwater Drainage Manual, July 1995
1 New earth (uniform, sodded, clay soil)
2 Existing earth (fairly uniform, with some weeds)
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-368 Backwater Method for Pipe System Analysis.
   a.   For hydraulic analysis of existing or proposed storm drains which
possess submerged outfalls, a more sophisticated design/analysis methodology
than Manning's equation will be required. The backwater analysis method
provides a more accurate estimate of pipe flow by calculating individual head
losses in pipe systems that are surcharged and/or have submerged outlets. These
head losses are added to a known downstream water surface elevation to give a
design water surface elevation for a given flow at the desired upstream
location.
   b.   Tail water conditions assumed for this computation should be verified
by appropriate calculations.
   c.   Total head losses may be determined as follows:
   Total head loss = frictional loss+ manhole loss+ velocity head loss+
junction loss
   d.   Various computer modeling programs such as HYDRA, ILLUDRAIN, and
STORMCAD are available for analysis of storm drains under these conditions.
Computer models to be utilized, other than those listed, must be accepted by
the Town of Schererville or designee. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-369 Minimum Size for Storm Sewers.
   The minimum diameter of all storm sewers shall be twelve (12) inches. When
the minimum twelve (12) inch diameter pipe will not limit the rate of release
to the required amount, the rate of release for detention storage shall be
controlled by an orifice plate or other device, subject to acceptance of the
Town of Schererville. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-370 Pipe Cover, Grade, and Separation from Sanitary Sewers.
   Pipe grade shall be such that, in general, a minimum of two (2) feet of
cover is maintained over the top of the pipe. If the pipe is to be placed under
pavement, or within five (5) feet of the pavement, then the minimum pipe cover
shall be two and a half (2.5) feet from top of pavement to top of pipe. Uniform
slopes shall be maintained between inlets, manholes and inlets to manholes.
Final grade shall be set with full consideration of the capacity required,
sedimentation problems, and other design parameters. Minimum and maximum
allowable slopes shall be those capable of producing velocities of between two
and a half (2.5) and ten (10) feet per second, respectively, when the sewer is
flowing full. Maximum permissible velocities for various storm sewer materials
are listed in Table 9-367. A minimum of two (2) feet of vertical separation
between storm sewers and sanitary sewers shall be required. When this is not
possible, the sanitary sewer must be encased in concrete or ductile steel
within five (5) feet, each side, of the crossing centerline. (Ord. No. 2009, §
1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-371 Alignment.
   Storm sewers shall be straight between manholes and/or inlets. (Ord. No.
2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-372 Manholes/Inlets.
   a.   Manholes and/or inlets shall be installed to provide human access to
continuous underground storm sewers for the purpose of inspection and
maintenance. The casting access minimum inside diameter shall be no less than
twenty-two (22) inches or a rectangular opening of no less than twenty-two (22)
inches by twenty-two (22) inches. Steps shall be provided in structures deeper
than four (4) feet, with the first step at the depth of two (2) feet and the
following steps spaced every one (1) foot until the bottom is reached. When
grade adjustments of manholes and inlets are required in the field to meet
finish design or existing curb grade, adjustment rings with a maximum height of
twelve (12) inches may be used. Manholes shall be provided at the following
locations:
      1.   Where two (2) or more storm sewers converge.
      2.   Where pipe size or the pipe material changes.
      3.   Where a change in horizontal alignment occurs.
      4.   Where a change in pipe slope occurs.
      5.   At intervals in straight sections of sewer, not to exceed the
maximum allowed. The maximum distance between storm sewer manholes shall be as
shown in Table 9-372.1.
 
TABLE 9-372.1
MAXIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN MANHOLES
Size of Pipe  Maximum Distance
(inches)      (feet)
12 through 42 400
48 and larger 600
 
   b.   Manhole/inlet inside sizing shall be according to the Town of
Schererville standard construction details.
   c.   In addition to the above requirements, a minimum drop of one tenth
(0.1) foot through manholes and inlet structures should be provided. When
changing pipe size, match crowns of pipes, unless detailed modeling of
hydraulic grade line shows that another arrangement would be as effective. Pipe
slope should not be so steep that inlets surcharge (i.e. hydraulic grade line
should remain below rim elevation).
   d.   Plans should note that all inlets and castings must be pre-stamped with
a "clean water" message.
   e.   Manhole/inlet inside sizing shall be as shown in Table 9-372.2.
 
TABLE 9-372.2
MANHOLE/INLET INSIDE SIZING
Depth of Structure Minimum Diameter Minimum Square Opening
Less than 5 feet   36 inches        36 inches x 36 inches
5 feet or more     48 inches        48 inches x 48 inches
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-373 Inlet Sizing and Spacing.
   Inlets or drainage structures shall be utilized to collect surface water
through grated openings and convey it to storm sewers, channels, or culverts.
The inlet grate opening provided shall be adequate to pass the design ten
(10)year flow with fifty percent (50%) of the sag inlet areas clogged. Inlets
shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any
intersection nor for a distance greater than five hundred (500) feet. An
overflow channel from sag inlets to the overflow channel or basin shall be
provided at sag inlets. Inlet design and spacing may be done using the
hydraulic equations by manufacturers or orifice/weir equations. Use of the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers HEC-12 computer program is also an acceptable method.
Gutter spread on continuous grades may be determined using the Manning's
equation, or by using Table 9-367. Further guidance regarding gutter spread
calculation may be found in the latest edition of LTAP Stormwater Drainage
Manual, available from the Local Technical Assistance Program (LTAP). At the
time of printing of this document, contact information for LTAP was:
   Indiana LTAP
   Purdue University
   Toll-Free: (800) 428-7369 (Indiana only)
   Phone: (765) 494-2164
   Fax: (765) 496-1176
   Email: inltap@ecn.purdue.edu
   Website: www.purdue.edu/INLTAP/
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-374 Installation and Workmanship.
   a.   The point of commencement for laying a storm sewer pipe shall be the
lowest point in the proposed sewer line. All pipes shall be laid, without
break, upgrade from structure to structure. All storm sewer pipe outlets shall
have poured in place toewalls with anchor bolts. Bedding and backfill materials
around storm sewer pipes, sub-drains, and the associated structures shall be
per Tables 9-372.1 and 9-372.2. The specific location requirements for the use
of these materials are dependent on pipe location in relation to pavement
structures and on pipe material as detailed in Tables 9-372.1 and 9-372.2. The
specifications for the construction of storm sewers and sub-drains, including
backfill requirements, shall not be less stringent than those set forth in the
latest edition of the INDOT "Standard Specifications". Additionally, ductile
iron pipe shall be laid in accordance with American Water Works Association
(AWWA) C-600 and clay pipe shall be laid in accordance with either American
Society of Testing Materials (ASTM) C-12 or the appropriate American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
specifications.
   b.   Dips/sags on newly installed storm systems will not be allowed. Also,
infiltration from cracks, missing pieces, and joints would not be allowed.
Variations from these standards must be justified and receive written
acceptance from the Town of Schererville. To verify that all enclosed drains
and sewers are functioning properly, all storm sewers including sub-drains
shall be cleaned and televised with visual recordings (via closed circuit
television). Two visual recordings will be scheduled, thirty (30) days after
installation and at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the
maintenance bond. Reports summarizing the results of the noted visual
recordings shall be reviewed and accepted by the Town of Schererville before
maintenance sureties would be recommended to be released.
   c.   Based on the review of visual recordings, the Town of Schererville
shall determine the need for additional inspection of the storm sewers or sub-
drains to assess the condition of the system. Newly installed storm systems
covered under the maintenance bond shall meet the minimum requirements
established in the AASHTO Culvert and Storm Drain Inspection Guide constituting
a condition rating of 1 or "good" as defined in Section 4, Condition Rating
System and as established below in Table 9-374.
 
TABLE 9-374
PIPE INSPECTION CRITERIA
Material        (1) Good Rating Condition
                Barrel maintains round shape with less than 5% vertical
HDPE, PVC or PP deformation of original ID. No indication of wear, abrasion,
                splits or cracking.
Concrete        No measurable crack width greater than 0.01 in. No spalling,
                slabbing, delamination, scaling or abrasion.
                Barrel maintains round shape with less than 5% vertical
CMP             deformation of inside diameter. No dents, rust, abrasion or
                localized damage.
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-375 Materials.
   a.   Storm sewer manholes and inlets shall be constructed of cast in place
concrete or pre-cast reinforced concrete. Material and construction shall
conform to the latest edition of the Indiana Department of Transportation
(INDOT) "Standard Specifications", Sections 702 and 720.
   b.   Pipe and fittings used in storm sewer construction shall conform to the
latest edition of the INDOT "Standard Specifications", Section 907 and 908. In
addition, ductile iron pipe and fittings shall conform to AWWA C-151.
Polyethylene pipe used far private storm sewers shall conform to ASTM F2648 or
INDOT specifications. Other pipe and fittings not specified herein or in
Sections 907-908 of the latest edition of the INDOT "Standard Specifications"
may be used only when specifically authorized by the Town of Schererville. Pipe
joints shall be flexible and leak resistant as defined in AASHTO R82, with a
maximum leakage rate of 200 gal/in.-dia/mi/day. If the storm sewer pipe is to
be placed within a road right-of-way or in an area subject to loading, the pipe
and fittings shall be reinforced concrete (RCP) or corrugated polypropylene
(CPP). (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-376 Connections to Storm Sewer System.
   a.   To allow any connections to the storm sewer system, provisions for the
connections shall be shown in the drainage calculations for the system.
Specific language shall be provided in the protective covenants, on the record
plat, or with the parcel deed of record, noting the ability or inability of the
system to accommodate any permitted connections, for example, sump pumps and
footing drains.
      1.   Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge groundwater or other
stormwater shall be connected to a sub-surface drain provided by the developer.
Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow or other
sanitary sewage shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. A stormwater sump
pump shall only be used for the discharge of stormwater.
      2.   Footing drains and perimeter drains shall be connected to the sub-
surface drain provided by the developer.
      3.   A.   All roof downspouts, roof drains, or roof drainage piping of
residential developments shall discharge onto a grass surface that is no closer
than twenty-five (25) feet to the right-of-way of any street and shall not be
directly connected to the storm drainage system. Variation from this
requirement may be requested and granted by the Town of Schererville in special
circumstances. No downspouts or roof drains shall be connected to the public
sanitary sewers.
         B.   Commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings that have
their own private storm sewers may direct such drains directly to their
systems.
      4.   Garage and basement floor drains shall not be connected to the storm
sewers.
      5.   Swimming pool drains shall not be connected to the storm sewers
unless the water is dechlorinated, as defined in Sec.
9-341, prior to being connected to the storm sewer.
   b.   In addition, none of the above-mentioned drains shall be connected to
any road sub-drain/street underdrains, unless requested as a variance and
specifically authorized by the Town of Schererville. Sub-drains shall be
installed on all new developments by the developer. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-
24)
Sec. 9-378 Drainage System Overflow Design.
   a.   Overflow path/ponding areas throughout the development resulting from a
one hundred (100) year storm event, calculated based on all contributing
drainage areas, on-site and off-site, in their proposed or reasonably
anticipated land use and with storm pipe system assumed completely plugged,
shall be determined.
   b.   The centerline of this one hundred (100) year overflow path shall be
clearly shown as a distinctive line symbol on the plans, and a minimum width of
thirty (30) feet flow width along the centerline of the flow path (fifteen (15)
feet from centerline on each side) designated as permanent drainage easements.
A continuous flood route from the sag inlets to the final outfall shall be
shown and the minimum thirty (30) feet along the centerline contained within an
easement or road right-of-way regardless of the one hundred (100) year storm
event ponding elevation. This overflow path/easement area shall be shown on the
plans as hatched area or another distinctive symbol. No fences or landscaping
should be constructed within the easement areas. These areas are easements that
are to be maintained by the property owners or be designated as common areas to
be maintained by the homeowners association.
   c.   The minimum adjacent grade of the portion of any residential,
commercial, or industrial building (the ground elevation next to the building
after construction is completed that sits adjacent to the emergency flood route
or may be subject to flooding by the emergency flood route) shall be a minimum
of one (1) foot above the estimated one hundred (100) year elevation of the
emergency flood route assuming that all stormwater pipes are fully clogged. The
required minimum adjacent grade of buildings adjacent to an overflow path is
provided in Table 9-378 or as alternatively calculated as discussed below.
TABLE 9-378
MINIMUM BUILDING ADJACENT GRADE WITH RESPECT TO OVERFLOW PATH INVERT
ELEVATIONS
              Minimum Building Adjacent Grade Minimum Building Adjacent Grade
Drainage Area Above Overflow Path Invert      Above Overflow Path Invert, if
(acres)       (feet)1                         Overflow Path is in the Street
                                              (feet)1
TABLE 9-378
MINIMUM BUILDING ADJACENT GRADE WITH RESPECT TO OVERFLOW PATH INVERT
ELEVATIONS
              Minimum Building Adjacent Grade Minimum Building Adjacent Grade
Drainage Area Above Overflow Path Invert      Above Overflow Path Invert, if
(acres)       (feet)1                         Overflow Path is in the Street
                                              (feet)1
Up to 5       2.50                            1.50
6-10          3.00                            1.50
11-15         3.25                            1.75
16-20         3.50                            1.75
21-30         4.00                            2.00
30-50         4.25                            2.00
Notes:
1 The overflow path invert refers to the elevation of the flow line of the
emergency flow route (typically in the form of a channel, swale, or gutter)
nearest to the upstream end of a building.
 
   d.   As an alternative to using default values in Table 9-378, the overflow
path/ponding may be modeled as successive series of natural ponds and open
channel segments. For simplification, occasional ponding along the overflow
path may be ignored. If explicitly modeled, ponds should be modeled similar to
that discussed for modeling depressional areas in Division VI. Channels should
be modeled according to modeling techniques discussed in Division V. The
calculations for determining the one hundred (100) year overflow path/ponding
elevations may be based on hand calculation methods utilizing normal depth
calculations and storage routing techniques or performed by computer models.
Examples of computer models that either individually or in combination with
other models can handle the required computations include TR-20 and HEC-HMS,
combined with HEC-RAS. Other models may be acceptable on a case by case basis.
   e.   Simply using the values in Table 9-378 is preferred over the much more
complicated detailed modeling of the overflow/ponding areas. However,
regardless of the methodology used, the Town of Schererville reserves the right
to require independent calculations to verify that the proposed building
minimum adjacent grade facing the flood route or the portion of building having
a potential to be subject to flooding by the flood route provide adequate
freeboard above the anticipated overflow path/ponding elevations.
   f.   The lowest adjacent grade (LAG) requirements for buildings adjacent to
other flooding sources are discussed in Division X. In case there are more than
one flooding sources applicable to a building site, the highest calculated LAG
for the building shall govern the placement of the building on that site.
   g.   In the case of existing upstream detention, an allowance equivalent to
the reduction in flow rate provided may be made for upstream detention only
when: (1) such detention and release rate have previously been accepted by the
Town of Schererville or other official charged with the approval authority at
the time of the acceptance, and (2) evidence of its construction and
maintenance can be shown.
   Figure 9-378.1
Street and Gutter Capacities (Continuos Grade)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3762.jpg]
 
Figure 9-378.2
Bedding and Backfill Standards for Storm Sewers
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3764.jpg]
 
Table 9-378.3
Bedding and Backfill Standards for Sub-drains under Swales
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3766.jpg]
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-377 Record Drawings.
   In addition to the paper copies of the Preliminary and Final Drainage Plans
submitted to the Plan Commission, record drawings shall be submitted with a
digital copy. The record drawings shall show design and actual locations and
elevations of all infrastructure improvements. Standards set out in Section
9-371 shall apply.
(Ord. No. 1708, 6-13-07)
Sec. 9-378 Submittal and Consideration of Plans.
   After review and advisory recommendation by the Plan Commission at a regular
public meeting, Preliminary and Final Drainage Plans and/or construction plans
shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Building at least twenty
(20) days prior to their regularly scheduled meeting. All Preliminary Plans,
Final Plans and/or construction plans in compliance with the standards of this
ordinance, as amended from time to time, shall be approved by the Department of
Planning and Building, after review and recommendation by the Plan Commission.
The Department of Planning and Building shall stamp such approval on a copy of
such plans and deliver the same to the applicant. The Department of Planning
and Building shall approve or disapprove any Preliminary Plans, Final Plans
and/or construction plans within sixty (60) days of submission unless the
applicant consents to a continuance or extension. All approvals and
disapprovals with written reasons shall be incorporated into the Meeting
Minutes of the Plan Commission.
(Ord. No. 1708, 6-13-07)
Sec. 9-379 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Open Channel Design Standards and Specifications.
Sec. 9-380 General.
   All channels, whether private or public, and whether constructed on private
or public land, shall conform to the design standards and other design
requirements contained herein. Unless specifically referenced in a particular
provision, the standards contained in this Article refer to open channels and
not swales. Proposed open channels must be sized and designed to convey at
least the ten (10) year frequency on-site stormwater runoff, as well as the
anticipated ten (10) year frequency tributary off-site stormwater runoff based
on the future developed condition (using Table 9-398). An analysis of the
emergency routing of stormwater runoff through the subject development must be
provided to confirm that the development will not obstruct the free flow of
floodwaters from the tributary off-site property in its current condition and
after development. In addition, the drainage system overflow design must be
completed in accordance with Sec.
9-378 to ensure the safe routing of flood waters through the subject
development with the tributary off-site property in its current condition and
after development. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-381 Design Storm Frequencies.
   a. All channels and swales shall accommodate, as a minimum, peak runoff from
a ten (10) year return frequency storm calculated based on methodology
described in Division II.
   b.   Channels with a carrying capacity of more than thirty (30) cfs at bank-
full stage shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff for a fifty (50) year
return frequency storm within the drainage easement.
   c.   Channel facilities functioning as a major drainage system, as defined
in Sec.
9-341, must also meet IDNR design standards in addition to the Town of
Schererville standards. In case of discrepancy, the most restrictive
requirements shall apply.
   d.   The ten (10) year storm design flow for residential rear and side lot
swales shall not exceed four (4) cfs. Unless designed as a post-construction
stormwater quality BMP, the maximum length of rear and side lot swales before
reaching any inlet shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet.
   e.   Regardless of minimum design frequencies stated above, the performance
of all parts of drainage system shall be checked for the one hundred (100) year
flow conditions to ensure that all buildings are properly located outside the
one hundred (100) year flood boundary and that flow paths are confined to
designated areas with sufficient easement.
   f.   A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from top of the bank on each side of
a new channel shall be designated on the recorded plat as a drainage easement.
No landscaping is allowed within any drainage easement, except for a minimum
twenty-five (25)-foot width of filter strip or suitable grass that shall be
installed along the top of bank. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-382 Determination of Channel Waterway Area Using Manning’s Equation.
   The waterway area for channels shall be determined using Manning’s Equation,
where:
   A = Q/V
      A = Waterway area of channel in square feet.
      Q = Discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs).
      V = Steady-state channel velocity, as defined by Manning's Equation (see
Division IV).
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-383 Backwater Method for Drainage System Analysis.
   The determination of one hundred (100) year water surface elevation along
channels and swales shall be based on accepted methodology and computer
programs designed for this purpose. Computer programs HEC-RAS, HEC-2, and ICPR
are preferred programs for conducting such backwater analysis. The use of other
computer models must be accepted in advance by the Town of Schererville. (Ord.
No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-384 Channel Cross-Section and Grade.
   a.   The required channel cross-section and grade are determined by the
design capacity the material in which the channel is to be constructed, and the
requirements for maintenance. A minimum depth may be required to provide
adequate outlets for subsurface drains, tributary ditches, or streams. The
channel grade shall be such that the velocity in the channel is high enough to
prevent siltation but low enough to prevent erosion. Velocities less than two
(2) feet per second for the design storm are not acceptable, as siltation will
take place and ultimately reduce the channel cross-section area. The maximum
permissible velocities in vegetated-lined channels are shown in Table 9-384. In
addition to existing runoff, the channel design should incorporate increased
runoff due to the proposed development.
   b.   Where depth of design flow is slightly below critical depth, channels
shall have freeboard adequate to cope with the effect of hydraulic jumps.
   c.   Along the streets and roads, the bottom of the ditch should be low
enough to install adequately sized driveway culverts without creating "speed
bumps". The driveway culvert inverts shall be designed to adequately consider
upstream and downstream culvert elevations. Use of open channels and swales
within the road right of way is only allowed in special circumstances when no
other viable option exists. The applicant must consult with the Town Engineer
prior to design.
   d.   Flow of a channel into a closed system is prohibited, unless runoff
rate and head loss computations demonstrate the closed conduit to be capable of
carrying the one hundred (100) year channel flow for developed conditions,
either entirely or in combination with a defined overflow channel, with no
reduction of velocity.
TABLE 9-384
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE VELOCITIES IN VEGETAL-LINED CHANNELS1
Cover Channel Slope Range (percent)3 Permissible Velocity2
TABLE 9-384
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE VELOCITIES IN VEGETAL-LINED CHANNELS1
                                        Permissible Velocity2
Cover              Channel Slope Range  Erosion Resistant Easily Eroded Soils
                   (percent)3           Soils (ft. per    (ft. per sec.)4
                                        sec.)4
                   0-5                  8                 6
Bermuda grass      5-10                 7                 5
                   Over 10              6                 4
Bahia              0-5                  7                 5
Buffalo grass      5-10                 6                 4
Kentucky bluegrass
Smooth Brome       Over 10              5                 3
Blue Grama
Grass mixture      0-53                 5                 4
Reed canary grass  5-10                 4                 3
Lespedeza sericea  0-54
Weeping lovegrass
Yellow bluestern                        3.4               2.5
Redtop             5-10
Alfalfa
Red fescue
Common
Lespedeza5         0-56                 3.5               2.5
Sudangrass5
1 From Soil Conservation Service, SCS-TP-61. "Handbook of Channel Design for
Soil and Water Conservation".
2 Use velocities exceeding 5 feet per second only where good channel ground
covers and proper maintenance can be obtained.
3 Do not use on slopes steeper than 10% except for vegetated side slopes in
combination with a stone, concrete, or highly resistant vegetative center
section.
4 Do not use on slopes steeper than 5% except for vegetated side slopes in
combination with a stone, concrete, or highly resistant vegetative center
section.
5 Annuals- use on mild slopes or as temporary protection until permanent
covers are established.
6 Use on slopes steeper than 5% is not recommended.
 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-385 Side Slopes.
      a.   Earthen channel side slopes shall be no steeper than three (3)
horizontal to one (1) vertical (3:1). Flatter slopes may be required to prevent
erosion and for ease of maintenance.
   b.   Where channels will be lined with riprap, concrete, or other acceptable
lining method, side slopes shall be no steeper than two (2) horizontal to one
(1) vertical (2:1) with adequate provisions made for weep holes.
   c.   Side slopes steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical (2:1)
may be used for lined channels provided that the side lining is designed and
constructed as a structural retaining wall with provisions for live and dead
load surcharge.
   d.   When the design discharge produces a depth of greater than three (3)
feet in the channel, appropriate safety precautions shall be added to the
design based on reasonably anticipated safety needs at the site. (Ord. No.
2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-386 Channel Stability.
   a.   Characteristics of a stable channel are:
      1.   It neither promotes sedimentation nor degrades the channel bottom
and sides.
      2.   The channel banks do not erode to the extent that the channel cross-
section is changed appreciably.
      3.   Excessive sediment bars do not develop.
      4.   Excessive erosion does not occur around culverts, bridges, outfalls
or elsewhere.
      5.   Gullies do not form or enlarge due to the entry of uncontrolled flow
to the channel.
   b.   Channel stability shall be determined for an aged condition and the
velocity shall be based on the design flow or the bank full flow, whichever is
greater, using an “n" value for various channel linings as shown in Tables 9-
367 and 9-384. In no case is it necessary to check channel stability for
discharges greater than that from a one hundred (100) year frequency storm.
   c.   Channel stability shall be checked for conditions representing the
period immediately after construction. For this stability analysis, the
velocity shall be calculated for the expected flow from a ten (10) year
frequency storm on the watershed, or the bank full flow, whichever is smaller,
and the "n" value for the newly constructed channels in fine-grained soils and
sands may be determined in accordance with the "National Engineering Handbook
5, Supplement B, Soil Conservation Service" and shall not exceed twenty-five
thousandths (0.025). The allowable velocity in the newly constructed channel
may be increased by a maximum of twenty percent (20%) to reflect the effects of
vegetation to be established under the following conditions:
      1.   The soil and site in which the channel is to be constructed are
suitable for rapid establishment and support of erosion controlling vegetation.
      2.   Species of erosion controlling vegetation adapted to the area, and
proven methods of establishment are shown.
      3.   The channel design includes detailed plans for establishment of
vegetation on the channel side slopes. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-387 Drainage of Swales.
   All swales shall meet the following requirements and the specifications of
the Town of Schererville or designee:
   a.   Minimum swale flow line slopes are one percent (1%). Swales with
longitudinal slopes that are flatter than one percent (1%) shall consist of six
(6) inch thick rebar-reinforced concrete. The side slopes of swales shall not
be steeper than a four (4) (horizontal) to one (1) (vertical) slope.
   b.   Maximum swale flow line slopes are seven percent (7%).
   c.   Minimum swale top width shall be six (6) feet.
   d.   All flow shall be confined to the specific easements associated with
each rear and side lot swale that are part of the minor drainage system.
   e.   Unless designed to act as a stormwater quality BMP or lined with
concrete, vegetated swales shall have a double-walled eight (8) inch sub-
surface drain with a minimum cover of eighteen (18) inches to dry the swales.
Typical detail of a swale with sub-surface drain is shown on Table 372.2. Tile
lines may be outletted through a drop structure at the ends of the swale or
through a standard tile outlet. Before reaching an open channel, the perforated
drain shall be connected to ten (10) feet of SDR #40. Also, cleanout risers are
to be installed at the high point as well as end of run.
   f.   A minimum of twenty (20) feet along the swale (ten (10) feet from each
side of the centerline) must be designated on the recorded plat as drainage
easement.
   g.   Further guidance regarding this subject may be found in the latest
edition of the Indiana Drainage Handbook. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-388 Appurtenant Structures.
   a.   The design of channels will include provisions for operation and
maintenance and the proper functioning of all channels, laterals, travelways,
and structures associated with the project. Recessed inlets and structures
needed for entry of surface and subsurface flow into channels without
significant erosion or degradation shall be included in the design of channel
improvements. The design will also provide for necessary floodgates, water
level control devices, and any other appurtenance structure affecting the
functioning of the channels and the attainment of the purpose for which they
are built.
   b.   The effects of channel improvements on existing culverts, bridges,
buried cables, pipelines, and inlet structures for surface and subsurface
drainage on the channel being improved and laterals thereto shall be evaluated
to determine the need for modification or replacement. Culverts and bridges
which are modified or added as part of channel improvement projects shall meet
reasonable standards for the type of structure, and shall have a minimum
capacity equal to the design discharge or governmental agency design
requirements, whichever is greater. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-389   Disposal of Spoil.
   Spoil material resulting from clearing, grubbing, and channel excavation
shall be disposed of in a manner that will:
   a.   Minimize overbank wash.
   b.   Provide for the free flow of water between the channel and floodplain
boundary unless the valley routing and water surface profiles are based on
continuous dikes being installed.
   c.   Not hinder the development of travel ways for maintenance.
   d.   Leave the right-of-way in the best condition feasible, consistent with
the project purposes, for productive use by the owner. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-
12-24)
Sec. 9-390 Materials.
   a.   Materials acceptable for use as channel lining are:
      1.   Grass.
      2.   Revetment riprap.
      3.   Concrete.
      4.   Hand laid riprap.
      5.   Precast cement concrete riprap.
      6.   Gablons.
      7.   Straw, coconut mattings, or other accepted material (only until
grass is established).
   b.   Other lining materials must be accepted in writing by the Town of
Schererville. Materials shall
comply with the latest edition of the INDOT, "Standard Specifications". (Ord.
No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-391 Drainage System Overflow Design.
   See Sec.
9-378. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-392    through Sec. 9-394 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Stormwater Detention Design Standards for Peak Flow Control.
Sec. 9-395 General.
   Basins shall be constructed to retain and/or temporarily detain the
stormwater runoff that exceeds the maximum peak release rate authorized by the
chapter and these technical standards. The required volume of storage provided
in these basins, together with such storage as may be authorized in other on-
site facilities, shall be sufficient to control excess runoff from the ten (10)
year or one hundred (100) year storm as explained below in Sec. 9-382. Also,
basins shall be constructed to provide adequate capacity to allow for sediment
accumulation resulting from development and to permit the pond to function for
reasonable periods between cleanings. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-396 Suggested Calculation Sequences or Designing a Detention Pond for
Peak Flow Control.
   a.   In addition to the requirement for peak flow control through retention
and/or detention, the Technical Standards require the developer to address
channel protection and water quality control requirements discussed in Division
VIII. The proper way to accommodate the water quality, channel protection, and
peak flow rate control of a site is to first consider addressing the water
quality and channel protection volume requirements through conventional or LID
approaches (as described in Division VIII) and then determine the size and
dimensions of the required retention or detention storage for peak flow rate
control.
   b.   Division VIII provides several BMPs and options to address the channel
protection volume and water quality requirements. However, in many cases,
providing some level of extended detention may become necessary to meet those
requirements. While such extended detention is best provided in a separate
facility, many developers choose to combine the needed extended detention
feature with the detention pond needed for peak runoff rate control of the site
into one facility.
   c.   A combined facility must accommodate the channel protection volume,
water quality volume, and design storm detention to meet allowable release rate
requirements while also meeting channel protection or water quality detention
time requirements.
   d.   These requirements can be challenging to meet, especially with
additional considerations needed for bypassing runoff from off-site areas, The
following are suggested calculation sequences for designing a detention pond
for peak flow control only, and for combining extended detention with peak flow
control. However, every site is different and depending on the site conditions
and the layout of the pond, there may be other ways to design the pond such
that all the pond's objectives are met.
      1.   Peak Flow Control Only.
         A.   Determine the main outlet's control elevation.
         B.   Route the on-site ten (10) year and one hundred (100) year inflow
hydrographs through the pond (by temporarily ignoring off-site flows) and size
the main outlet to limit peak outflows to the allowable release rates. If an
orifice will need to be used to limit the outflow, use the actual orifice size
needed to meet the release rate requirements, unless the calculated diameter is
less than six (6) inches, in which case the minimum six (6) inch orifice
diameter shall be used. The resulting maximum water surface elevation is the
top of peak flow control storage for on-site flows. If no off-site flows are
routed through the detention facility, then this will be the pond's one hundred
(100) year elevation and the emergency spillway invert elevation is also set at
this elevation.
         C.   Off-site flows that are bypassed (no detention) through the site
detention pond (rather than bypassed around the pond), should be routed through
a separate outlet (such as a drop inlet structure) with its control elevation
set at the on-site one hundred (100) year pond elevation determined in
Subdivision d.1.B.. The one hundred (100) year pond elevation is determined by
routing the on-site and off-site one hundred (100) year inflow hydrographs
through the pond. Ideally, a separate emergency spillway should be provided
with an invert elevation set at the combined (on-site and off-site) one hundred
(100) year ponding elevation. A less desirable option would be to route the
off-site flows through the emergency spillway with the invert elevation set at
the on-site one hundred (100) year ponding elevation as determined in
Subdivision d.1.B. However, since this would result in water flowing over the
emergency spillway more frequently, this option may require additional erosion
control measures based on the estimated frequency of use. Additional discussion
on managing off-site runoff is contained in Sec. 9-398c. of this chapter.
      2.   Combined Peak Flow Control and Extended Detention.
         A.   Calculate the extended detention storage volume as needed to
address the requirements noted in Division VIII. Also, note that there may be
no need to provide extended detention, depending on the approach used to
address water quality and channel protection volume requirements.
         B.   Determine the outlet control elevation. This will be the bottom
of the extended detention storage volume, and the permanent pool elevation if a
wet-bottom pond is used.
         C.   Design the pond to provide the extended detention storage volume
determined in Subdivision d.2.A., and assuming no outflow through the pond
outlet. The top of this storage volume will be the invert elevation of the main
outlet.
         D.   Route the on-site ten (10) year and one hundred (100) year inflow
hydrographs through the pond (with the initial elevation at normal pool, i.e.,
the bottom of extended detention space) and size the main outlet to limit peak
outflows to the allowable release rates. If an orifice will need to be used to
limit the outflow, use the actual orifice size needed to meet the release rate
requirements, unless the calculated diameter is less than six (6) inches, in
which case the minimum six (6) inch orifice diameter shall be used. The
resulting maximum water surface elevation is the top of peak flow control
storage for on-site flows. If no off-site flows are routed through the
detention facility, then this will be the pond's one hundred (100) year
elevation and the emergency spillway invert elevation is also set at this
elevation.
         E.   Off-site flows that are bypassed (no detention) through the site
detention pond (rather than bypassed around the pond), should be routed through
a separate outlet (such as a drop inlet structure) with its control elevation
set at the on-site one hundred (100) year pond elevation determined in
Subdivision d.2.B. The one hundred (100) year pond elevation is determined by
routing the on-site and off-site one hundred (100) year inflow hydrographs
through the pond. Ideally, a separate emergency spillway should be provided
with an invert elevation set at the combined (on-site and off-site) one hundred
(100) year ponding elevation. A less desirable option would be to route the
off-site flows through the emergency spillway with the invert elevation set at
the on-site one hundred (100) year ponding elevation as determined in
Subdivision d.2.B. However, since this would result in water flowing over the
emergency spillway more frequently, this option may require additional erosion
control measures based on the estimated frequency of use. Additional discussion
on managing off-site runoff is contained in Sec. 9-396c. of this chapter.
         F.   Determine the size and design the retention/extended detention
storage drain in a manner to meet the extended detention minimum and maximum
emptying lime requirements discussed in Division VIII, using both on-site and,
if applicable, off-site runoff. If an orifice is required to control the flow
of the extended detention drain, the minimum orifice size shall be six (6)
inches. However, depending on the proposed clog-free design and the proposed
maintenance schedule of the extended detention storage drain structures, a
smaller orifice than six (6) inches may be allowed on a case by case basis.
      G.   To make sure that the addition of the release through the drain will
not cause the on-site only allowable release rate to be exceeded, reroute the
on-site ten (10) year and one hundred (100) year inflow hydrographs through the
pond (with the initial elevation at normal pool, i.e., the bottom of extended
detention space), this time allowing water to also leave through the extended
detention storage drain as the pond fills up. If the total peak outflow
discharge exceeds the on-site only allowable release rate, the size of the main
outlet orifice may need to be reduced or the storage volume increased.
   e.   Note that in some instances such as relatively small development sites
less than ten (10) acres or sites with highly restrictive site-specific maximum
allowable release rates, when the required outlet orifice size and/or the
required size of the extended detention drain will be small, the calculated
drain time may extend beyond the maximum required forty-eight (48) hour
emptying time. Often times, the situation can be addressed through enlarging
the pond volume or reconfiguring the pond's shape. When the situation cannot be
resolved in a reasonable manner despite those attempts, the Town of
Schererville or designee may, on a case by case basis, allow deviation from the
required orifice size, maximum allowable release, or emptying time after
considering reasonable options and examining the potential impacts on
downstream or upstream areas. Economic factors shall not be considered for this
determination.
   f.   The following shall govern the design of any improvement with respect
to the retention/detention of stormwater runoff for peak flow control. (Ord.
No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-397 Acceptable Detention Facilities.
   The increased stormwater runoff resulting from a proposed development should
be retained (if possible) and detained on-site (if retention is not feasible
due to limited infiltration capacity) by the provisions of appropriate above-
or below-ground wet bottom or dry bottom detention facilities, parking lots, or
other acceptable techniques. Measures that retard the rate of overland flow and
the velocity in runoff channels shall also be used to partially control runoff
rates. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-398 Allowable Release Rates.
   a.   General Release Rates.
      1.   Control devices shall limit the discharge to a rate such that the
post-developed release rate from the site is no greater than one tenth (0.1)
cfs per acre of development for zero to ten (0-10) year return interval storms
and three tenths (0.3) cfs per acre of developed area for eleven to one hundred
(11-100) year return interval storms. The above fixed general release rates may
be set at a lower value by the Town of Schererville for geographical areas
determined as impact drainage area or for certain watersheds if more detailed
data becomes available as a result of comprehensive watershed studies conducted
and/or formally approved and adopted by the Town of Schererville. The applicant
shall confirm the applicable release rates with the Town of Schererville or
designee prior to initiating the design calculations to determine whether a
basin-specific release rate has been established for the watershed of their
interest or whether the site is located within a designated or an impact
drainage area.
      2.   For sites where the pre-developed area has more than one (1) outlet,
the release rate should be computed based on pre-developed discharge to each
outlet point. The computed release rate for each outlet point shall not be
exceeded at the respective outlet point even if the post developed conditions
would involve a different arrangement of outlet points.
   b.   Site-Specific Release Rates for Sites with Depressional Storage.
      1.   For sites where depressional storage exists. the general release
rates provided above may have to be further reduced. If depressional storage
exists at the site, site-specific release rates must be calculated according to
methodology described in Division II, accounting for the depressional storage
by modeling it as a pond whose outlet is a weir at an elevation that stormwater
can currently overflow the depressional storage area. Post developed release
rate for sites with depressional storage shall be the two (2) year pre-
developed peak runoff rate for the post-developed ten (10) year storm and ten
(10) year pre-developed peak runoff rate for the post-developed one hundred
(100) year storm. In no case shall the calculated site-specific release rates
be larger than general release rates provided above.
      2.   Note that by definition, the depressional storage does not have a
direct gravity outlet but if in agricultural production, it is more than likely
drained by a tile and should be modeled as "empty" at the beginning of a storm.
The function of any existing depressional storage should be modeled using an
event hydrograph model to determine the volume of storage that exists and its
effect on the existing site release rate. To prepare such a model, certain
information must be obtained, including delineating the tributary drainage
area, the stage-storage relationship and discharge-rating curve, and
identifying the capacity and elevation of the outlet(s).
      3.   The tributary area should be delineated on the best available
topographic data. After determining the tributary area, a hydrologic analysis
of the watershed should be performed, including, but not limited to,
calculation of the appropriate composite runoff curve number and time of
concentration. Stage-storage data for the depressional area should be obtained
from the site topography. The outlet should be clearly marked, and any
calculations performed to create a stage-discharge rating curve must be
included with the stormwater submittal.
      4.   Also note that for determining the post-developed peak runoff rates,
the depressional storage must be assumed to be filled unless the Town of
Schererville can be assured, through dedicated easement, that the noted storage
will be preserved in perpetuity.
   c.   Management of Off-Site Runoff.
      1.   Runoff from all upstream tributary areas (off-site land areas) may
be bypassed around the retention/detention facility without attenuation. Such
runoff may also be routed through the detention/retention facility, provided
that a separate outlet system or channel is incorporated for the safe passage
of such flows, i.e., not through the primary outlet of a detention facility.
      2.   Note that the efficiency of the retention/detention facility in
controlling the on-site runoff may be severely affected if the off-site area is
considerably larger than the on-site area. As a general guidance, on-line
detention may not be effective in controlling on-site runoff where the ratio of
offsite area to on-site area is larger than five to one (5:1). Additional
detention (above and beyond that required for on-site area) may be required by
the Town of Schererville when the ratio of off-site area to onsite area is
larger than five to one (5:1).
   d.   Downstream Restrictions.
      1.   In the event the downstream receiving channel or storm sewer system
is inadequate to accommodate the post-developed release rate provided above,
then the allowable release rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the
capacity of the receiving downstream channel or storm sewer system. Additional
detention, as determined by the Town of Schererville, shall be required to
store that portion of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers
or waterways. When such downstream restrictions are suspected, the Town of
Schererville may require additional analysis to determine the receiving
system's limiting downstream capacity.
      2.   If the proposed development makes up only a portion of the
undeveloped watershed upstream of the limiting restriction, the allowable
release rate for the development shall be in direct proportion to the ratio of
its drainage area to the drainage area of the entire watershed upstream of the
restriction.
      3.   As an alternative to reduction of release rates, the Town of
Schererville may require the applicant to pursue alleviating downstream
restrictions. The applicant would be responsible for obtaining all permits and
consents required and for incurring all expenses involved in such undertaking.
   e.   Documentation of Results. The results of the allowable release rate
determinations (if retaining the entire required peak flow rate volume is not
feasible) as well as the modeling simulation results must be summarized in a
table that shall be included in the stormwater drainage technical report and on
the drainage plan. The table must include, for each eventual site outlet, the
pre-developed acreage tributary to each eventual site outlet, the unit
discharge allowable release rate used, the resulting allowable release rate in
cfs for the post-developed ten (10) year and one hundred (100) year events,
pre-developed two (2) year flow rates in cfs as well as pre- and post-developed
flow rates for two (2), ten (10), and one hundred (100) year events. The
worksheet provided as Table 9-398 should be filled for each final site outlet.
   TABLE 9-398
            Pre-Development                   Post-Development
Site              Depress.                          Depres
Outlet Item D.A.  Storage? 2 yrs 10 yr 100 yr D.A.  s.       2 yrs 10 yr 100 yr
#           (ac)  (yes/no)                    (ac)  Storage?
                                                    (yes/no)
   TABLE 9-398
                     Pre-Development             Post-Development
Site                      Depress.                     Depres
Outlet Item          D.A. Storage? 2   10 yr 100 D.A.  s.       2 yrs 10 yr 100
#                    (ac) (yes/no) yrs       yr  (ac)  Storage?             yr
                                                       (yes/no)
       Default unit
       discharge
       allowable                                              0.1   0.3
       release rate
       (cfs/acre)
       Basin-
       specific unit
       discharge
       allowable                                                    
       release rate,
       if any (cfs/
       acre)
       Unit
       discharge
       allowable
       release rate
       based on D/                                                  
       S
1      restrictions,
       if any (cfs/
       acre)
       Adopted unit
       discharge
       allowable                                                    
       release rate
       (cfs/acre)
       Contributing
       area of
       development
       site (ac) and                                                
       allowable
       release rate
       (cfs)
       Total
       contributing
       DA (ac) and                               no                  
       modeling
       results (cfs)
 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-399   General Detention Basin Design Requirements.
   a.   The retention/detention facility shall be designed in such a manner
that a minimum of ninety (90%) of the maximum volume of water stored and
subsequently released at the design release rate (if not retaining the entire
peak flow rate volume) shall not result in a storage duration in excess of
forty-eight (48) hours from the start of the storm unless additional storms
occur within the period. In other words, the design shall ensure that a minimum
ninety (90%) of the original retention/detention capacity is restored within
forty- eight (48) hours from the start of the design one hundred (100) year
storm.
   b.   The one hundred (100) year elevation of stormwater retention/detention
facilities shall be separated by not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any
building or structure to be occupied. The lowest adjacent grade (including
walkout basement floor elevation) for all residential, commercial, or
industrial buildings shall be set a minimum of two (2) feet above the one
hundred (100) year pond elevation or two (2) feet above the emergency overflow
weir elevation, whichever is higher. In addition to the lowest adjacent grade
requirements, any basement floor must be at least a foot above the normal water
level of any wet- bottom pond or the local groundwater table, whichever is
higher, to avoid the overuse of sump pumps and frequent flooding of the
basement.
   c.   No detention facility or other water storage area, permanent or
temporary, shall be constructed under or within twenty (20) feet of any pole or
high voltage electric line. Likewise, poles or high voltage electric lines
shall not be placed within twenty (20) feet of any detention facility or other
water storage area.
   d.   Detention facilities shall be separated from parking lots and roadways
by an appropriately selected and designed method of safety barrier, such as
guard rails, bollards, or other physical barriers capable of deterring the
passage of a vehicle into the pond.
   e.   Slopes no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) for
safety, erosion control, stability, and ease of maintenance shall be permitted.
   f.   Safety screens having a maximum opening of six (6) inches shall be
provided for any pipe or opening end sections twelve (12) inch in diameter or
larger. Storm drain pipes outleting into the pond shall no be submerged.
   g.   Use of fences around all retention/detention ponds is encouraged to
assure safety. Unless specifically required by the Town of Schererville, the
decision to use fencing around retention/detention ponds are left to the owner
or the developer. Recommendations contained within this document do not relieve
the applicant and owner/developer from the responsibility of taking all
necessary steps to ensure public safety with regards to such facilities.
   (h)   Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate as simply as
possible and shall require little or no maintenance and/or attention for proper
operation. For maintenance purposes, the outlet from the pond (if any) shall be
a minimum of one half (0.5) foot above the normal water level of the receiving
water body. They shall limit discharges into existing or planned downstream
channels or conduits so as not to exceed the predetermined maximum authorized
peak flow rate. If an outlet control structure includes an orifice to restrict
the flow rate, such orifice shall be no less than six (6) inches in diameter.
   i.   1.   Emergency overflow facilities such as a weir or spillway shall be
provided for the release of exceptional storm runoff or in emergency conditions
should the normal discharge devices become totally or partially inoperative.
The overflow facility shall be of such design that its operation is automatic
and does not require manual attention.
      2.   Emergency overflow facilities shall be designed to convey, without
overtopping the detention facility banks, one and one-quarter (1.25) times the
peak inflow discharge resulting from the one hundred (100) year design storm
event runoff from the entire contributing watershed draining to the detention/
retention facility, assuming post-development condition on-site and existing
condition off-site. The length of the weir is to be determined using the weir
equation, with the overflow weir control elevation at the pond's one hundred
(100) year elevation (pond is assumed full to the overflow weir control
elevation), discharge equal to one and one-quarter (1.25) times the peak one
hundred (100) year inflow, and the maximum head being the difference between
the weir control elevation and the top of the bank.
      3.   The emergency overflow routing from the emergency overflow facility
to an adequate receiving system must be positive (by gravity) and shown on the
construction plans. It must be sized to accommodate the design flow of the
pond's emergency overflow weir. A minimum of thirty (30) feet width along the
centerline of this emergency overflow route or the flow width required to
accommodate the emergency spillway design flow, whichever is greater, shall be
designated as permanent drainage easement. This emergency overflow path/
easement area shall be shown on the plans as hatched area or another
distinctive symbol. No fences or landscaping can be constructed within the
easement areas. The lowest adjacent grade of all residential, commercial, or
industrial buildings along this emergency overflow route shall be set a minimum
of two (2) feet above the flood elevation along the route, calculated based on
the pond's emergency overflow weir design discharge.
   j.   Grass or other suitable vegetative cover shall be provided along the
banks of the retention/detention storage basin. Vegetative cover around
detention facilities should be maintained as appropriate.
   k.   Debris and trash removal and other necessary maintenance shall be
performed on a regular basis to assure continued operation in conformance to
design.
   l.   No residential lots or any part thereof shall be used for any part of a
detention basin assumed full to the one hundred (100) year water surface
elevation or the emergency overflow weir elevation, whichever is higher.
Detention basins, assumed full to the one hundred (100) year water surface
elevation or the emergency overflow weir elevation, whichever is higher, shall
be placed within a common area either platted or legally described and recorded
as a perpetual stormwater easement.
   m.   A minimum of twenty (20) feet horizontally from the top of bank of the
facility, or the one hundred (100) year pool if no defined top of bank is
present, shall be dedicated as permanent stormwater easement if the above-noted
boundary of the common area does not extend that far. Within this easement
area, no trees shall be planted within fifty (50) feet of any pipe outlet
entering the pond or the outlet for the pond.
    n.   In addition, an exclusive easement to assure access to the pond from
an adjacent public street/road right of way shall be required. No above-ground
utilities or other obstruction that may hinder access shall be allowed within
this exclusive access easement. Additional access easements may be required for
larger ponds. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-400 Additional Requirements for Wet-Bottom Facility Design.
   Where part of a detention facility will contain a permanent pool of water,
all the items required for detention storage shall apply. Also, a controlled
positive outlet will be required to maintain the design water level in the wet
bottom facility and provide required detention storage above the design water
level. However, the following additional conditions shall apply:
   a.   Facilities designed with permanent pools or containing permanent lakes
shall have a water area of at least one-half (0.5) acre with a minimum depth of
eight (8) feet over the majority of pond area. If fish are to be used to keep
the pond clean, a minimum depth of approximately ten (10) feet shall be
maintained over at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the pond area. The
remaining pond area shall have no extensive shallow areas, except as required
to install the safety ramp, safety ledge, and BMPs as required below.
Construction trash or debris shall not be placed within the permanent pool.
   b.   All wet detention/retention ponds must be constructed in as natural a
shape (footprint) as possible and have a vegetated safety ledge (approximately
six (6) inches below normal pool) and/or have native vegetation planted on the
pond banks to create a riparian buffer (minimum ten (10) feet wide). Native
vegetation can be installed as container grown plants or as seed at the time of
construction, if native vegetation is planted on the pond banks, signage must
be provided indicating that it is a natural "Do Not Mow" area. The vegetation
should be planted in a manner so as not to hide or disguise the ponds edge.
Maintenance of the vegetated barrier shall be the responsibility of the owner
or the homeowners' association, all pond slopes shall be three to one (3:1)
(horizontal to vertical) or flatter.
   c.   1.   For wet-bottom facilities without a security fence, a maintenance
ledge ten (10) feet in width is required and shall be installed approximately
twelve (12) inches above the permanent water level and a safety ledge ten (10)
feet in width is required and shall be installed approximately six (6) inches
below the permanent water level. If a non-vegetated safety ledge is installed,
the depth of the safety ledge shall be approximately eighteen (18) inches below
normal pool. The slope between the two ledges shall be stable and protected
from erosion with hard armoring or bio-engineered techniques.
      2.   For wet-bottom facilities with a security fence, a maintenance ledge
six (6) feet in width is required and shall be installed approximately twelve
(12) inches above the permanent water level and a safety ledge six (6) feet in
width is required and shall be installed approximately six (6) inches below the
permanent water level. If a non-vegetated safety ledge is installed, the depth
of the safety ledge shall be approximately eighteen (18) inches below normal
pool. The slope between the two ledges shall be stable and protected from
erosion with hard armoring or bio-engineered techniques.
      3.   The maintenance ledge may be waived if pond side slopes above normal
water are six to one (6:1) or flatter.
   d.   Prior to final acceptance of construction and release of bonds, danger
signs warning of deep water, possible flood conditions during storm periods, or
other dangers, shall be installed at an interval of four hundred (400) feet
around the perimeter of wet-bottom facilities without a vegetated safety ledge,
riparian buffer, or a security fence. Maintenance of the warning signs shall be
the responsibility of the owner or the homeowners' association.
   e.   If a retaining wall is used below the normal pool of wet detention
pond, the wall shall have either steps or a ladder incorporated into the
construction at the center of the wall span.
   f.   A safety ramp exit from the lake shall be required in all cases and
shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and exit slope of six horizontal
to one vertical (6:1). The safety ramp shall be constructed of suitable
material to prevent structural instability due to vehicles or wave action.
Adequate access to the safety ramp shall be provided by locating it adjacent to
public right-of-way or by providing a clear route recorded within an access
easement or a common area.
   g.   In addition to provisions specified in Sec. 9-398d. (if applicable),
parks, playgrounds, and athletic fields shall be separated from all stormwater
detention facilities by no less than one hundred (100) feet, measured from the
one hundred (100) year pool of the pond. Trails and sidewalks shall be
separated from all stormwater detention facilities by no less than twenty-five
(25) feet, measured from the one hundred (100) year pool of the pond.
   h.   Periodic maintenance is required in lakes to control weed and larval
growth. The facility shall also be designed to provide for the easy removal of
sediment that will accumulate during periods of reservoir operation. A means of
maintaining the designed water level of the lake during prolonged periods of
dry weather may also be required.
   i.   For maintenance purposes, the outlet of storm sewers entering the pond
shall be a minimum of one half (0.5) foot above the normal pool level.
   j.   1.   Methods to prevent pond stagnation, including but not limited to
surface or sub-surface aeration or de-stratification facilities that can, at
the minimum, achieve one complete pond volume turnover per day should be
considered. Figure below shows a typical diffuser aeration system that consists
of a quiet air compressor at the shore, aeration tubing, and one(1) or more
sets of diffuser head(s).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3778.jpg]
 
      2.    Irregularly shaped ponds should be treated as two (2) or three (3)
separate ponds. Likewise, larger ponds will also need multiple aeration units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3780.jpg]
      3.    Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of proposed
aeration facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans. Design
calculations should, at a minimum, indicate that the device and/or series of
devices are providing a minimum volume turnover of once per twenty-four (24)
hours over the majority of the pond volume (i.e. pump radius of influence
calculations, etc.). Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance of
aeration facilities by the property owner or the HOA shall be prepared similar
to that noted for post-construction BMPs noted in Division VIII of these
technical standards.
      4.   If the detention pond is also proposed to be used as a post-
construction stormwater BMP, alternative means of aeration (such as diffuser
aeration systems) shall be used that would not result in re-suspension of
sediment particles and would not prevent the efficient settling of sediment
particles.
   k.   If the facility is being located near an airport, a minimum horizontal
separation distance between the airport property and the pond will need to be
provided in accordance to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Advisory
Circular 150/5200-33, titled "Hazardous Wildlife Attractions On or Near
Airports" and dated 8/28/2007, or the latest update of the same. (Ord. No.
2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-401 Additional Requirements for Dry-Bottom Facility Design.
   In addition to general design requirements, retention/detention facilities
that will not contain a permanent pool of water shall comply with the following
requirements:
   a.   Provisions shall be incorporated into facilities for complete interior
drainage of dry bottom facilities, including the provisions of natural grades
to outlet structures (if any), longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter
drainage facility. Unless designed as a retention facility, a six (6) inch
underdrain with a minimum of one and a half (1.5) feet of cover shall be
provided within all dry-bottom ponds.
   b.   For residential developments, unless the facility is fully fenced in
and gated, the maximum planned depth of stormwater stored shall not exceed four
(4) feet.
   c.   In excavated retention/detention facilities, a minimum side slope of
three to one (3:1) shall be provided for stability. In the case of valley
storage, natural slopes may be considered to be stable. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-
12-24)
Sec. 9-402 Detention Facilities in Floodplains.
   No detention facilities are allowed within FEMA regulatory floodplains.
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12- 24)
Sec. 9-403 Joint Development of Control Systems.
   Stormwater control systems may be planned and constructed jointly by two or
more developers as long as compliance with this chapter is maintained. (Ord.
No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-404 Diffused Outlets.
   When the allowable runoff is released in an area that is susceptible to
flooding or erosion, the developer may be required to construct appropriate
storm drains through such area to avert increased flood hazard caused by the
concentration of allowable runoff at one point instead of the natural overland
distribution. The requirement of diffused outlet drains shall be at the
discretion of the Town of Schererville. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-405 IDNR Requirements.
   Any construction in the floodway of a stream with a drainage area of one
square mile or more must satisfy IDNR permit requirements. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1,
6-12-24)
Sec. 9-406 Allowance for Sedimentation.
   Retention/detention basins shall be designed with an additional ten percent
(10%) of available capacity to allow for sediment accumulation resulting from
development and to permit the pond to function for reasonable periods between
cleanings. Basins should be designed to collect sediment and debris in specific
locations, such as a fore bay, so that removal costs are kept to a minimum. For
wet-bottom ponds, the sediment allowance may be provided below the permanent
pool elevation. No construction trash or debris shall be allowed to be placed
within the permanent pool. If the pond is used as a sediment control measure
during active construction, the performance sureties will not be released until
sediment has been cleaned out of the pond and elevations and grades have been
re-established as noted in the accepted plans. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-407 Maintenance.
   The routine maintenance of stormwater detention facilities (i.e. trash
pickup, aeration, weed control, sediment removal, etc.) is the responsibility
of the homeowners’s association. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-408 Dry Bottom Basin Design Requirements.
   Detention basins which will not contain a permanent pool of water shall
comply with the following requirements:
   a.   Provisions shall be incorporated to facilitate complete interior
drainage of dry bottom basins through the installation of sub-surface drainage.
   b.   The detention basin shall, whenever possible, be designed to serve a
secondary or multipurpose function. Recreational facilities, aesthetic
qualities (open spaces) or other types of use shall be considered in planning
the detention facility.
(Ord. No. 1708, 6-13-07)
Sec. 9-409 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Construction Sites Stormwater Pollution Prevention Standards.
Sec. 9-410 General.
   The requirements contained in this chapter are intended lo prevent
stormwater pollution resulting from soil erosion and sedimentation or from
mishandling of solid and hazardous waste. Practices and measures included
herein should assure that no foreign substance, (e.g., sediment, construction
debris, chemicals) be transported from a site and allowed to enter any drainage
way, whether intentionally or accidentally, by machinery, wind, rain, runoff,
or other means. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-411 Pollutants of Concern During Construction.
   a.   The major pollutant of concern during construction is sediment. Natural
erosion processes are accelerated at a project site by the construction process
for a number of reasons, including the loss of surface vegetation and
compaction damage to the soil structure itself, resulting in reduced
infiltration and increased surface runoff. Clearing and grading operations also
expose subsoils which are often poorly suited to re-establish vegetation,
leading to longer-term erosion problems.
   b.   Problems associated with construction site erosion include transport of
pollutants attached to transported sediment; increased turbidity (reduced
light) in receiving waters; recreational use impairment. The deposited sediment
may pose direct toxicity to wildlife or smother existing spawning areas and
habitat. This siltation also reduces the capacity of waterways, resulting in
increased flood hazards to the public.
   c.   Other pollutants of concern during the construction process are
hazardous wastes or hydrocarbons associated with the construction equipment or
processes. Examples include concrete washout, paints, solvents, and
hydrocarbons from refueling operations. Poor control and handling of toxic
construction materials pose an acute (short-term) or chronic (long-term) risk
of death to aquatic life, wildlife, and the general public. (Ord. No. 2009, §
1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-412 Erosion and Sediment Control Requirements.
   a.   General and Implementation Requirements. The following general and
implementation requirements apply to all land-disturbing activities and shall
be considered in the preparation of a SWPPP within the corporate boundaries of
the Town of Schererville.
      1.   Trained individuals must be utilized for activities associated with
the development and design of the SWPPP, stormwater measure implementation, and
stormwater project management.
      2.   Minimize the potential for soil erosion by designing a development
that fits the topography end soils of the site. Unless needed to meet
requirements and goals of the development, steep slopes should be avoided, and
natural contours should be followed.
      3.   All activities on a site should be conducted in a logical sequence
and in accordance with the site's construction phasing plan so that the
smallest practical area of land will be exposed for the shortest practical
period of time during development.
      4.   The length and steepness of designed slopes should be minimized to
reduce erosion potential. Drainage channels and swales must be designed and
adequately protected so that their final gradients and resultant velocities
will not cause erosion in the receiving channel or at the outlet. Methods for
determining acceptable velocities are included in this Stormwater Technical
Standards Manual as well as in the IDEM Stormwater Quality Manual.
      5.   Sediment-laden water which otherwise would flow from the project
site shall be managed by appropriate erosion and sediment control measures to
minimize sedimentation to receiving waters and adjacent properties as discussed
in the IDEM Stormwater Quality Manual and other authoritative sources.
      6.   Public roadways and roadways not exclusive to construction traffic
shall be kept cleared of accumulated sediment that is a result of runoff or
tracking. The following minimum conditions are applicable:
         A.   Clearing of sediment must not include the utilization of
mechanical methods that will result in mobilization of dust off the project
site or flushing the area with water unless the flushed water is directed to an
appropriate sediment control measure.
         B.   Cleared sediment must be redistributed or disposed of in a manner
that is in accordance with all applicable statutes and regulations.
         C.   Sediment discharged or tracked onto roadways that are open to
traffic must be removed as directed by a regulatory authority or at a minimum,
removed by the end of the same day.
      7.   Phasing of construction activities must be used, when feasible, to
minimize the footprint of disturbed unstable areas.
      8.   Collected runoff leaving a project site must be either discharged
directly into a well-defined, stable receiving channel, or diffused and
released to adjacent property without causing an erosion or pollutant problem
to the adjacent property owner.
      9.   Natural features, including wetlands and sinkholes (karst features),
shall be protected from pollutants associated with stormwater runoff, through
appropriate stormwater management and/or treatment measures.
      10.   Soil compaction is to be minimized, especially in areas where
permanent vegetation will be re-established and/or areas that are designated to
infiltrate stormwater for the post-construction phase.
      11.   Topsoil must be preserved, unless infeasible.
      12.   Existing natural buffers that are adjacent to waters of the slate
must be preserved to promote infiltration and provide protection of the water
resource, unless infeasible. Activities performed by a county drainage board
under I.C. 36-9-27 are excluded.
         A.   Natural buffers must be preserved, including the entire buffer
bordering and/or surrounding the water resource. Existing buffers:
            i.   Fifty (50) feet or more in width must be preserved to a
minimum of fifty (50) feet.
            ii.   Less than fifty (50) feet in width must be preserved in their
entirety. May be enhanced with vegetation that is native and promotes
ecological improvement and sustainability.
         B.   Runoff directed to the natural buffer must be:
            i.   Treated with appropriate erosion and sediment control measures
prior to discharging to the buffer.
            ii.   Managed with appropriate runoff control measures to prevent
erosion from occurring within the buffer area.
         C.   Further information regarding buffer requirements is contained in
IOEM's "Implementation of Buffers" guidance document.
      13.   Minimize the generation of dust through dust suppression techniques
to prevent deposition into waters of the state and areas located beyond the
permitted boundaries of the site as discussed in the IDEM Stormwater Quality
Manual and other authoritative sources.
      14.   A stable construction site access measure must be provided at all
points of construction traffic ingress and egress to the project site. Where
the selected measure is not effective, an alternative measure or additional
controls must be utilized to minimize tracking. Alternative measures may
include, but are not limited to, wheel wash systems and rumble strips.
      15.   During the period of construction activities, all stormwater
management measures necessary to meet the requirements of this permit must be
maintained. Alternative measures must be selected and implemented, as
necessary.
      16.   Discharge water from de-watering of ground water from excavations,
trenches, foundations, etc. must not be discharged when:
         A.   Sediment-laden water is not first directed to an appropriate
sediment control measure or a series of control measures, as per IDEM
Stormwater Quality Manual and other authoritative sources, that minimizes the
discharge of the sediment.
         B.   A visible sheen and/or pollutants are present at a level that
requires additional treatment and/or an alternate permit.
      17.   Appropriate measures must be implemented to eliminate wastes or
unused building materials including, but not limited to garbage, debris,
cleaning wastes, wastewater, concrete washout, mortar/masonry products, soil
stabilizers, lime stabilization materials, and other substances from being
carried from a project site by runoff or wind. Wastes and unused building
materials must be managed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable
statutes and regulations.
      18.   Construction and domestic waste must be managed to prevent the
discharge of pollutants and windblown debris. Surplus plastic or hardened
concrete/cementitious materials are not required to be placed in trash
receptacles and are considered clean fill that may be reused, disposed of on-
site, or recycled in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations.
Management of waste materials may include, but are not limited to:
         A.   Waste containers (trash receptacles), when selected to manage
waste, must be managed to reduce the discharge of pollutants and blowing of
debris. Receptacles that are not appropriately managed will require
alternatives that include but are not limited to:
            i.   Cover (e.g., lid, tarp, plastic sheeting, temporary roof) to
minimize exposure of wastes to precipitation; or
            ii.   A similarly effective method designed to minimize the
discharge of pollutants.
         B.   Waste that is not disposed of in trash receptacles must be
protected from exposure to the weather and/or removed at the end of the day
from the site and disposed of properly.
      19.   Concrete and cementitious wash water areas, where cementitious
fluids are permissible, must be identified for the site and the locations
clearly posted. Wash water must be directed into leakproof containers or leak-
proof containment areas which are located and designed to divert runoff away
from the measure and sized to prevent the discharge and/or overflow of the
cementitious wash water. If not evaporated, wash water must be removed (pumped)
for appropriate off-site disposal.
      20.   Fertilizer applications associated with the stabilization plan for
the project must meet the following requirements:
         A.   Apply fertilizer at a rate and amount as determined by a soil
analysis or in accordance with the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual or similar
guidance documents.
         B.   Apply fertilizer at an appropriate time of year for the project
location, laking into consideration proximity to a waterbody, and preferably
timed to coincide with the period of maximum vegetative uptake and growth.
         C.   Avoid applying fertilizer immediately prior to precipitation
events that are anticipated to result in stormwater runoff from the application
area.
      21.   Proper storage and handling of materials, such as fuels or
hazardous wastes, and spill prevention and clean-up measures must be
implemented to minimize the potential for pollutants to contaminate surface or
ground water or degrade soil quality. To meet this requirement:
         A.   A spill prevention and response plan, meeting the requirements in
327 IAC 2-6.1, must be completed.
         B.   Proper project management and the utilization of appropriate
measures including, but not limited to, eliminating a source or the exposure of
materials must be completed.
         C.   Manage the following activities:
            i.   Fueling and maintenance of equipment.
            ii.   Washing of equipment and vehicles.
            iii.   Storage, handling, and disposal of construction materials,
products, and wastes.
            iv.   Application of pesticides, herbicides, insecticides, and
fertilizers.
            v.   Dispensing and utilization of diesel fuel, oil, hydraulic
fluids, other petroleum products, and other chemicals.
            vi.   Handling and disposal of hazardous wastes, including, but not
limited to paints, solvents, petroleum-based products, wood preservatives,
additives, curing compounds, and acids.
            vii.   Washing of applicators and containers used for paint, grout,
or other materials.
      22.   Personnel associated with the project must be informed of the terms
and conditions of this permit and the requirements within the SWPPP. The
permittee is required to document this process. Information must be provided
through written notification, contracts, or other means (i.e., pre-construction
meetings) that effectively communicates the provisions and requirements of the
permit and SWPPP. Personnel may include, but are not limited to:
         A.   General contractors, construction management firms, grading or
excavating contractors, and trade industry representatives (i.e. concrete
industry) associated with the overall project.
         B.   Contractors or individual lot operators that have primary
oversight on individual building lots.
         C.   Those responsible for the implementation of the SWPPP, and the
installation, repair, and maintenance of stormwater measures.
         D.   Those responsible for the application and storage of treatment
chemicals.
         E.   Those responsible for administering the self-monitoring program
(SMP).
      23.   A.   A notice must be posted near the main entrance of the project
site or at a publicly accessible location. For linear project sites, such as a
pipeline or highway, the notice must be placed in a publicly accessible
location near the project field office.
         B.   The notice must be maintained in a legible condition and include:
            i.   A copy of the completed IDEM NOI or a document, such as the
permit summary report and notice of sufficiency letter produced by IDEM's
online ePortal system, that at a minimum contains the information referenced in
Section 6(c)1 of the Town of Schererville Stormwater Management Ordinance.
            ii.   The NPDES permit number(s), upon receipt.
            iii.   The location of the construction plan/SWPPP if the project
site does not have an on-site location to store the plan.
      24.   The use of anionic polymers (cationic polymers are not authorized
for use) on the project site are authorized for sediment control provided their
use is in conformance with current State of Indiana standards and
specifications and the use is identified in the stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP). If use of a polymer is not in the SWPPP and is selected at a
later date, notification to IDEM and the Town of Schererville is required. An
email notification prior to the use of the polymer to the IDEM Stormwater
Program is acceptable. For projects regulated by a MS4 notification must follow
the local process for the use of polymers.
      25.   Restoration and/or clean-up may be required for those areas
impacted by sediment or other pollutant discharges. These activities will be
performed as directed by the inspecting authority and may require:
         A.   Development and submittal of a removal and restoration plan to
ensure the methodology chosen will not result in further degradation of the
resource.
         B.   Permission by a property owner when the restoration activity
requires access to a property owned by another entity or individual.
         C.   Additional permits prior to initiation of the work.
   b.   Stabilization Requirements. The following stabilization requirements
apply to all land-disturbing activities:
      1.   Un-vegetated areas that are left idle or scheduled to be left
inactive must be temporarily or permanently stabilized with measures
appropriate for the season to minimize erosion potential. To meet this
requirement, the following apply:
         A.   Stabilization must be initiated by the end of the seventh day the
area is left idle. The stabilization activity must be completed within fourteen
(14) days after initiation. Initiation of stabilization includes, but is not
limited to, the seeding and/or planting of the exposed area and applying mulch
or other temporary surface stabilization methods where appropriate. Areas that
are not accessible due to an unexpected and disruptive event that prevents
construction activities are not considered idle.
         B.   Areas that have been compacted may be excluded from the
stabilization requirement when the areas are intended to be impervious surfaces
associated with the final land use, provided runoff from the area is directed
to appropriate sediment control measures.
      2.   Final stabilization of a project site is achieved when:
         A.   All land-disturbing activities have been completed and a uniform
(evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with
a density of seventy percent (70%) has been established on all unpaved
disturbed areas, and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent
permanent stabilization measures have been employed. This requirement does not
apply to:
            i.   Landscaping that is part of the final project plan is
considered stable when the plan has been fully implemented and areas not being
vegetated are stable with a non-erosive material and/or product.
            ii.   Projects or specific stormwater measures that utilize native
vegetation and/or special vegetative plantings that are either required by a
water quality permit/authorization or part of the design and functionality of a
stormwater measure provided the activity does not pose a threat that will
result in off-site sedimentation.
            iii.   Projects on land used for agricultural purposes when:
               (a)   Stabilization is completed in accordance with the above
stabilization requirements (in Subdivision b.1.A. and B. above) as land-
disturbance progresses. Land that is returned to agricultural production must
be temporarily or permanently seeded upon completing land-disturbing
activities. Stabilization requirements may be waived by the inspecting
authority if the project site does not pose a threat of discharging sediment.
               (b)   Disturbed areas, not previously used for agricultural
production, such as filter strips, must be returned to their pre land
disturbance use.
         B.   Specific projects, due to function and/or operation may
necessitate that an area remain disturbed. Only the minimum operational area is
allowed to remain disturbed. This option primarily applies to off-road
recreational commercial operations but may apply to other land use types upon
determination by the regulating entity.
   d.   Design Requirements. The following design requirements apply to all
land-disturbing activities and shall be considered in the selection, design,
and implementation of all stormwater quality and management measures contained
in the SWPPP:
      1.   Sound engineering, agronomic, and scientific principles must be
utilized for measures contained in the SWPPP.
      2.   Appropriate measures must be planned, designed, and installed as
part of an erosion and sediment control system and in accordance with the
site's construction phasing plan.
      3.   Stormwater runoff leaving the project site must be discharged in a
manner that is consistent with this Article, state, or federal law.
      4.   Collected runoff leaving the project site must be directed to an
established vegetated area, when feasible and applicable, to increase pollutant
removal and maximize stormwater infiltration and then either discharged
directly into a well-defined, stable receiving conveyance or diffused and
released without causing erosion at the point of discharge.
      5.   Conveyance systems must be designed taking into consideration both
peak flow and total volume and must be adequately protected so that their final
gradients and resultant velocities are unlikely to cause erosion at the outlet
or in the receiving channel, based on known conditions of the discharge at the
time of design to accommodate post-construction conditions.
      6.   Sediment basins, where feasible, must withdraw water from the
surface of the water column unless equivalent sediment reduction can be
achieved by use of alternative measures. Alternative measures include but are
not limited to increasing the basin length to width ratio to four to one (4:1)
or greater, implementation of porous baffles, use of flocculants/polymers, and/
or phasing of project land disturbance that also incorporates a rapid
stabilization program. During freezing conditions, the implementation of
alternative withdrawal methods may be utilized.
   e.   Monitoring and Management Requirements. A trained individual,
acceptable to the Town of Schererville shall monitor project construction and
stormwater activities. These shall include:
      1.   A written evaluation of the entire project site, with the exception
of those areas that are considered unsafe. The evaluation must be performed by
a trained individual and completed:
         A.   Twenty-four (24) hours prior to a qualifying precipitation event
or by the end of the next business day following each measurable storm event
(excludes accumulated snow events); which is defined as a precipitation
accumulation equal to, or greater than, one-half (0.50) inch of rainfall within
a twenty-four (24) hour period, If no rain event occurs within the work week a
minimum of one inspection must occur. In the event of multiple qualifying
events during the work week, no more than three (3) inspections would be
required to meet the self-monitoring commitment.
         B.   At a minimum of one (1) time per month for specific areas within
the project which are stabilized with permanent vegetative cover at seventy
percent (70%) density and/or erosion resistant armoring is installed. A
reduction to once per month is also applicable for the entire project site for
stabilized common areas, basins, conveyances, outfalls, and inactive building
sites. Prior to reducing the monitoring to monthly, records must identify the
area and the date the area became eligible for monthly monitoring. Weekly
monitoring as identified in 1.A. above must resume if one or more of the
following occurs:
            i.   The vegetative cover fails or there is evidence of erosion in
the identified area.
            ii.   The Town of Schererville requires monitoring to resume.
      2.   A complete written evaluation report which must include:
         A.   Name of the individual performing the evaluation, including
printed name, title, and signature (electronic signatures are acceptable).
         B.   Date of the evaluation.
         C.   Amount of precipitation, when the evaluation is conducted after a
measurable storm event. Recorded rainfall may be documented utilizing an on-
site rain gauge or storm event information from a weather station that is
representative of the project location.
         D.   Observations of project performance in relation to:
            i.   Implementation of the stormwater pollution prevention plan.
            ii.   Assessment of existing stormwater measures based on industry
standards and maintenance standards as identified in Section 5 of the
stormwater permit application form (found in Appendix A of this document) to
ensure each measure is operational and functioning properly.
            iii.   Additional measures necessary in the event an existing
measure fails or is not present in the landscape
            iv.   Impacts including, but not limited to, sediment discharges,
erosion, discharges that results In bank erosion, and operational activities
that have the potential to generate pollutants and unauthorized discharges.
         E.   Documentation of an actual discharge that is visible during the
assessment, the location of the discharge and a visual description of the
discharge. The visual description includes, but is not limited to, color
(turbidity reading is an option), odor, floatables, settled/suspended solids,
foam, oil sheen, and any other visible sign that may be attributed to
operations occurring on the project site.
         F.   Detail of corrective action recommended and/or completed.
Corrective action includes, but is not limited to:
            i.   Repairing, modifying, or replacing any stormwater management
measure.
            ii.   Clean-up and proper disposal of spills, releases, or other
deposits.
            iii.   Remedying a permit violation.
            iv.   Taking reasonable steps to remediate, minimize or prevent the
discharge of pollutants associated with the construction activity until a
permanent corrective solution is initiated.
            v.   Restoring an impacted area and/or removing accumulated
sediment, provided appropriate permission and permits are obtained to conduct
the activity.
         G.   A timeline for which the corrective action will occur to
remediate the discharge of pollutants. The established corrective action, at a
minimum, must be initiated:
            i.   On the day the deficiency was discovered or when it is not
practical to initiate on the discovery date, no later than forty-eight (48)
hours for the repair of a measure or installation of a temporary measure until
a new and/or replacement measure is installed as specified in item ii) below.
            ii.   Within seven (7) days of discovery for the installation of a
new (alternative) measure or replacement of an existing measure unless a
shorter time-frame is required as part of a regulatory inspection. The
inspecting authority may also allow additional time to take corrective action.
            iii.   If corrective action cannot be achieved within the time
lines outlined in i) or ii) above, a reason for incompletion must be provided
and documented, including the anticipated completion date.
         H.   Documentation of corrective action taken from the previous self-
monitoring report.
      3.   Maintaining the SMP reports at the site or at an easily accessible
location (refer to project documentation requirements below).
      4.   Providing all reports for the project site to Town of Schererville
within forty-eight (48) hours of a request. Electronic copies are acceptable,
provided they are in a format consistent with the paper record.
   f.   Project Documentation Requirements. The following project documentation
shall be developed
and maintained:
      1.   Maintain a project management log that contains:
         A.   Information related to all off-site borrow sites, disposal areas,
and staging areas, including the location of each activity as it is identified
and/or selected.
         B.   Information related to all project activities including, but not
limited to:
            i.   SMP reports.
            ii.   Regulatory inspections.
            iii.   Responses to a compliance action or enforcement action.
            iv.   Records showing the dates of all SWPPP modifications. The
records must include the name of the person authorizing each change and a
summary of all changes.
      2.   Ensure the SWPPP and supporting documentation associated with the
SMP and project management log are accessible at the project site office or in
the possession of on-site individuals with responsibility for the overall
project management or associated with the management and operations of
construction activities. This information must be provided to Town of
Schererville within forty-eight (48) hours of a request. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1,
6-12-24)
Sec. 9-413 Common Control Practices.
   All erosion control and stormwater pollution prevention measures required to
comply with these Technical Standards shall meet the design criteria,
standards, and specifications similar to or the same as those outlined in the
"Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual" (ISWQM), or other comparable and reputable
references. Please note that pursuant to I.C. 13-18-27, MS4-designated entities
may not require erosion and sediment control measures/BMPs that are more
stringent than the measures/BMPs required by the IDEM general permit. (Ord. No.
2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-414 Individual Lot or Parcel Controls.
   a.   Although individual lots within a larger development may not appear to
contribute as much sediment as the overall development, the cumulative effect
of lot development is of concern. The same is true for individual parcels of
land of any size that are not associated with a larger development. From the
time construction on an individual lot begins, until the individual lot is
stabilized, the builder must take steps to:
      1.   Protect adjacent properties from sedimentation.
      2.   Prevent mud/sediment from depositing on the street.
      3.   Protect drainage ways from erosion and sedimentation.
      4.   Prevent sediment laden water from entering storm sewer inlets.
   b.   This can be accomplished using numerous erosion and sediment control
measures. Individual lot permit request form, plot plan review form and
detailed requirements, including a standard erosion control plan for individual
lots, are provided in
Appendix A. The standard plan includes perimeter silt fence, stabilized
construction entrance, drop inlet protection, stockpile containment, stabilized
drainage swales, downspout extensions, temporary seeding and mulching, and
permanent vegetation. Every relevant measure should be installed at each
individual lot site. Note that construction site discharge must be contained
and treated within each individual lot (or a group of individual lots being
constructed by one builder) and is not allowed to be discharged offsite.
   c.   Construction sequence on individual lots and parcels should be as
follows:
      1.   Clearly delineate areas of trees, shrubs, and vegetation that are to
be undisturbed. To prevent root damage, the areas delineated for tree
protection should be at least the same diameter as the crown.
      2.   Install perimeter silt fence at construction limits. Position the
fence to intercept runoff prior to entering drainage swales.
      3.   Avoid disturbing drainage swales if vegetation is established. If
drainage swales are bare, install erosion control blankets or sod to
immediately stabilize.
      4.   Install drop inlet protection for all inlets on the property.
      5.   Install stable construction entrance that extends from the street to
the building pad.
      6.   Perform primary grading operations.
      7.   Contain erosion from any soil stockpiles created on-site with an
appropriate sediment control measure around the base.
      8.   Establish temporary seeding and straw mulch on disturbed areas.
      9.   Construct the home and install utilities.
      10.   Install downspout extenders once the roof and gutters have been
constructed. Extenders should outlet to a stabilized area.
      11.   Re-seed any areas disturbed by construction and utilities
installation with temporary seed mix within three (3) days of completion of
disturbance.
      12.   Grade the site to final elevations.
      13.   Install permanent seeding or sod.
   d.   All erosion and sediment control measures must be properly maintained
throughout construction. Temporary and permanent seeding should be watered as
needed until established. For further information on individual lot and parcel
erosion and sediment control, please see the "Individual Lot Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan and Certification" form and other resources in Appendix A
as well as the latest information posted on IDEM's website. (Ord. No. 2009, §
1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-415 through Sec. 9-419 Reserved for Future Use.
   Runoff and erosion control systems shall be installed as soon as possible
during the course of site development. Detention/retention basins shall be
designed with an additional six percent (6%) available capacity to allow for
sediment accumulation resulting from development and to permit the pond to
function for reasonable periods between cleanings. Basins should be designed to
collect sediment and debris in specific locations so that removal costs are
kept to a minimum.
(Ord. No. 1708, 6-13-07)
Division VIII. Post-Construction Stormwater Quality Management Standards.
Sec. 9-420 Introduction.
   a.   It is recognized that developed areas, as compared to undeveloped
areas, generally have increased imperviousness, decreased infiltration rates,
increased runoff rates, and increased concentrations of pollutants such as
fertilizers, herbicides, greases, oil, salts and other pollutants. As new
development and re-development continues within areas subject to Town of
Schererville jurisdiction, measures must be taken to intercept and filter
pollutants from stormwater runoff prior to reaching regional creeks, streams,
and rivers. Through the use of appropriate best management practices (BMPs),
stormwater runoff will be filtered and harmful amounts of sediment, nutrients,
and contaminants will be removed.
   b.   It is also recognized that another major source of pollution in many
Indiana streams, including those within Town of Schererville, is the streambank
erosion associated with urbanizing watersheds. Stream channels develop their
shape in response to the volume and rate of runoff that they receive from their
contributing watersheds. Research has shown that in hydrologically stable
watersheds, the stream flow responsible for most of the shaping of the channel
(called the bank full flow) occurs between every one to two years. When land is
developed, the volume and rate of runoff from that land increases for these
comparatively small flooding events that are not normally addressed by the
detention practices and the stream channel will adapt by changing its shape. As
the stream channel works to reach a new stable shape, excess erosion occurs. As
new development and re-development continues within Town of Schererville,
measures must be taken to minimize the impact of such development or re-
development on streambank erosion. Through the use of appropriate best
management practices (BMPs), the volume and rate of runoff for channel-forming
flows will be reduced in an attempt to minimize increased streambank erosion in
the receiving streams and channels.
   c.   Requirements of this technical standards manual with regards to the
channel protection and water quality protection can be satisfied through a
variety of methods that can be broadly categorized under two general
approaches:
      1.   Conventional approach.
      2.   Low impact development (LID) approach.
   d.   This chapter establishes minimum standards for the selection and design
of post-construction water quality and channel protection BMPs. The information
provided in this chapter establishes performance criteria for stormwater
quality management and procedures to be followed when preparing a BMP plan for
compliance. Post-construction BMPs must be sized to treat the channel
protection volume (CPv), water quality volume (WQv), and for flow-through BMPs
the water quality discharge rate (Qwq), as appropriate. For conventional
approach, the methodology for calculating the CPv, WQv, and Qwq values is
provided in Division IX. For LID approach, alternative methods of calculating
these values are provided in Sec.
9-425. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-421 Post-Construction BMPs Performance Criteria.
   a.   Channel protection is typically achieved by matching the post-
construction runoff volume and rate to the pre-conversion (prior to any
historical land conversion by man) condition for all runoff events up to the
bank full flow. The bank full flow in most Indiana streams correlates with the
one and a half (1.5) to two (2) year flood event flow. However, due to
difficulties in determining the pre-conversion conditions, the net control of
runoff resulting from a one (1) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm in proposed
conditions (rather than the alternative method of determining increase in two
(2) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm over pre-conversion conditions) is
established as the Town of Schererville standard for channel protection.
   b.   Town of Schererville has also established a minimum standard that the
measurement of the effectiveness of the control of post-construction stormwater
runoff quality will be based on removal of floatables in stormwater runoff and
treatment, to the maximum extent practicable, of all major pollutants of
concern expected for the proposed land use and/or those identified in the
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the site (including, if
applicable, those pollutants found to be the cause of the receiving stream to
be listed in IDEM 303(d) list) for the first inch of rainfall at the site. The
above-noted "maximum extent practicable" criterion is subject to a minimum of
eighty percent (80%) removal of total suspended solids (TSS). These
requirements are adopted as the basis of the Town of Schererville stormwater
quality management program for all areas of the jurisdiction.
   c.   For the purpose of these standards, the control of channel protection
volume and postconstruction stormwater runoff quality is assumed satisfactory
when the appropriate number of pre-approved structural BMPs, tiered in
accordance to the total site disturbed area as shown below, are designed,
installed, and operated in accordance with fact sheets provided in the
appendices provided in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA)
Green Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-
Fact-Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
 
Total Property/Development Area Post-Construction BMP Requirement*
0 to less than 1 acre           Water quality BMP not required
At least 1 acre                 At least 1 water quality BMP
At least 10 acres               Channel protection volume**
*These BMPs are in addition to any pre-treatment that may be required for hot
spots.
**When the CPv is controlled with BMPs that also meet the stormwater quality
performance criteria in this secion, often no additional water quality BMP is
necessary. An additional water quality BMP may be required if the CPv is not
believed to adequately address water quality requirements.
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-422 Pollutants of Concern After Construction Stabilization.
   a.   There are three (3) major sources of pollutants for a stabilized
construction site:
      1.   Deposition of atmospheric material (including wind-eroded material
and dust).
      2.   General urban pollution (thermal pollution, litter).
      3.   Pollutants associated with specific land uses.
   b.   It should be noted that some pollutants accumulate on impervious
surfaces. This accumulated material is then subject to being washed into
watercourses during storm events. It is for this reason that fish kills often
occur during a rain event with a substantial prior rainless period. This is
also the reason that the most hazardous driving conditions are realized after
the initial onset of a storm event, when deposited oil has not yet washed into
adjacent conveyance systems.
   c.   Pollutants of concern include:
      1.   Sediment is the major pollutant of concern during active
construction. Natural erosion processes are accelerated at a project site by
the construction process for a number of reasons, including the loss of surface
vegetation and compaction damage to the soil structure itself, resulting in
reduced infiltration and increased surface runoff. After the construction is
completed, other chemicals that are released to surface waters from industrial
and municipal discharges and polluted runoff from urban and agricultural areas
continue to accumulate to harmful levels in sediments.
      2.   Toxic chemicals from illegal dumping and poor storage and handling
of materials. Industrial sites pose the most highly variable source of this
pollution due to the dependency of the specific process to the resulting
pollution amounts and constituents. As during construction, these chemicals can
pose acute (short-term) or chronic (long-term) risk to aquatic life, wildlife
and the general public.
      3.   Bacteria from illicit sanitary connections to storm sewer systems,
combined sewers, leaking septic systems, wildlife and domestic animal waste.
Bacteria pathogens pose a direct health risk to humans and aquatic life.
      4.   Nutrients can be released from leaking septic systems or applied in
the form of fertilizers. Golf courses, manicured landscapes and agricultural
sources are the primary land uses associated with excess fertilization.
Excessive nutrients in the local ecosystem are the source of algal blooms in
ponds and lakes. These excessive nutrients also lead to acceleration of the
eutrophicalion process, reducing the usable lifespan of these water bodies.
Nitrogen and phosphorous are the primary nutrients of concern.
      5.   Oxygen demand can be impacted by chemicals transported on sediment,
by nutrients, and other pollutants (such as toxic chemicals). Reduced levels of
oxygen impair or destroy aquatic life.
      6.   Oils and hydrocarbons accumulate in streets from vehicles. They can
also be associated with fueling stations and illicit dumping activities. Oils
and hydrocarbons pose health risk to both aquatic and human health.
      7.   Litter, including floatables, can result in a threat to aquatic
life. The aesthetic impact can also reduce the quality of recreational use.
      8.   Metals can be associated with vehicular activity (including certain
brake dusts), buildings, construction material storage, and industrial
activities. Metals are often toxic to aquatic life and threaten human health.
      9.   Chlorides (salts) are historically associated with deicing
activities. Chlorides are toxic to native aquatic life (verses saltwater
aquatic life). Communities should consider a combination or cinders or sand to
replace or supplement their deicing activities with chlorides. In addition,
chloride stockpiles should remain covered.
      10.   Thermal effects can be introduced by the removal of shade provided
by riparian trees, as well as impervious channel linings, such as concrete,
which release stored heat to water passing over them. Other sources of elevated
temperature include effluent from power plant and industrial activities.
Thermal pollution can threaten aquatic habitat, including fish species and
beneficial water insects. Of particular concern are salmonid streams, due to
the effect of thermal pollution on spawning for this particular species. (Ord.
No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-423 Water Quality Characteristics by Land Use.
   Direct water quality sampling is not generally required at this time by
IDEM. However, water quality characteristics are strongly tied to land use. For
the purpose of these standards, all proposed developments and re-developments
shall be assumed to involve increased levels of floatables, TSS, TP, TN, and
metals. Additional pollutants may also be expected at certain types of
developments and specific sites, as identified in the stormwater pollution
prevention plan for the site (including, if applicable, those pollutants found
to be the cause of the receiving stream to be listed in IDEM 303(d) list).
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-424 Conventional Approach Procedures.
   The following procedures shall be followed according to the conventional
approach:
   a.   Step 1: Provide BMPs to address Channel Protection Volume.
      1.   In a conventional approach, the receiving channel is protected
through retaining (when possible) or the extended detention (if infiltration
methods are considered ineffective/inappropriate for the site) of the one (1)
year, twenty-four (24) hour storm event on entire site (excluding any protected
undisturbed areas acceptable to the Town of Schererville tributary to each
outlet. The methodology for calculating the channel protection volume (CPv) is
according to that discussed in Division IX of this standards manual. Both
retention or wet/dry extended detention may be used so long as only ten percent
(10%) of the maximum stored volume is left in the basin after thirty-six (36)
hours from maximum storage time (or forty-eight (48) hours from the start of
storm) and no more than forty percent (40%) of the maximum stored volume is
released within the first twelve (12) hours. To ensure that adequate retention/
detention volume is available within the facility over the years, the facility
should be designed for long-term sediment accumulation. If long term sediment
accumulation cannot be adequately provided for in the pond, or if the pond is
intended to provide sediment control during the construction phase of the
project, forebays near inlets can be included to help manage sediment
accumulation. Forebays do not require a hard maintenance surface and shall not
be visibly disconnected from the pond by rip rap or other berm structures.
      2.   Since, by design, ninety percent (90%) of the original volume will
be available within forty-eight (48) hours of start of each storm event
(assumed to be about thirty-six (36) hours from when the channel protection
pool is full), the volume in the pond associated with the channel protection
(CPv) may be assumed empty for the purpose of peak flow retention/detention
analysis discussed in Division VI. In addition, the volume provided for channel
protection would also count as one BMP towards the water quality requirements,
provided that the facility meets the design criteria in the fact sheet and
additional pre-treatment and/or wetland fringe can be provided to assure the
performance criteria noted in Sec. 9-422 are met.
   b.   Step 2: Provide BMPS to address Water Quality Management.
      1.   When the channel protection volume is controlled with BMPs that also
meet the stormwater quality performance criteria in Sec.
9-421 (including both the required type and also the number of BMP in series),
often no additional calculation or BMP implementation is necessary. If the
channel protection volume is not controlled through practices that also meet
the stormwater quality performance criteria in Sec.
9-421, additional BMPs will be required. Town of Schererville has designated a
number of pre-approved structural BMP methods (listed in Table 9-424 for
conventional approach and Tables 9-425.3 through 9-425.5 for LID approach) to
be used alone or in combination to achieve the stormwater quality performance
criteria noted in Sec.
9-421 for runoff generated from up to first inch of rainfall on the entire site
(excluding any protected undisturbed areas acceptable to the Town of
Schererville) tributary to each outlet. Details regarding the applicability and
design of these pre-approved BMPs, including the effectiveness of these BMPs in
treating pollutants of concern (including, if applicable, those pollutants
found to be the cause of the receiving stream to be listed in the IDEM 303(d)
list), are contained within fact sheets presented in the appendices provided in
the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green Infrastructure
Curriculum and Training web resources (https://www.in.gov/ocra/2367.htm).
Additional information on recommended plant lists and recommended materials
used for construction of stormwater BMPs are also provided in those appendices.
      2.   Innovative BMPs, including but not limited to, BMPs not previously
accepted by Town of Schererville must be certified by a professional engineer
licensed in State of Indiana and approved through Town of Schererville. ASTM
standard methods must be followed when verifying performance of new measures.
New BMPs, individually or in combination, must meet the performance criteria
noted in Sec.
9-421, including the capture and removal of floatables. All innovative BMPs
must have a low to medium maintenance requirement to be considered by Town of
Schererville. Testing to establish the pollutant removal rate must be conducted
by an independent testing facility, not the BMP manufacturer. The accepted
design flow rate for a water quality device shall be the flow value at which
the claimed removal rate for TSS is equaled or exceeded based on the unit's
efficiency curve (flow rate versus removal rate graph).
      3.   Note that a single BMP measure may not be adequate to achieve the
water quality requirements (as noted above) for a project. It is for this
reason that a "treatment train", a number of BMPs in series, is often required
for a project. The pollutant removal efficiency of a number of BMPs in series
may be determined from the following formula:
   Eseries = 1 - (1-E1)(1-E2)(1-E3)...
   Where:
      Eseries = Removal efficienty of the BMP series combined (in decimal
form).
      E1, E2, E3... = Removal efficiency of units 1, 2, 3, ..., respectively
(in decimal form).
TABLE 9-424
PRE-APPROVED POST-CONSTRUCTION BMPs FOR CONVENTIONAL APPROACH
BMP1 Typical % Removal Efficiency2 Maintenance Easement Requirements
TABLE 9-424
PRE-APPROVED POST-CONSTRUCTION BMPs FOR CONVENTIONAL APPROACH
BMP1                      Typical % Removal Maintenance Easement
                          Efficiency2       Requirements
Bio retention             903               25 feet wide along the
                                            perimeter
                                            25 feet wide along the outer
Constructed wetland       673               perimeter of forebay and 30
                                            feet wide along centerline of
                                            outlet
                                            20 feet wide strip from
                                            access easement to tank's
Underground detention     70                access shaft and 30 feet wide
                                            along centerline of inlet and
                                            outlet
                                            25 feet wide along the outer
Extended detention/dry    72                perimeter of forebay and 30
ponding                                     feet wide along centerline of
                                            outlet
Infiltration basin
(including                903               25 feet wide along the
retention ponds with                        perimeter
pretreatment
Infiltration trench       903               25 feet wide along the
                                           perimeter
Constructed (sand) filter 703               25 feet wide along the
                                            perimeter
                                            20 feet wide strip from
Water quality device      Varies4           access easement to chamber s
                                            access shaft
Vegetated filter strip    783               25 feet wide along the length
                                            on the pavement side
Vegetated swale           813               25 feet wide along the top of
                                            bank on one side
                                            25 feet wide along the outer
Wet ponds/retention basin 80                perimeter of forebay and 30
                                            feet wide along centerline of
                                            outlet
Notes:
1   Detailed specifications for these BMPs are provided in the fact
sheets contained in the appendices provided in the Indiana Office of
Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green Infrastructure Curriculum and
Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
2   Removal rates shown are based on typical results. Unless otherwise
shown, data extracted from various data sources. These rates are also
dependent on proper installation and maintenance. The ultimate
responsibility for determining whether additional measures must be taken
to meet the ordinance requirements for site-specific conditions rests
with the applicant.
3   IDEM Stormwater Quality Manual, 2007.
4   The removal rate for this category varies widely between various
models and manufacturers. The acceptable treatment rate for these devices
shall be based on that currently certified by the New Jersey Department
or Environmental Protection (NJDEP). Further details on acceptable Water
Quality Devices and their treatment rates are provided in Chapter 9.
 
Sec. 9-425 Low Impact Development (LID) Approach Procedures.
   a.   Low impact development (LID) stormwater management design approaches
are fundamentally different from conventional design approaches and challenge
traditional thinking regarding development standards, watershed protection, and
public participation. LID combines fundamental hydrologic concepts with many of
today's common stormwater strategies, practices and techniques to reshape
development patterns in a way that maintains natural watershed hydrologic
functions. When a county or community has a stormwater user fee system based on
imperviousness, the utilization of LID approach will often result in reduced
stormwater user fee for non-residential lots, because LID reduces overall
imperviousness of the lot. The five principles of LID are:
      1.   Conservation of existing natural and topographic features;
      2.   Minimization of land clearing and impervious surfaces;
      3.   Maintain or lengthen the pre-developed time of concentration;
      4.   Installation of integrated structural best management practices; and
      5.   Use of pollution prevention measures and practices.
   b.   Several methods for achieving the above principals are outlined below.
In addition to methods described in this Standards Manual, several readily
available references provide details on incorporating LID practices into site
development. One of the most recent, comprehensive resources for incorporating
LID practices into site development design is "Low Impact Development Manual
for Michigan: A Design Guide for Implementers and Reviewers" available online
at www.semcog.org/LowImpactDevelopment.aspx. The noted resource was used
extensively for the development of LID section in this Standards Manual.
   c.   The following steps shall be followed for the LID approach:
      1.   Step 1: Minimize Disturbed Areas and Protect Sensitive Areas.
         A.   Map sensitive areas such as waterbodies, floodplains, and natural
flow paths. Identify hydrologic soil types on the maps. Show elevations and
identify critical slopes of fifteen percent (15%) to twenty-five percent (25%)
and above twenty-five percent (25%). Show areas of known contamination. Also
show existing structures and infrastructure.
         B.   Determine the total area of impervious surface existing prior to
development.
         C.   Note the seasonal high groundwater level.
         D.   Designate sensitive areas that are proposed to be protected as
part of the proposed layout.
         E.   Lay out the proposed development, minimizing disturbance and
avoiding the sensitive areas, utilizing existing soils.
         F.   Utilize the non-structural BMPs listed in Table 9-425.1 to
properly protect sensitive areas so they maintain their pre-development state
and runoff characteristics. Fact sheets for these BMPs are provided in the
appendices provided in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA)
Green Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (https://www.in.gov/
ocra/2367.htm).
TABLE 9-425.1
PRE-APPROVED BMPs WITH TREATMENT AREA REDUCTION RECOGNITION FOR LID APPROACH
BMP1 Runoff Reduction Recognition2
TABLE 9-425.1
PRE-APPROVED BMPs WITH TREATMENT AREA REDUCTION RECOGNITION FOR LID APPROACH
BMP1                          Runoff Reduction Recognition2
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Protect sensitive areas       this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Protect riparian buffers      this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Minimize total disturbed area this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Reduce impervious surfaces    this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Protect natural flow pathways this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (undisturbed acres complying with the
                              requirements of this BMP) can be subtracted from
Cluster-type development      site development area for channel protection
                              volume and water quality volume/rate
                              calculations.
Notes:
1   In using and crediting these BMPs. applicants must meet the review criteria
located within the discussion of each BMP provided in the appendices provided
in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green
Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-
Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
2   If the LID track is pursued, reduced CNs (associated with pre-developed
underlying soil types instead of the normal requirement of assigning the post-
development CN according to the next lower infiltration soil group) for areas
protected by these BMPs may be used for determining the post-developed runoff
rates and volumes for larger events (up to and Including the 100-year event).
See Table 8-8.
 
         G.   As shown in Table 9-425.1, when using the LID approach (and
certain other circumstances determined as appropriate by the Town of
Schererville), any area that is set aside and protected as described in those
BMPs may be subtracted from site development area for purposes of determining
channel protection volume calculations and water quality volume/rate
calculations.
         H.   Since the LID track is being used, for determining the ten
(10)year and one hundred (100) year runoff and peak discharges, the CN
associated with the original. pre-development soil groups (instead of the
normal requirement of assigning the post-development CN according to the next
lower infiltration soil group) may be used for these areas (see Table 9-425.7).
         I.   The runoff reduction recognition only works with designs based on
the curve number or CN method of analysis utilizing non-composite CN
determination methods.
      2.   Step Two: Restore Disturbed Areas.
         A.   For the LID approach, runoff reduction recognitions are used in
the design process to emphasize the use of BMPs that, when applied, restore/
alter the disturbed area in a way that reduces the volume of runoff from that
area.
         B.   Runoff reduction recognition is provided for the five (5) BMPs
listed in Table 9-425.2 because they enhance the response of a piece of land to
a storm event rather than treat the runoff that is generated. These BMPs are
encouraged because they are relatively easy to implement over structural
controls, require little if any maintenance, and the land they are applied to
remains open to other uses.
         C.   Runoff reduction recognition is applied by reducing the default
CN value so that the amount of runoff generated from an event is reduced.
         D.   The runoff reduction recognition only works with designs based on
the CN method of analysis utilizing non-composite CN determination methods.
         E.   Fact sheets for these BMPs are provided in the appendices
provided in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green
Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-
Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
TABLE 9-425.1
PRE-APPROVED BMPs WITH TREATMENT AREA REDUCTION RECOGNITION FOR LID APPROACH
BMP1 Runoff Reduction Recognition2
TABLE 9-425.1
PRE-APPROVED BMPs WITH TREATMENT AREA REDUCTION RECOGNITION FOR LID APPROACH
BMP1                          Runoff Reduction Recognition2
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Protect sensitive areas       this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Protect riparian buffers      this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Minimize total disturbed area this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Reduce impervious surfaces    this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (acres complying with the requirements of
Protect natural flow pathways this BMP) can be subtracted from site development
                              area for channel protection volume and water
                              quality volume/rate calculations.
                              Area (undisturbed acres complying with the
                              requirements of this BMP) can be subtracted from
Cluster-type development      site development area for channel protection
                              volume and water quality volume/rate
                              calculations.
Notes:
1   In using and crediting these BMPs. applicants must meet the review criteria
located within the discussion of each BMP provided in the appendices provided
in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green
Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-
Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
2   If the LID track is pursued, reduced CNs (associated with pre-developed
underlying soil types instead of the normal requirement of assigning the post-
development CN according to the next lower infiltration soil group) for areas
protected by these BMPs may be used for determining the post-developed runoff
rates and volumes for larger events (up to and Including the 100-year event).
See Table 8-8.
 
      3.   Step Three: Minimize Imperviousness.
         A.   The BMPs listed in Table 9-425.3 are designed to reduce the
volume of runoff from hard surfaces such as roads, sidewalks, parking areas,
roofs, etc. Runoff reduction recognition is used to encourage these practices
and recognize their runoff reduction impacts when LID approach is being
pursued. Fact sheets for these BMPs are provided in the appendices provided in
the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green Infrastructure
Curriculum and Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
 
TABLE 9-425.3
PRE-APPROVED BMPs WITH RUNOFF REDUCTION CREDITS FOR REDUCING IMPERVIOUSNESS AS
PART OF LID APPROACH
BMP1            Runoff Reduction Recognition2
                Area covered by porous pavement with a minimum of 8 inch washed
                aggregate base may be assigned a weighted CN value of 87
                (instead of CN of 98 normally used for impervious surfaces) for
                the purpose of channel protection volume calculations. Use a
                weighted CN of 74 for the purpose of water quality volume
Porous pavement calculations, if needed. Note: if this BMP is specifically
                designed to provide permanent volume reduction through
                infiltration or through providing detention storage within the
                aggregate void, the volume reduction recognition discussed in
                Step 5 should be pursued instead of the CN reduction
                recognition, assuming CN of 98.
                Vegetated roofs are designed to reduce runoff volumes. However,
                the volume reduction is highly dependent on the media and
                planting used, with the calculation methods very complex at
                times. In lieu of calculating the volume reduction benefits,
                the roof area with vegetated roof with a minimum media depth of
Vegetated roof  4 inches and a void ratio of 0.3 (as described in the fact
                sheet) may be assigned a weighted CN of 87 (instead of CN of 98
                normally used for impervious surfaces) for the purpose of
                channel protection volume calculations. Use a weighted CN of 74
                for the purpose of water quality volume calculations, if
                needed.
Notes:
1   In using and crediting these BMPs, applicants must meet the review criteria
located within the discussion of each BMP provided in the appendices provided
in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green
Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-
Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
2   If the LID track is pursued, reduced CNs for areas covered by these BMPs
may be used for determining the post.developed runoff rates and volumes for
larger events (up to and including the 100-year event). See Table 8-8 for
weighted CN values used for such larger events.
 
         B.   Although imperviousness reduction BMPs are encouraged throughout
any new development or re-development, the runoff reduction recognition may
only be considered where the following conditions are met:
            i.   The BMP must be in the common areas and covered by an easement
or other agreement that assigns responsibility for its maintenance.
            ii.   The BMP must be covered by a maintenance plan and agreement
with assurances for the long-term availability of maintenance funds (such as
funds held in a permanent escrow account) in a form acceptable to Town of
Schererville.
      4.   Step Four: Calculate the Amount of Volume Control Needed for Channel
Protection.
         A.   Determine the one (1) year twenty-four (24) hour rainfall from
Table 9-352.2;
         B.   Delineate subbasins in a manner that, at a minimum and to the
extent possible, the pervious and impervious surfaces are in different
subbasins;
         C.   Determine the disturbed drainage area for each subbasin by
subtracting the protected area determined in Step 1 from total contributing
drainage area.
         D.   Assign CN to each cover type and land use, assigning "credited
CN" for areas treated in Steps 2 and 3 instead of normal post-development CN
that is determined based on the proposed land use and the next less
infiltrating underlying soil group, when applicable. Published pre-determined
weighted CN values shall not be utilized for LID approach. This applies
regardless of whether manual methods or computer modeling techniques are used.
         E.   Determine the total post-development one (1) year, twenty-four
(24) hour runoff volume for the entire site's disturbed areas through the use
of acceptable computer models or manually as specified below. This is the net
channel protection volume needing to be permanently removed by appropriate
structural BMPs.
            i.   Computer Model. Use acceptable computer models (listed in
Division II) to determine the total runoff volume for the site, utilizing one
(1) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall depth with Soil Conservation Service
(SCS) type 2 storm distribution, drainage area, and CN determined above,
according to the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) CN loss method along with SCS
unit less hydrograph methodology.
            ii.   Manual Calculation. If calculating manually, use the
following formula:
   Runoff volume (ft3) for each cover type = Qv x 1/12 x A
      Where:
      A = disturbed area of the particular cover type (ft2)
      Qv = runoff depth (in) = (P - 0.2S)2/(P+0.8S)
      P = 1 year, 24 hour rainfall (in)
      S = (1000/CN) – 10
      Sum the individual volumes to obtain the post-development runoff volume
area to be managed.
      5.   Step Five: Provide Distributed Volume Reduction/Infiltration
Practices.
         A.   Table 9-425.4 includes a list of the structural BMPs from
potential BMPs that provide volume removal/retention. Select and design
structural BMPs that provide volume control to meet, when combined, the total
net channel protection volume determined in Step 4. Fact sheets for these and
other relevant post-construction structural BMPs are provided in the appendices
provided In the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green
Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-
Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
 
TABLE 9-425.4
PRE-APPROVED STRUCTURAL BMPs WITH PERMANENT VOLUME REDUCTION RECOGNITIONS FOR CHANNEL
PROTECTION AS PART OF LID APPROACH
BMP1          Channel Protection Volume Runoff Reduction Recognition2
Infiltration
practices
(infiltration Volume reduction is achieved by surface storage volume (if included in the
basin,        design), subsurface volume (if included in the design), and infiltration
subsurface    volume as described in the fact sheet. If an underdrain has to be used due to
infiltration  soil conditions, no recognition is granted for the “infiltration volume”
bed,          portion.
infiltration
trench and
dry well)
Bioretention  Volume reduction is achieved by surface storage volume, soil storage volume,
              and infiltration bed volume as described in the fact sheet.
              Volume reduction is achieved by surface storage volume (if included in the
Vegetated     design through inclusion of check dams) and active infiltration volume during
swale         the storm (when infiltration is expressly designed fro as a purpose) as
              described in the fact sheet.
Notes:
1   In using and crediting these BMPs, applicants must meet the review criteria located
within the discussion of each BMP provided in the appendices provided in the Indiana Office
of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web
resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
2   If the LID track is pursued, the volume reduction provided by these BMPs may be
recognized towards determining the post-developed runoff rates and volumes for larger
events (up to and Including the 100-year event). See Table 8-8 for extent of runoff
reduction recognition allowed for such larger events.
 
         B.   The volume reduction BMPs work well when they are placed in an
appropriate setting. Please see “applicability and limitation" discussions in
each fact sheet for best suited placement of BMP. In order to qualify for
recognition, the BMPs must also meet all the following:
            i.   Be in the common areas and covered by an easement or other
agreement that assigns responsibility for its maintenance.
            ii.   Be covered by a maintenance plan and agreement with
assurances for the long-term availability of maintenance funds in a form
acceptable to Town of Schererville.
            iii.   Be constructed on undisturbed A or well-drained B soils (BID
soils do not qualify) or amended soil with underdrains, as needed. If
underdrains are used, the bottom elevations of the underdrains should be above
the seasonal high water table. Soil infiltration testing protocol, provided in
the appendices provided in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs
(OCRA) Green Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (https:/
lwww.in.gov/ocra/files/ Appendix-F-Soil-Infiltration-Testing-Protocol.pdf),
must be followed to determine if infiltration BMPs are suitable at a site and
to obtain the required data (such as soil conditions and depth of seasonal high
water table) for infiltration design.
            iv.   Be constructed in an area where the depth of seasonal high
water table and any bedrock is more than a minimum of two (2) feet (four (4)
feet is desirable) from BMP bottom elevation.
            v.   Be constructed in a manner that any infiltration practices are
adequately separated from basement foundations (fifty (50) feet up gradient,
ten (10) feet down gradient), on-site septic systems/drain fields (one hundred
(100) feet), wells (fifty (50) feet), and other building elements that could be
affected by infiltration systems.
            vi.   Be constructed outside of any one (1) year (Zone 1) or five
(5) year (Zone 2) time of travel areas to public water supply wells, as defined
by a modeled wellfield delineation performed in compliance with 327 IAC 8-4.1.
When such delineation is not available, said practice must be at least 3,000
feet from the nearest public water supply well (unless applicant can
demonstrate that the proposed practice will have no impacts on the water
quality of the water supply well).
            vii.   Final construction should be completed after the
contributing drainage area has been stabilized.
            viii.   Must contain erosion-protection features at the inflow to
prevent scouring
            ix.   Must contain a maintenance area near the inlet to collect
large debris. Examples include small concrete aprons, catch basin inserts, or
similar durable maintenance point.
         C.   When the LID approach is being pursued in all other aspects of
the design but site limitations would not allow permanent volume reduction
practices/infiltration, channel protection volume should, at a minimum and as
site limitations would allow, be accommodated through distributed storage
solutions noted in Table 9-425.4 that also include underdrains as described in
the appropriate fact sheets so that at a minimum they can act as both extended
detention and filtration practices.
         D.   Calculation Methods for Recognizing Impacts of Distributed
Storage on Overall Site's
Peak Flow Detention Requirements. When all the stated conditions above are met
for volume reduction distributed storage practices noted in Table 9-425.4,
total volume provided for channel protection within distributed storage units
(not to exceed the required channel protection volume calculated in Step 4 may
be applied towards the site's overall detention requirements for peak (ten (10)
year and one hundred (100) year) flow control (see Table 9-425.7). Several
methods are available to account for the noted runoff reduction recognition. A
few common methods are listed below (other methods not noted below may also be
used as appropriate):
            i,   Method 1: assume that the provided CPv in the distributed
storage units (not to exceed the required CPv calculated in Step 4) will be
stored below the detention pond's normal pool (below the lowest outlet). To
simulate this condition, all the volumes in the elevation-storage table are
increased by the provided CPv, an additional table entry is made as the first
row with an artificial lower elevation and with zero for storage, and the
reservoir's starting elevation is set at the noted artificial elevation.
            ii.   Method 2: utilize the "divert" option of the hydrologic model
used to compute the inflow to the pond to simulate the diversion (abstraction)
of the provided CPv (not to exceed the required CPv calculated in Step 4) from
the detention pond inflow before the remaining flood hydrograph is routed
through the detention system. To accomplish this, the model should have
capability to simulate diversion with a volume cap option.
            iii.   Method 3: explicitly model the distributed storage features
as a network of storage and conveyance units through the use of computer
programs that can correctly model interconnected storage.
      6.   Step Six: Provide Additional (As-Needed) Extended Detention
Practices.
         A.   When the LID approach is being pursued in all other aspects of
the design but site limitations would not allow adequate distributed volume
reduction/infiltration practices noted in Step 5 (with or without underdrain),
then a constructed wetland or a wet-bottom extended detention facility along
with incorporation of an appropriate wetland fringe should be utilized as
listed in Table 9-425.5. If designed properly, such a facility can be
incorporated into a multi-purpose facility to control channel protection
volume, water quality volume, and one hundred (100) year peak flow rate. Note
that since by design conditions of an extended detention facility, ninety
percent (90%) of the original volume will be available within forty-eight (48)
hours of each storm event (i.e., a maximum of thirty-six (36) hours from when
the channel protection pool is full), the volume in the pond associated with
the channel protection may be assumed empty for the purpose of peak flow
detention analysis discussed in Division VI (see Table 9- 925.7).
 
TABLE 9-425.5
PRE-APPROVED BMPs WITH ADDITIONAL, AS-NEEDED EXTENDED DETENTION RUNOFF
REDUCTION RECOGNITIONS FOR CHANNEL PROTECTION AS PART OF LID APPROACH
BMP1                            Runoff Reduction Recognition
                                The volume of the supplementary extended
                                detention, in lieu of permanent volume
                                reduction, is applied towards meeting channel
Constructed wetland             protection volume requirements so long as only
                                10% of the maximum stored volume is left in the
                                basin after 36 hours from maximum storage time
                                and no more than 40% from the maximum stored
                                volume is released within the first 12 hours.
                                The volume of the supplementary extended
                                detention, in lieu of permanent volume
                                reduction, is applied towards meeting channel
Extended detention wet/dry pond protection volume requirements so long as only
                                10% of the maximum stored volume is left in the
                                basin after 36 hours from maximum storage time
                                and no more than 40% from the maximum stored
                                volume is released within the first 12 hours.
Notes:
1   In using and crediting these BMPs, applicants must meet the review criteria
located within the discussion of each BMP provided in the appendices provided
in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA) Green
Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-
Sheets.pdf(in.gov)).
2   If the LID track is pursued, the volume reduction provided by these BMPs
may be applied towards determining the post-developed runoff rates and volumes
for larger events (up to and including the 100-year event). See Table 8-8 for
extent of volume reduction allowed for such larger events.
 
      7.   Determine Water Quality Volume and Provide, As-Needed, Additional
Water Quality BMPs.
         A.   The expected treatment of many BMPs applied to LID designs is
based on removing solids. Many pollutants are attached to solids or are removed
by similar treatment mechanisms. Therefore, removing solids can act as a
surrogate for the expected removal of other particulate pollutants. Often
multiple BMPs will be necessary to remove successively smaller particle sizes
to achieve the highest level of treatment.
         B.   When the CPv is controlled with BMPs that also meet the
stormwater quality performance criteria in Sec.
9-421  (including both the required type and also the number of BMP in series),
often no additional calculation or BMP implementation is necessary. If the
channel protection volume is not controlled through practices that also meet
the stormwater quality performance criteria in Sec.
9-421 , calculate the water quality volume that provides for the treatment of
the first inch of rainfall on the site's disturbed areas as discussed below.
         C.   The methodology for determining the design water quality volume
or rate for the LID approach is the same as that described for CPv calculation
described in Step 4, except the rainfall depth for water quality will be one
(1) inch instead of the one (1) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall depth used
for calculating the CPv. A few considerations specific to water quality volume/
rate calculations are as follows:
            i.   Time of concentration in the case of LID design is the time it
takes a drop of water to move from the furthest point in the disturbed area to
its discharge from the disturbed area.
            ii.   Computer Model. If using acceptable computer models, perform
the same procedure as that performed for calculating CPv in Step 4, but for one
(1) inch of rainfall depth.
            iii.   Manual Calculation. If calculating manually, use the
following formula:
               (a)   Runoff volume (ft3) for each cover type = Qv x 1/12 x A
               Where:
               A = disturbed area of the particular cover type (ft2)
               Qv = runoff depth (in) = (P - 0.2S)2/(P+0.8S)
               P = 1 inch
               S = (1000/CN) - 10
               (b)   Peak runoff rate (ft3/sec) = qu x A x 1/43,560
               Where:
               A = disturbed area of the particular cover type (ft2)
               Qv = runoff depth (in) calculated in previous step
               qu = unit peak discharge (cfs/mi2/in), determined from TR-55 4-
11
               (c)   Sum the individual volumes and peak runoff rates to obtain
the total design post-development water quality runoff volume and rate.
            iv.   Determine the total post-development water quality runoff
volume and rate for the entire site's disturbed areas. These are the design
post-development water quality runoff volume and rate needing to be treated.
         D.   Select BMPs from the list provided in Table 9-425 that will meet
the performance criteria noted in Sec.
9-421 . Often, multiple types of BMPs used in series will be required to
provide adequate treatment. Design the BMPs in conjunction with any detention
control that is needed for peak rate control of larger floods (one hundred
(100) year), if possible.
      8.   Step Eight: Complete the LID Approach Utilization Summary Form.
         A.   As the final step of the LID approach, a summary of non-
structural and structural BMPs utilized, as part of the LID approach, in the
site design of a particular development site is provided in Table 9-425.6 and
submitted as part of the permit request package.
         B.   The presence of Table 9-425.6 in the submittal package and the
information contained in the form would alert the plan reviewer that the LID
approach is being used to meet the post-construction stormwater quality
requirements of the site and that the overall site design as well as peak
discharge and detention calculations should be reviewed with the impacts of LID
approach in mind.
TABLE 9-425.6
LID APPROACH SUMMARY CHECKLIST
This checklist is a tool to allow both the regulatory agency and the developer
to reference various LID measures implemented within the development in order
to meet the development s post construction stormwater management requirements.
Project Name:               Engineer:               Developer:
Total site area:               __________sf
Proposed earth disturbance area:   __________sf
Existing impervious area         __________sf
LID Approach                 Total Surface    Plan Pg # of LID Pg # of
Step         Potential BMPs  Area (sf) of LID Measure          Calculations for
                             Measure/BMP                       LID Measure
TABLE 9-425.6
LID APPROACH SUMMARY CHECKLIST
This checklist is a tool to allow both the regulatory agency and the developer
to reference various LID measures implemented within the development in order
to meet the development s post construction stormwater management requirements.
Project Name:               Engineer:               Developer:
Total site area:               __________sf
Proposed earth disturbance area:   __________sf
Existing impervious area         __________sf
LID Approach                      Total Surface   Plan Pg # of Pg # of
Step            Potential BMPs    Area (sf) of    LID Measure  Calculations for
                                  LID Measure/BMP              LID Measure
                Protect                                      
                sensitive areas
                Protect
                riparian                                     
                buffers
                Protect natural                              
1. Minimize     flow pathways
disturbed areas Minimize total                               
                disturbed area
                Reduce
                impervious                                   
                surfaces
                Cluster-type                                 
                development
                Minimize soil                                
                compaction
                Protect trees
                in disturbed                                 
                areas
2. Restore      Soil amendment
disturbed areas and/or                                       
                restoration
                Native                                       
                revegetation
                Riparian buffer                              
                restoration
3. Minimize     Porous pavement                              
imperviousness  Vegetated roof                               
4. Determine
volume control  N/A
needed for      (calculation     N/A                          
channel         step only)
protection
5. Provide      Infiltration                                 
distributed     practices*
retention/      Bio-retention                                
infiltration    Vegetated swale                              
practices
6. Additional   Constructed      N/A                          
(as- needed)    wetland
extended        Extended
detention       detention wet/   N/A                          
practices       dry pond
7. Additional   Pre-approved
(as- need)      BMPs noted in
water quality   Table 8-1 for    N/A                          
BMPs            conventional
                method
Additional      Detention pond
flood peak      (wet/dry/        N/A                          
control (2      undergroun d)
year- 100 year)
Total Surface Area of LID Measures         _____________________sf
Proposed Final Impervious Surface Area         _____________________sf
Percent of Total Site Area Covered by LID      _____________________sf
Note: Not all LID measures are necessary or appropriate for every site. It is
imperative that proper site assessments and due diligence is completed by the
developer and/or engineer prior to design.
* Infiltration practices include: infiltration basins, subsurface infiltration
beds or trenches, and dry wells.
      9.   Summary of Runoff Reduction Recognitions for Water Quality Volume,
Channel Protection and Pea Flow Control Detention Volume for LID Approach. As
discussed throughout this section, to encourage LID approach for stormwater
management, runoff reduction recognitions towards all three (3) major
stormwater management requirements, i.e., water quality, channel protection,
and peak runoff detention, are associated with various BMPS as noted through
the above eight (8) step process. These runoff reduction recognitions are
summarized in Table 9-425.7.j
Sec. 9-426 Special Provisions for “Hot Spot” Land Uses.
   For all those projects involving land uses considered to be high pollutant
producers or "hot spots" (see Table 9-426.1) e.g., vehicle service and
maintenance facilities, vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities, vehicle
and equipment cleaning facilities, fleet storage areas for buses, trucks, etc.,
industrial/commercial or any hazardous waste storage areas or areas that
generate such wastes, industrial sites, restaurants and convenience stores, any
activity involving chemical mixing or loading/unloading, outdoor liquid
container storage, public works storage areas, commercial container nurseries,
and some high traffic retail uses characterized by frequent vehicle turnover),
additional water quality requirements may be imposed by Town of Schererville in
addition to those included in water quality criteria in order to remove
potential pollutant loadings from entering either groundwater or surface water
systems. These pre-treatment options are included in Table 9-426.1 and Table 9-
426.2.
TABLE 9-426.1
PRE-TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR STORMWATER HOT SPOTS
TABLE 9-426.1
PRE-TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR STORMWATER HOT SPOTS
Stormwater Hot Spots                      Minimum Pre-Treatment Options
Vehicle maintenance and repair facilities A, E, F, G
Vehicle fueling stations                  A, D, G
Drive-through restaurants, pharmacies,    B, C, D, I, K
convenience stores
Outdoor chemical mixing or handling       G, H
Outdoor storage of liquids                G
Commercial nursery operations             I, J, L
Other uses or activities designated by    As required
appropriate authority
 
TABLE 9-426.2
MINIMUM PRE-TREATMENT OPTIONS
Minimum Pre-Treatment Options
TABLE 9-426.2
MINIMUM PRE-TREATMENT OPTIONS
Minimum Pre-Treatment Options
A Oil/water separators/hydrodynamic separators
B Sediment traps/catch basin sumps
C Trash/debris collectors in catch basins
D Water quality inserts for inlets (inspected and cleaned after every
  significant rainfall event)
E Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep material under vehicles/equipment
F Use of absorbent devices to reduce liquid releases
G Spill prevention and response program
H Diversion of stormwater way from potential contamination areas
I Vegetated swales/filter strips
J Constructed wetlands
K Stormwater filters (sand, peat, compost, etc.)
L Stormwater collection and reuse (especially for irrigation)
M BMPs that are a part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) under
  a NPDES permit
 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-427 Construction Sequencing Considerations.
   a.   BMPs noted in this chapter refer to post-construction BMPs, which
continue to treat stormwater after construction has been completed and the site
has been stabilized. Installing certain BMPs, such as bio retention areas and
sand filters, prior to stabilization can cause failure of the measure due to
clogging from sediment. If such BMPs are installed prior to site stabilization,
they should be protected by traditional erosion control measures.
   b.   In those instances, the construction sequence must require that the
pond is cleaned out with pertinent elevations and storage and treatment
capacities reestablished as noted in the accepted stormwater management plan.
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-428 Inspection and Maintenance Requirements.
   a.   Subsequent to successful installation of post-construction BMPs, they
need to be inspected and maintained regularly in accordance with the Operation
and Maintenance Manual required to be prepared for each BMP. An operations and
maintenance (O and M) manual for all MS4-owned or private infrastructure,
including but not limited to pipes, ponds, ditches, and BMPs (when required),
shall be submitted for the final plan approval and permit process. The manual
will become a maintenance guide for the drainage infrastructure once
development is complete. The final O and M manual will be provided to the Town
of Schererville in both hard copy and digital formats. The O and M manual
maintenance agreement along with a site map showing the BMP locations shall be
recorded with the final plat. The O and M manual will include the following:
      1.   Name, address, business phone number, home phone number, email
address, cellular phone number, pager number of owner;
       2.   Site drawings (eight and one half (8.5) inches by eleven (11)
inches or eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches), showing both plan and
cross-section views, showing the infrastructure and applicable features,
including dimensions, easements, outlet works, fore bays, signage, etc., as
well as an overall site map of the development showing all structures;
      3.   Guidance on owner-required periodic inspections;
      4.   Requirement of owner to perform maintenance specified by Town of
Schererville inspection, if any;
      5.   Guidance on routine maintenance, including mowing, litter removal,
woody growth removal, signage, etc.;
      6.   Guidance on remedial maintenance; such as inlet replacement, outlet
works maintenance, etc.;
      7.   Guidance on sediment and trash removal, both narrative and
graphical, describing when sediment removal should occur in order to ensure
that BMPs and other infrastructure remain effective as water quality and/or
quantity control devices;
      8.   A statement that the Town of Schererville's representatives have the
right to enter the property to inspect the infrastructure;
      9.   A tabular schedule showing inspection and maintenance requirements;
and
      10.   Identification of the property owner as the party responsible for
all maintenance, including cost.
      11.   Identification of the homeowners association, if applicable, for
eventual transfer of BMP ownership and maintenance responsibilities.
   b.   Inspection checklists for various types of BMPs are provided in the
appendices provided in the Indiana Office of Community and Rural Affairs (OCRA)
Green Infrastructure Curriculum and Training web resources (https://www.in.gov/
ocra/2367.htm). A sample of the required stormwater management maintenance
agreement is provided in Appendix A. This agreement will need to be further
customized, signed, notarized, and recorded so that it can be a part of the
property's deed. The maintenance agreement, the O and M Manual, and the escrow
account (described below) shall be transferred to the new owner as the
ownership and BMP maintenance responsibilities change hands.
   c.   Since the proper perpetual maintenance of post-construction BMPs,
especially the green infrastructure, is so crucial to proper operation of such
BMPs, in addition to the discussed above, the developer is required to
establish a permanent maintenance escrow account and subsequently transfer it
to the future property owner's association or similar entity to cover the cost
of annual maintenance of the post-construction BMPs in perpetuity. The escrow
account is to be held by an entity acceptable to Town of Schererville.
   d.   The established escrow account can be spent solely for sediment
removal, structural, biological or vegetative replacement or removal, invasive
species or weed management, mulching, major repair, or reconstruction of the
stormwater management measures and devices of the particular site plan or
subdivision. If stormwater management facilities are not performing adequately
or as intended or are not properly maintained, the Town of Schererville, in its
sole discretion, may remedy the situation, and in such instances the Town of
Schererville shall be fully reimbursed from the escrow account. Escrowed funds
may be spent by the association for sediment removal, structural, biological or
vegetative replacement or removal, invasive species or weed spraying and/or
removal/trimming, mulching, major repair, and reconstruction of the stormwater
management facilities; provided that, the Town of Schererville shall first
consent to the expenditure. Note that the list of eligible expenses excludes
routine mowing, landscaping, pruning, and other similar activities that have
traditionally and continue to be expected of the entity controlling the land to
fund.
   e.   Initially, the developer's contribution shall fund the escrow account.
Prior to plat recordation or issuance of construction plan approval/permits,
whichever shall first occur, the developer shall pay into the escrow account an
amount equal to fifteen (15%) percent of the estimated initial construction
cost of the stormwater control facilities. This amount shall remain in the
escrow account and shall be transferred to the future property owner's
association or similar entity after the developer receives a signed copy of the
final termination inspection checklist the Town of Schererville confirming
compliance and the IDEM NOT for the project is filed. Note that the
establishment and dedication of the above referenced maintenance escrow account
is in addition to the maintenance bond and assurance required by the Article
following the issuance of the signed final termination inspection checklist by
the Town of Schererville.
   f.   Once the signed final termination inspection checklist by the Town of
Schererville is issued for the project and the maintenance of the site has been
turned over to the property owner/property owner's association or similar
entity, the subsequent required annual funding of the escrow account shall be
the responsibility of the property owner association. A portion of the annual
assessments of the property owner's association shall include an allocation
into the escrow account. Any funds drawn down from the escrow account shall be
replaced in accordance with the schedule of anticipated work used to create the
budget. The property owner's association or similar entity shall report the
balance and financial activities of the escrow account to the Town of
Schererville on an annual basis in the manner acceptable to the Town of
Schererville.
   g.   Installation and maintenance of appropriate signage of all green
infrastructure BMP sites shall also be required both to alert the maintenance
crew and to educate the public.
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-429   Reserved for Future Use.
Division IX. Methodology for Determination of Required Sizing of BMPs.
Sec. 9-430 Introduction.
   This chapter describes the acceptable methods for calculating channel
protection volume, water quality volume, and flow-through bmp flow rate
associated with conventional stormwater management approach (acceptable methods
associated with the LID stormwater management approach are discussed in
Division VIII). Channel protection is achieved through retention or extended
detention of runoff volume for one (1) year, twenty-four (24) hour slam, event.
Structural water quality treatment is achieved by treating the first inch of
rainfall, either through retention/detention BMPs or by flow-through BMPs.
detention/retention BMPs impound (pond) the runoff to be treated, while flow-
through BMPs treat the runoff through some form of filtration process. (Ord.
No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-431 Retention/Detention BMP Sizing.
   a.   Channel Protection Volume.
      1.   Channel protection detention/retention BMPs must be designed to
store the channel protection volume. The channel protection volume, CPv, is the
storage needed to retain or detain the runoff to the receiving stream from the
one (1) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall.
      2.   The methodology for calculating the channel protection volume (CPv)
for each of site's final outlets using computer models or manual calculation is
as follows:
         A.   Computer Model. Use acceptable computer models (listed in
Division II) to determine the total runoff volume for the site contributing to
each site's outlet, utilizing one (1) year, twenty- four (24) hour rainfall
depth with Soil Conservation Service (SCS) type 2 storm distribution, drainage
area, and the composite CN calculated for the site, according to the Soil
Conservation Service (SCS) CN loss method along with SCS unit less hydrograph
methodology.
         B.   Manual Calculation. If calculating manually, use the following
formula:
   CPv(ft3) = Qv x 1/12 x A
         Where:
         A = total post-construction site area contributory to each outlet
(ft2)
         Qv = runoff depth (in) = (P - 0.2S)2/(P + 0.8S)
   724.74
         P = one (1) year, 23 hour rainfall (in)
         S = (1000/CN) - 10
   b.   Water Quality Volume.
      1.   Water Quality Detention BMPs must be designed to store the water
quality volume for treatment. The water quality volume, WQv, is the storage
needed to capture and treat the runoff from the first one inch of rainfall. The
water quality volume is equivalent to one (1) inch of rainfall multiplied by
the volumetric runoff coefficient (Rv) multiplied by the site area.
      2.   A calculation methodology similar to that described for the channel
protection volume may be utilized, except that the rainfall depth (P) will be
equal to one (1), instead of the one (1) year, twenty- four (24) hour depth.
      3.   Alternatively, a simpler methodology may be used for calculation of
WQv as follows:
   WQv = (P)(Rv)(A)/12
      Where:
      WQv = water quality volume for each site’s outlet (acre-feet)
      P = one (1) inch
      Rv = volumetric runoff coefficient
      A = area in acres
      4.   The volumetric runoff coefficient is a measure of imperviousness for
the contributing area, and is calculated as:
   Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I)
      Where:
      I = the percent impervious cover
      5.   For example, a proposed commercial site will be designed to drain to
three (3) different outlets, with the following drainage areas and impervious
percentages:
 
Subarea ID On-site Contributing Area Impervious Area % Off-Site Contributing
           (acres)                                     Area (acres)
A          7.5                       80                0.0
B          4.3                       75                0.0
C          6.0                       77                0.0
 
      6.   Calculating the volumetric runoff coefficient for subareas A, B and
C yields:
         A.   Rv (subarea A) = 0.05+0.009(80) = 0.77
         B.   Rv (subarea B) "0.05+0.009(75) = 0.73
         C.   Rv (subarea C) "0.05+0.009(77) = 0.74
      7.   The water quality volumes for these three (3) areas are then
calculated as:
         A.   WQv (subarea A) = (1")(Rv)(A)/12 = 0.77(7.5)/12 = 0.47 acre-feet
         B.   WQv (subarea B) = 0.73(4.3)/12 = 0.26 acre-feet
         C.   WQv (subarea C) = 0.74(6.0)/12 = 0.37 acre-feet
      8.   Note that this example assumed no offsite sources of discharge
through the water quality BMPs. If there were significant sources of off-site
runoff (sometimes called runon for upstream areas draining to the site), the
designer would have the option of bypassing off-site runoff around the onsite
systems, or the detention BMP should be sized to treat the on-site channel
protection volume plus the water quality volume for the off-site sources. (Ord.
No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-432 Flow Through BMP Sizing.
   Flow-through BMPs are designed to treat runoff at a calculated water quality
treatment flow rate through the system. Examples of flow through BMPs include
catch basin inserts, sand filters, and grassed channels. Another flow through
BMP is a manufactured treatment device such as a hydrodynamic separator,
manufactured infiltration chambers, or other similar type of device discussed
in the water quality devices fact sheet (https://www.in.gov/ocra/2367.htm)
   a.   Requirements for Manufactured Treatment Devices.
      1.   Stormwater manufactured treatment devices (MTD), also known as
hydrodynamic separators are proprietary, and usually include a pollutant-water
separation component. The MTD should be sized to treat flows up to, and
including, the water quality treatment rate (Qwq) calculated for each project
site outlet. To be acceptable, the MTD should meet the following criteria:
         A.   The MTD must be offline and located upstream of detention
facilities (if any).
         B.   The MTD must provide complete and unobstructed access to the
entire bottom of the system from grade level, if applicable, for ease of
maintenance.
         C.   The MTD, or the treatment train (if applicable) that includes the
MTD as one of its components, must have the ability to capture or skim
pollutants including but not limited to: floating oils/immiscible materials.
         D.   The MTD, or the treatment train (if applicable) that includes the
MTD as one of its components, must have the ability to capture both floating
and suspended solid material (trash, organic material, etc.) and other
pollutants.
         E.   The MTD shall be a manufactured system currently certified by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). A list of NJDEP-
MTDs certified for fifty percent (50%) and eighty percent (80%) TSS removal are
provided in a table located at http://www.nj.gov/dep/stormwater/treatment.html.
      2.   To obtain the maximum flow rate for various models of a MTD that is
listed in the NJDEP-certified list, the latest verification report from NJCAT
Verification Database must be used. A link to the database is provided right
above the NJDEP-certified list table.
      3.   In summary, the following steps should be used to determine whether
a proposed MTD unit is NJDEP-certified and to determine the accepted maximum
flow rate for that unit.
         A.   Step 1: Determine if the MTD is NJDEP-certified for fifty percent
(50%) treatment rate (when the MTD will be used in a treatment train) or eighty
percent (80%) treatment rate (when the MTD will be used alone):
            i.   Go to http://www.nl.gov/dep/stormwater/treatment.html.
            ii.   Look up the name of the MTD in the first column of the table.
            iii.   Look up the certified TSS removal rate of that MTD in the
fourth column .
         B.   Step 2: Determine the maximum accepted flow rate:
            i.   Click the link "certification" in the second column of the
NJDEP-certified list table referenced in Step 1. In some cases, a table of MTD
model versus the NJDEP-certified maximum flow rate is included in the
certification letter. In that case, skip to sub-step vii (below). If not
continue to the sub-step ii (below).
            ii.   Click the "Click here" link above the NJDEP-certified list
table to access NJCAT Verification Database.
            iii.   Find the name of the MTD manufacturer of interest in first
column.
            iv.   Find the latest entry (one with the latest verification date
shown in third column) for that particular MTD.
            v.   Click the report download link in the fourth column.
            vi.   Find the table in the report (typically towards the end of
the report) that lists various MTD model sizes along with the NJDEP fifty
percent (50%) or eighty percent (80%), if appropriate) TSS maximum treatment
flow rate.
            vii.   The selected model should have a maximum flow rate that is
equal or larger than the site's required treatment flow rate as determined in
Sec.
9-432b.
      4.   Note that the NJDEP-certified manufactured system treatment rates
for units not equipped with special filters reflect a standard certified fifty
percent (50%) TSS reduction at the listed certified treatment flow rate.
Therefore, to achieve the eighty percent (80%) TSS removal requirement, either
a treatment train with a conventional listed in Table 9-424 (except for another
MTD or a sand filter) must be used or a filtration system must be used instead
in accordance with the NJDEP methodology. The treatment train shall not include
more than one MTD.
      5.   Also, note that multiple inlet or units in series configurations are
not accepted unless the NJCAT certification and NJDEP verification is
specifically done for such an arrangement.
   b.   Calculating the Required Treatement Flow Rate (Qwq).
      1.   The following procedure should be used to estimate peak discharges
for flow through BMPs (adopted from Maryland, 2000). It relies on the volume of
runoff computed using the Small Storm Hydrology Method (Pitt, 1994) and
utilizes the NRCS, TR-55 Method.
      2.   Using the WQv methodology, a corresponding curve number (CNwq) is
computed utilizing the following equation:
   CNwq =  1000
   [10=5P=10Qa-1-Qa2=1.25QaP]
      Where:
      CNwq = curve number for water quality storm event
      P = one (1) inch (rainfall for water qualiy storm event)
      Qa = runoff volume, in inches = 1"xRv=Rv(inches)
      Rv = volumetric runoff coefficient (see previous section)
      3.   Due to the complexity of the above equation, the water quality curve
number is represented as a function of percent imperviousness in Figure 9-432.
      4.   The water quality curve number, CNwq, is then used in conjunction
with the standard calculated time-of-concentration, tc, and drainage area as
the basis input for TR-55 calculations. Using the SGS Type II distribution for
one (1) inch of rainfall in twenty-four (24) hours, the water quality treatment
rate, Qwq, can then be calculated.
   c.   References.
      1.   Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volume II, Appendix D.10, 2000.
      2.   Pitt, R., 1994, Small Storm Hydrology. University of Alabama -
Birmingham. Unpublished manuscript. Presented at design of stormwater quality
management practices. Madison, WI, May 17-19, 1994.
      3.   Schueler, T.R. and R.A. Claytor, 1996, Design of Stormwater Filter
Systems. Center for Watershed Protection, Silver Spring, MD.
      4.   United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), 1986. Urban
Hydrology for Small
Watersheds. Soil Conservation Service, Engineering Division. Technical Release
55 (TR-55). (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Figure 9-432
Curve Number Calculatio n for Water Quality Storm Event
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3794.jpg]
Sec. 9-433   through Sec. 9-434 Reserved for Future Use.
Division X. Lot/Building Grading and Drainage Standards.
Sec. 9-435 Grading and Building Pad Elevations.
   a.   Minimum Federal and State Requirements. For all structures located in
the special flood hazards area (SFHA) as shown on the FEMA maps and/or that
mapped by the IDNR based on best available data, the lowest floor elevation,
including basement, shall be at or above the flood protection grade (FPG) and
therefore have a minimum of two (2) feet of freeboard above the one hundred
(100) year flood elevation. Additional requirements for buildings within SFHA
are contained in Chapter 10, Article 2.
   b.   Additional Local Requirements.
      1.   FPG for all buildings located within or adjacent to SFHA shall be
shown on the secondary plat.
      2.   For all structures located outside SFHA or an IDNR designated
floodplains that are subject to flooding from a detention/retention pond, the
lowest adjacent grade (LAG) of all residential, commercial, or industrial
buildings shall have a minimum of two (2) feet of freeboard above the one
hundred (100) year flood elevation or the emergency overflow weir elevation,
whichever is higher.
      3.   For all structures located outside SFHA or an IDNR designated
floodplains that are subject to flooding from a stream or an open ditch or
other waterway (an area along a stream with no floodplain designation or an
area adjacent to a designated floodplain with ground elevation below one
hundred (100) year flood elevation plus two (2) feet), the LAG of all
residential, commercial, or industrial buildings shall have a minimum of two
(2) feet of freeboard above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation of that
open ditch or waterway.
      4.   For all structures fronting a flooding source other than a swale or
an emergency flood route, the floor of any basements or crawl spaces (if
provided) shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the normal pool level (if
pond) or the two (2) year flood level (if a stream or an open ditch). In
addition, special considerations, based on detailed geotechnical analysis,
should be made prior to considering placement of any basement below the one
hundred (100) year flood elevation of an adjacent flooding source or pond.
      5.   For all structures adjacent to an emergency flood route (also
referred to as overflow path/ponding areas), the minimum adjacent grade of the
portion of the structure (the ground elevation next to the building after
construction is completed that sits adjacent to the emergency flood route or
may be subject to flooding by the emergency flood route) shall be a minimum of
one (1) foot above the estimated one hundred (100) year elevation of the
emergency flood route assuming that all stormwater inlets and pipes are fully
clogged, with no discharge into the storm sewer system. The building adjacent
grade requirements (including default elevations above the overflow route
bottom) for buildings adjacent to overflow path/ponding areas are further
discussed in Division IV.
      6.   For all structures adjacent to a road, the building's lowest entry
elevation that is adjacent to and facing a road shall be a minimum of two (2)
feet above the road elevation (elevation of the gutter at the center of the
lot) so that the road drainage is not directed against the building.
      7.   There shall be a positive slope drainage away from the building with
maximum yard slopes that are three to one (3:1) where soil has been disturbed
during construction processes. Finished floor elevation or the lowest building
entry elevation must be no less than six (6) inches above finished grade around
the building.
      8.   In addition to any other provisions in these standards, no buildings
shall be placed within twenty-five (25) feet from the top of the bank of any
existing or proposed stream, drain, or watercourse, regardless of the
contributing drainage area or the bank height. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-436 Lot Drainage.
   a.   All lots shall be laid out so as to provide drainage away from all
buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general
stormwater drainage pattern for the subdivision. Drainage shall be designed so
as to avoid the concentration of stormwater runoff from a lot onto adjacent
lots. Each lot owner shall maintain the lot grade, as it relates to stormwater
drainage, in compliance with the approved construction plans.
   b.   No part of the lot area of any lot may contain land that is utilized as
retention or detention facility or drainage pond, contains a watercourse, or is
within a floodway. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of the lot
from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for the
installation of a culvert or other appropriate structure, as approved by the
Town of Schererville or designee. If a subdivision contains an existing or to
be developed waterbody, watercourse, or portion thereof, appropriate
documentary assurances acceptable to the Town of Schererville shall be provided
for the maintenance of such waterbody or watercourse.
   c.   It shall be the property owners' responsibility to maintain the natural
features on their lots and to take preventive measures against any and all
erosion and/or deterioration of natural or manmade features on their lots.
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-437 Acceptable Outlet and Adjoining Property Impacts Policies.
   a.   Design and construction of the stormwater facility shall provide for
the discharge of the stormwater runoff from off-site land areas as well as the
stormwater from the area being developed (on-site land areas) to an acceptable
outlet(s) (as determined by the Town of Schererville) having capacity to
receive upstream (off-site) and on-site drainage. A roadside ditch is generally
not considered an adequate outlet. The flow path from the development outfall
(s) to a regulated drain, a Town of Schererville storm drain, or natural
watercourse (as determined or approved by the Town of Schererville) shall be
provided on an exhibit that includes topographic information. Any existing
field tile encountered during the construction shall also be incorporated into
the proposed stormwater drainage system or lied to an acceptable outlet.
   b.   If an adequate outlet is not located on site, then off-site drainage
improvements may be required. Those improvements may include, but are not
limited to, extending storm sewers, clearing, dredging and/or removal of
obstructions to open drains or natural water courses, and the removal or
replacement of undersized culvert pipes as required by the Town of
Schererville. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-438 and Sec. 9-439 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XI. River Corridor, Bluffs, and Floodplain Protection Standards.
Sec. 9-440 Development Within Floodways and Fluvial Erosion Hazard Corridors.
   Regulatory floodway and fluvial erosion hazard (FEH) corridor along
regulated drains or any natural stream watercourse are considered impact
drainage areas and must be preserved to the extent possible to minimize
flooding and erosion impacts within the stream system.
   a.   Basis for Establishing Floodways. The regulatory floodway along Town of
Schererville streams are established as detailed in the latest edition of the
Chapter 10, Article 2.
   b.   Basis for Establishing Fluvial Erosion Hazard (FEH) Corridors.
      1.   The Indiana Silver Jackets Hazard Mitigation Task Force has
initiated a multi-agency program to identify, study and provide mitigation
planning resources for communities who would like lo adopt fluvial erosion
hazard (FEH) avoidance strategies. The resources provided by this project
enable individuals and communities to better recognize areas prone to natural
stream-erosion processes and adopt strategies to avoid FEH-related risks. The
FEH resources define approximate setbacks for communities to better manage
river corridors. The setbacks vary based on the stream's recent migration
history (actively migrating or relatively stationary).
      2.   For actively migrating and relatively stationary streams, a GIS
analysis algorithm generated bank full width values for each stream segment
using regional curves that are based on drainage area within each physiographic
region in Indiana. For relatively stationary streams, the analysis used these
values to create buffer zones of at least one bank full width on each side (a
total corridor width of three (3) times bank full width) or one hundred (100)
feet on each side of the bank full bank. whichever is greater. For actively
migrating streams, GIS generated a total corridor width of eight (8) times bank
full width, which was manually edited and refined to reflect the digital
elevation model and stream meander evidence.
      3.   It should be noted that the FEH corridors were created at a map
scale of approximately one to ten thousand (1:10,000) to one to fifteen
thousand (1:15,000). The depicted areas were not meant to be accurate beyond
providing an approximate boundary of potential stream migration. A data layer
containing FEH corridors along Indiana streams is currently hosted by IDNR-
Division of Water on their mapping portal currently at: https://
indnr.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=43e
7b307a0184c7c851b5068941e2e23. The IDNR website notes that, due to its level of
detail, this data is not intended for use in project design or parcel level
site analysis and that a more detailed analysis of the localized geology and
fluvial mechanics is necessary for the proper evaluation of the fluvial erosion
hazard.
      4.   Despite its inherent level of accuracy, the FEH corridor map created
by the Indiana Silver Jackets constitutes the best available data in Town of
Schererville and is the basis for regulating development within these corridors
by Town of Schererville. A scaled version of the Town of Schererville FEH
corridor map is available from the Town of Schererville GIS website. More
detailed mapping than that used as part of the Indiana Silver Jackets erosion
hazard mapping program may be provided by the applicant if it is based on
detailed field assessment acceptable to the Town of Schererville.
   c.   Special Requirements within Floodways and FEH Corridors. No disturbance
(fill or excavation) associated with a new development or redevelopment is
permitted within FEH corridors or regulatory floodways, unless such
modifications are part of a stream-wide restoration plan or a watershed master
plan. This restriction does not apply to stormwater or tile outfalls. Any
streambank stabilization effort within an FEH corridor shall require prior
review by the Town of Schererville to safeguard against potential negative
impacts on other properties or on the stream morphological system. Note that if
a stream that is located within incorporated area of a community is designated
as a county regulated drain, the proposed activities in the FEH corridor shall
be under the county's jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-441 Additional Consideration for Development Within or Adjacent to Bluff
Zones and Steep Slopes.
   a.   In addition to riverine erosion hazards that exist due to lateral
migration of streams as discussed above, there are hazardous areas along many
bluffs and steep slopes existing in Town of Schererville. For the purpose of
these standards, bluff is defined as a natural topographic feature having:
      1.   A slope that rises at least twenty-five (25) feet and the grade of
the slope averages thirty percent (30%) or greater, measured over a horizontal
distance of twenty-five (25) feet, from the toe of the slope to the top of the
slope. Where the slope begins below the ordinary high water level, the ordinary
high water level is the toe of the slope. See Figure 9-441.1; or
      2.   A natural escarpment or cliff with a slope that rises at least ten
(10) feet above the ordinary high water level or toe of the slope, whichever is
applicable, to the top of the slope, with a slope of seventy-five (75) degrees
or greater. See Figure 9-441.2.
   b.   These bluffs exist in many places and do not have to be necessarily
along a permanent stream. They may be along the rivers (but sometimes outside
the floodway and FEH zones) or along many head cut channels and developing
ravines in Town of Schererville that may be tributary to various streams. To
prevent buildings from damage due to natural slope adjustment next to bluffs, a
minimum of forty (40) feet of landward setback shall be required from top of
the bluff as illustrated in Figures 9-441.1 and 9-441.2. If a floodway or FEH
is also present on the site, the most landward limit shall govern.
   c.   The definition of other terms shown in Figures 9-441.1 and 9-441.2 are
as follows:
      1.   Bluff impact zone: A bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet
of the bluff.
      2.   Bluff line: A line delineating the top of the bluff. More than one
(1) bluff line may be encountered proceeding landward from the river.
      3.   Toe of bluff: a line along the bottom of a bluff, requiring field
verification, such that the slope above the line exceeds thirty percent (30%)
and the slope below the line is thirty percent (30%) or less, measured over a
horizontal distance of twenty-five (25) feet.
      4.   Top of bluff: a line along the top of a bluff, requiring field
verification, such that the slope below the line exceeds thirty percent (30%)
and the slope above the line is thirty percent (30%) or less, measured over a
horizontal distance of twenty-five (25) feet.
   d.   Where principal structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of
a proposed building site, the minimum setback may be altered to conform to the
average of the adjoining setbacks.
   e.   In addition to structure setback noted above, with the exception of
erosion control practices sanctioned by or approved by the Town of
Schererville, no land disturbance (fill or excavation) shall be allowed within
a bluff impact zone.
   f.   Also note that the minimum setback required in these standards is just
that: a minimum, which is based on national experience. When buildings or other
infrastructure is proposed near bluffs or steep slopes, the applicant is
encouraged to seek a detailed geotechnical evaluation that may result in
needing to have a larger setback or have special provisions even when the
slopes are gentler than that regulated in these standards.
Figure 9-441.1
Bluff and Bluff Impact Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3796.jpg]
Figure 9-441.2
Natural Escarpment Bluff and Bluff Impact Zone   
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3798.jpg]
 
(Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-442 Floodplain Avoidance/No Net Loss Floodplain Storage Policy.
   a.   Floodplains exist adjacent to all natural and man-made streams,
regardless of contributing drainage area or whether they have been previously
identified or mapped. Due to potential impacts of floodplain loss on peak flows
in streams and on the environment, floodplains are considered impact drainage
areas and disturbance to these areas should be avoided. When the avoidance of
floodplain disturbance is not practical, the natural functions of the
floodplain should be preserved to the extent possible.
   b.   In an attempt to strike a balance between the legitimate need for
economic development within the Town of Schererville jurisdictional area and
the ever-increasing importance of and the need to preserve the natural
functions of floodplains to the extent possible (especially given the ongoing
and projected climate change impacts), compensatory excavation equivalent to
the floodplain storage lost shall be required for all activities within area
inundated by the one hundred (100) year flood elevation plus two (2) feet along
floodplain of streams located in Town of Schererville where drainage area of
the stream is equal to or larger than one (1) square mile. The Town of
Schererville may alter the compensation ratio, based on extenuating
circumstances, for a specific project.
   c.   General Requirements.
      1.   Note that by definition, compensatory storage is the replacement of
the existing floodplain and, in rare exceptions, the floodway storage lost due
to fill. Compensatory storage is required when a portion of the floodplain is
filled, occupied by a structure, or when as a result of a project a change in
the channel hydraulics occurs that reduces the existing available floodplain
storage. Compensatory storage must:
         A.   Be provided regardless of whether the flooding source is mapped
or whether flood elevations are published or not. When flood elevations are not
available for a flooding source that has a drainage area equal to or larger
than one (1) square mile (six hundred and forty (640) acres), the applicant is
to determine the ten (10) year and one hundred (100) year flood elevations at
the site and get them approved by the I DNR prior to use for floodplain
compensation calculations;
         B.   Equal at least one (1) times the volume of flood storage lost
below the ten (10) year elevation and storage lost between ten (10) year and
one hundred (100) year plus two (2) feet flood elevations;
         C.   Be operational prior to placement of fill, structures, or other
materials temporarily or permanently placed in the regulatory floodplain;
         D.   Be provided in the immediate vicinity of the flood storage lost,
where practical;
         E.   Be provided in such a way to mimic as close as possible the
function provided by the lost floodplain storage. If the floodplain storage is
to be lost outside the active flow conveyance path, then it must be compensated
for outside the flow conveyance path (e.g., a flood conveyance shelf/two (2)
stage ditch, while improving conveyance and erosion, is not an appropriate
compensation for floodplain storage lost in the floodway fringe area);
         F.   Be provided in addition to the site retention/detention volume;
and
         G.   Drain freely and openly to the waterway.
      2.   Compensatory storage is also required to be provided incrementally
such that:
         A.   All floodplain storage/conveyance capacity lost within the
floodway shall be compensated for within the floodway;
         B.   All floodplain storage lost within the floodway fringe shall be
compensated for within the floodway fringe;
         C.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten (10) year
flood elevation shall be compensated for below the proposed ten (10) year flood
elevation; and
         D.   All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten (10) year
flood elevation shall be compensated for above the proposed ten (10) year flood
elevation.
      3.   Note that compensatory storage is required for activities in the
regulatory floodplain. There is no threshold to compensatory storage; any
volume of fill requires compensatory storage be provided. However, the
compensatory storage requirement does not apply to specific activities in the
regulatory floodplain, such as the flood proofing of an existing building,
where the flood proofing measures such as berms or floodwalls are within ten
(10) feet of the building, or crossing improvements, where artificially created
storage is lost due to a reduction in head loss.
   d.   Computing Compensatory Storage.
      1.   Computations must show one (1) time compensation for floodplain
storage volume lost for ten (10) year and one hundred (100) year storm plus two
(2) feet events. Storage lost between the existing ground and the existing ten
(10) year flood elevation must be compensated by providing one (1) time the
amount lost and be placed between the existing ground elevation and the
proposed ten (10) year floodplain elevation. Storage lost between the existing
ten (10) year and the existing one hundred (100) year plus two (2) feet
elevation must be compensated by providing one (1) time the amount lost and be
placed between the proposed ten (10) year elevation and proposed one hundred
(100) year plus two (2) feet elevation.
      2.   When preparing a grading plan, thought should be given to how
compensatory storage will be quantified. The most common methodology is the use
of cross sections and the "average end area method." The following requirements
should be followed when preparing cross sections:
         A.   Prepare a detailed topographic survey tied to North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 and the Town of Schererville Survey Control Network
benchmarks.
         B.   Locate cross sections parallel to each other and perpendicular to
a reference line, often times a property line or fence line. Cross sections
used in a hydraulic model are always perpendicular to flood flows, and not
always parallel to each other. Therefore, these are often not suitable for
computing flood fringe compensatory storage volumes.
         C.   Plot cross sections at a standard engineering scale so as to
allow the reviewer to verify areas. Horizontal scale should be a maximum of one
(1) inch = fifty (50) feet and vertical scale should be a maximum of one (1)
inch = five (5) feet, or as approved by the county.
         D.   Show existing grades, proposed grades, existing and proposed ten
(10) year flood elevations, existing and proposed one hundred (100) year flood
elevations, normal water level. a reference line, and floodway limits on the
cross sections on the plans.
         E.   Locate cross sections no more than one hundred and fifty (150)
feet apart, with a minimum of three (3) cross sections per cut/fill area, or as
necessary to accurately quantify cuts and fills.
         F.   Locate cross sections to pick up critical features such as berms,
ditches, and existing and proposed structures.
         G.   Each cross section should be numbered or lettered and referenced
on the plans.
      3.   This information is then utilized to compute the areas of cut and
fill. A sample grading plan, a typical cross section, and associated
compensatory storage calculations for the ten (10) year flood are provided on
Figures 9-442.1, Figure 9-442.2, and Table 9-442 respectively.
      4.   Volume of fill between cross sections are calculated by finding the
average fill cross sectional area and multiplying it by the distance between
the two cross sections. For example, the fill volume between cross sections A
and B is calculated as follows:
   Average fill area = (fill area A + fill area B)/2 = (0 ft2 + 100 ft2)/2 = 50
ft2
   Volume of fill = (average fill area) x (distance) = (50 ft2) x (150 ft) =
7,500 ft3
      5.   Once the total volume of fill placed, for this example, between the
zero (0)-and ten (10) year flood elevations is determined, the total required
compensatory storage can be calculated and compared against the total
compensatory storage volume provided by the design as shown in the table. For
this example:
   Required compensatory storage= (1) x (total volume of fill) = (1) x (36,250
ft3)= 36,250 ft3
Figure 9-442.1
Example Compensatory Storage Grading Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3805.jpg]
Figure 9-442.2
Example Cross Section D.D
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3803.jpg]
 
TABLE 9-442
EXAMP LE COMPE NSATO RY STORA GE CALCUL ATIONS FOR 0- 10 YEAR EVENT
        Distance             Average    Volume of           Average  Volume of
Cross   Between   Fill Area  Fill Area  fill (cu. Cut Area  Cut (sq. Cut (cu.
Section Sections  (sq. ft.)  (sq. ft.)  ft.)      (sq. ft.) ft.)     ft.)
        (ft)
TABLE 9-442
EXAMP LE COMPE NSATO RY STORA GE CALCUL ATIONS FOR 0- 10 YEAR EVENT
        Distance             Average    Volume of           Average  Volume of
Cross   Between   Fill Area  Fill Area  fill (cu. Cut Area  Cut (sq. Cut (cu.
Section Sections  (sq. ft.)  (sq. ft.)  ft.)      (sq. ft.) ft.)     ft.)
        (ft)
A                0                             0                  
       150                 50         7,500              0         
B                100                           0                  
       90                  125        11,250             20       1,800
C                150                           40                 
       100                 125        12,500             65       6,500
D                100                           90                 
       100                 50         5,000              100      10,000
E                0                             110                
       100                 0          0                  120      12,000
F                0                             130                
       85                  0          0                  85       7,225
G                0                             40                 
Total Fill                              36,250    Total Cut          37,525
 
      6.   Since the total amount of cut provided (37,525 ft3 as shown in the
table) is larger than that required (36,250 ft3), the design meets the
compensatory storage requirement for the ten (10) year flood. An additional
table and calculation should be completed for the flood storage between the ten
(10) year and one hundred (100) year plus two (2) feet flood elevation in a
similar manner to determine whether the design meets the compensatory storage
requirement for the area above the ten (10) year flood elevation.
   e.   Location of Compensatory Storage.
      1.   Compensatory storage must be located on-site and adjacent to or
opposite the areas filled or occupied by a structure. In those rare instances
when compensatory storage cannot be located adjacent to or opposite to the
areas filled or occupied, engineering computations demonstrating that
hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage has been provided in a nearby
area in the watershed is required. These computations must show that no
Increase in flood flows or flood depths will result as a result of the location
of the proposed compensatory storage,
      2.   Compensatory storage must be constructed to drain freely and openly
to watercourses. In some rare cases it may be necessary to install pipes to
construct and/or operate a compensatory storage basin. This may occur when site
constraints, such as a roadway or sidewalk, separate the waterway from the
compensatory storage area. This is illustrated in the top half of Figure 9-
442.3.
      3.   Another scenario may occur when a site cannot meet the incremental
storage requirements discussed In this document. If incremental storage
requirements from the ten (10) year to one hundred (100) year plus two (2) feet
elevations cannot be met, pipes could be installed with a flap gate to prevent
the water from entering from the stream bed at lower elevations. The berm could
then be set at the elevation of the ten (10) year flood elevation, thus
allowing the storage to only become effective above the ten (10) year flood
elevation. This is illustrated in the bottom half of the illustration in Figure
9-442.3.
      4.   The use of pipes in compensatory storage will require approval by
the county. Pipes must be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches in diameter so as to
allow water to enter and exit freely with a minimum head differential. If the
compensatory storage is proposed to be combined with detention, it must be
demonstrated the compensatory storage and detention do not interfere with one
another.
Figure 9-442.3
Example of Compensatory Storage Connection to Stream through Pipe
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3807.jpg]
   f.    Comp ensato ry Storag e in the Regul atory Flood way.
      1.    Only fill associ ated with appro priate uses of the regulatory
floodway may be allowed to be placed within the limits of the floodway. When in
rare circumstances, fill is allowed, all provisions discussed above relating to
compensatory storage must be met in addition to the items discussed below.
         A.   Any fill placed within the existing floodway must be compensated
for within the proposed floodway.
         B.   All floodway storage lost below the existing ten (10) year base
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten (10) year base flood
elevation.
         C.   All floodway storage lost between the existing ten (10) year
flood elevation and the existing one hundred (100) year plus two (2) feet flood
elevation shall be replaced between the proposed ten (10) year and proposed one
hundred (100) year plus two (2) feet flood elevation.
      2.   Should excavation within a floodway be allowed in special
circumstances, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result
of a floodway modification, unless such modification is part of a stream-wide
plan or necessary to reduce flooding at an existing structure. (Ord. No. 2009,
§ 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-443   and Sec. 9-444 Reserved for Future Use.
Division XII. Standards Associated with Dams and Levees.
Sec. 9-445 Policy on Dams and Levees.
   Dams and levees have the potential for significant, sometimes catastrophic
consequences should they fail. In order to minimize the potential for loss of
life and public safety, decrease the potential for increased flood damage and
disaster costs, and safeguard the downstream property rights, the following
shall be required by the Town of Schererville for any proposed new or
improvements to any existing dam or levee. These requirements are in addition
to what is normally required for other development subject to this chapter and/
or that required by state or federal agencies.
   a.   Design of dams shall follow the requirements of the latest edition of
IDNR-Division of Water "General Guidelines for New Dams and Improvements to
Existing Dams in Indiana" as well as principles provided in the latest edition
of "Indiana Dam Safety Inspection Manual".
   b.   Design of levee/floodwalls shall follow the FEMA requirements and
guidelines provided in 44 CFR Section 65.10 and USAGE Engineer Manual 1110-2-
193, Design and Construction of Levees.
   c.   An incident and emergency action plan (IEAP), including a detailed dam
breach inundation map, shall be developed in accordance with the template
provided in the latest edition of “Indiana Dam Safety Inspection Manual” and
submitted to the Town of Schererville. The detailed dam breach inundation map
referenced in this paragraph shall be developed for both "sunny day breach"
scenario (breach during normal loading conditions) and for maximum loading
condition with breach assumed to occur as the spillway system is passing the
spillway design flood associated with the dam ("SDF + breach" scenario).
   d.   Unless the "sunny day breach inundation area" is entirely contained
within the applicant's property and/ or contained within the existing one
hundred (100) year floodplain, a copy of recorded flood inundation easement or
a recorded written consent for every property within the potential "sunny day
breach inundation area" shall be submitted to the Town of Schererville. Also
required is the ownership or recorded easement of all property around the lake
with an elevation below the top of the dam. In addition, all the affected
property owners whose properties are located within the "SDF + breach
inundation area" must be notified of a hearing relevant to the proposed added
flooding risk, should such a man-made structure suffer a catastrophic failure.
Notification of the time and place of the hearing shall be made in person or by
certified mail at least five (5) to ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Proof
of notice to each landowner shall be filed by affidavit with the Town of
Schererville prior to the hearing.
   e.   A copy of a management and maintenance plan for the proposed dam or
levee developed in accordance with the latest edition of "Indiana Dam Safety
Inspection Manual" shall be submitted to the Town of Schererville.
   f.   Unless the dam is subject to and regulated by IDNR, following the
permitting and construction of the dam or levee, a copy of a formal periodic
inspection report prepared in accordance with the recommendations contained in
the latest edition of "Indiana Dam Safety Inspection Manual" shall be submitted
to the Town of Schererville along with evidence that the identified maintenance
deficiencies have been corrected. The inspection report has to be submitted as
it gets completed in accordance with the inspection frequency recommended in
the latest edition of "Indiana Dam Safety Inspection Manual". (Ord. No. 2009, §
1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-446 Requirements Associated with Proposed Developments Downstream of
Dams.
   As indicated in the previous section, dams have the potential for
significant, sometimes catastrophic consequences should they fall. Placing new
development downstream of an existing dam does not only expose the future
residents or users of the newly developed areas to a potential new significant
risk, but could also have an impact on the hazard rating of the dam itself,
which can in turn make the dam non-compliant with the state and federal
standards. In order to minimize the potential for loss of life and public
safety, decrease the potential for increased flood damage and disaster costs,
and safeguard the upstream dam owner's rights, the following shall be required
by the Town of Schererville for any proposed new development or redevelopment
downstream of an existing dam. These requirements are in addition to what is
normally required for new development or redevelopment subject to these
standards.
   a.   Dam breach inundation maps have been created for several existing dams
within the State of Indiana by the dam owners, IDNR, or others as part of
development of individual IEAPs for these dams. When the development location
is suspected by the applicant or the Town of Schererville to be within an
existing dam's breach inundation zone, the applicant is required to include a
copy of the breach inundation mapping associated with that dam as part of its
stormwater management permit application. To locate such a mapping, the
applicant should contact the dam owner, IDNR Division of Water, Town of
Schererville, or other agencies to obtain the breach inundation map for the
dam, if available. If no dam breach inundation map can be located for the dam,
it will be the applicant's responsibility to produce a Town of Schererville-
acceptable dam breach mapping either through directly contracting with a
qualified engineer or through funding the production of such a map by the Town
of Schererville review consultant in accordance with standards and guidelines
established by the IDNR-Division of Water.
   b.   If the location of the proposed development falls within the dam breach
inundation zone on the map discussed under Subdivision a. above, additional
requirements as determined by Town of Schererville may be imposed before a
permit is issued and the development is allowed to occur. The noted additional
requirements depend on several variables and are expected to vary case by case.
Typical requirements could include relocating a portion or all of the proposed
development to areas outside of the dam breach inundation zone, cost-sharing
with the dam owner in necessary upgrades to the dam as a result of a potential
hazard classification increase, addition of structural protection measures
(such as flood protection levees), additional freeboard requirements,
development and periodic exercise of warning and evacuation plans, and other
measures considered necessary by Town of Schererville to minimize the potential
for loss of life and public safety, decrease the potential for increased flood
damage and disaster costs, and safeguard the upstream dam owner's rights. (Ord.
No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-447 through Sec. 9-449 Reserved for Future Use.
Division  XIII. Special Standards for Proposed Solar Farms.
Sec. 9-450 Special Standards for Proposed Solar Farms.
   a.   Solar development has expanded over the last several years as Indiana
and other states have invested in this important resource to further greenhouse
gas emission reductions. The large amount of impervious surface inherent in the
construction of a large-scale solar array entails challenges not encountered in
traditional development projects. If not properly managed through appropriate
design and mitigation measures, stormwater discharged during and after the
construction of solar arrays can be a significant source of pollution resulting
from increased runoff, erosion, and sedimentation, which can adversely impact
adjoining properties, streams, wetlands, or other natural resources. Solar
installations must be properly designed to assure soil stabilization, minimize
soil disturbance and soil compaction, and address ineffective controls to
manage the total runoff volume and velocity that can lead to the loss of
topsoil, erosion and sediment discharges from disturbed areas and stormwater
outlets, and erosion along downstream channels and streambanks. The ability to
address such significant environmental problems during construction and post-
construction becomes more difficult as site imperviousness increases.
   b.   Solar projects that use traditional elevated solar panels are unique
because they contain an impervious surface (elevated solar panel) that often
has a pervious surface (vegetation) underneath the panel. Stormwater runoff
from solar projects is generated primarily from rain that falls on access
roads, inverter pads, and solar panels. Water that falls off solar panels runs
across the panel to the dripline, and eventually falls to the underlying
surface. Some of this water will infiltrate and some will run-off downslope and
eventually off site.
   c.   One of the most notable impacts that solar sites have on water quality
is the potential for erosion and/or scour at the dripline. To minimize the
erosion and/or scour at the dripline, the lowest vertical clearance of any
solar array shall be no greater than ten (10) feet. Also, erosion prevention
and sediment control best management practices (BMPs) as detailed in Division
VII must be utilized during construction.
   d.   In addition to providing construction BMPs, solar projects must adhere
to the post-construction stormwater management requirements, including
providing the required water quality volume (WQv) and channel protection volume
(CPv) described in Division VIII, as well as peak flow control (detention)
requirements described in Division VI. However, because solar farms-
particularly the panels- have unique characteristics, not like constructing a
building or road, they often inherently include stormwater disconnection
features that qualifies them for recognition/credit afforded to the stormwater
disconnection BMP, which similar to typical solar panel farms rely on
maintaining sheet flow and infiltration in adequately-sized, vegetative areas
receiving runoff. The stormwater disconnection BMP is detailed in OCRA Green
Infrastructure Curriculum and Training resources web page: Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-
Sheets.pdf/in.gov)). Per recommendations from the Center for Watershed
Protection, the following stormwater disconnection recognitions/credits are
established as part of these standards for solar farms that meet the conditions
stated in these standards:
      1.   WQv: Up to one hundred percent (100%) of the required water quality
volume, proportionate to the percentage of total disconnected area to total
site impervious area, may be subtracted from the required WQv.
      2.   CPv: For determining the channel protection volume (CPv), the post-
construction CN for the impervious area treated by the stormwater disconnection
BMP may be determined assuming the treated area is “wood in good condition”
(for the next less infiltrating hydrologic soil group than the pre-construction
hydrologic soil group, since the area underneath panels is assumed disturbed/
compacted during construction).
      3.   Qp (2, 10, 100): For determining the peak flow controls (detention),
the post-construction CN for the area treated by the stormwater disconnection
BMP, needed for determining post-construction peak flows (Qp) for two (2), ten
(10), and one hundred (100) year storms, may be determined assuming the treated
area is “wood in good condition” (for the next less infiltrating hydrologic
soil group than the pre-construction hydrologic soil group, since the area
underneath panels is assumed disturbed/compacted during construction).
   e.   In order for the solar farm developments to be eligible for stormwater
disconnection BMP recognitions/credits, the following design and construction
guidelines must be met (Items d and g are required for all proposed solar farms
regardless of whether stormwater disconnection recognition/credit is being
sought):
      1.   Roadways, gravel surfaces, transformer pads, and level spreaders
within the solar field are considered effective impervious cover for the
purposes of calculating water quality volume (WQv), channel protection volume
(CPv), and post-construction peak flows.
      2.   All solar panels in the array should also be considered additional
effective impervious cover for the purposes of calculating the WQv, CPv, and
post-construction peak flow unless All the following conditions are met:
         A.   The vegetated area receiving runoff between rows of solar panels
is equal to or greater than the average width of the row of solar panels
draining to the vegetated area.
         B.   Overall site conditions and solar panel configuration within the
array are designed and constructed such that the runoff remains as sheet flow
across the entire site. Design array to ensure a perpendicular layout of drip
edge to slope direction or install devices such as a level spreader to ensure
sheet flow from the drip edge. Level spreaders shall be designed in accordance
with the level spreader fact sheet contained in Appendix-C-BMP-Fact-Sheets.pdf
(in.gov).
         C.   The following conditions are satisfied regarding the design of
the post-construction slope of the site:
            i.   For slopes less than or equal to five percent (5%),
appropriate vegetation shall be established as indicated in Figure 9-450.1,
below.
            ii.   For slopes greater than five percent (5%), but less than ten
percent (10%), practices including, but not limited to, the use of level
spreaders, infiltration trenches, or similar energy dissipating practices as
described in Figure 9-450.2, below, shall be used to ensure long term sheet
flow conditions.
            iii.   For slopes equal to or greater than ten percent (10%) and
less than fifteen percent (15%), the plan includes specific engineered
stormwater control measures, such as level spreaders, infiltration trenches, or
similar energy dissipating practices, with detailed specifications that are
designed to provide permanent stabilization and non-erosive conveyance of
runoff to the property line of the site or downgrading from the site.
            iv.   Slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) are not qualified
for a stormwater disconnection recognition/credit.
         D.   The lowest vertical clearance of the solar panels above the
ground should not be greater than ten (10) feet. The panels should, however, be
at an adequate height to support vegetative growth and maintenance beneath and
between the panels. If the lowest vertical clearance of the solar panels above
the ground is greater than ten (10) feet, non-vegetative control measures will
be necessary to prevent/control erosion and scour along the drip line or
otherwise provide energy dissipation from water running off the panels.
         E.   Disconnecting impervious surfaces works best in undisturbed
soils. To minimize disturbance and compaction, construction vehicles and
equipment should avoid areas used for disconnection during installation of the
solar panels. Hydrologic Soil Group D soils or soils that are compacted by
construction equipment may need to be tilled to a depth of four (4) to six (6)
inches and/or amended to increase permeability.
         F.   i.   Groundcover vegetation must be maintained in good condition
in those areas receiving disconnected runoff. Areas receiving runoff should be
protected (e.g., planting shrubs or trees along the perimeter) from future
compaction. Vegetated areas shall not be subject to chemical fertilization or
herbicides/pesticides except for those applications that are necessary to get
vegetation established and which follow an approved erosion and sediment
pollution control plan.
            ii.   To maximize the potential for infiltration and reduce
maintenance, the use of native deep-rooted vegetative cover under the panels
and between the panel rows is highly encouraged. To achieve a native deep-
rooted vegetative cover, a mixture of perennial grasses and wildflowers is
recommended with a diversity of forbs or flowering plants that bloom throughout
the growing season. Blooming shrubs may also be used in buffer areas as
appropriate for visual screening. Perennial vegetation (grasses and forbs)
should be native to Indiana, but where appropriate to the vegetative management
plan goals, may also include other naturalized and non-invasive species which
provide habitat for pollinators and wildlife and/or other ecosystem services.
         G.   A fifty (50) foot buffer should be maintained between any part of
the solar array and any "watercourse" or "waterbody) as that term is defined in
Sec.
9-341. The buffer shall consist of undisturbed existing vegetation or native
shrub plantings.
         H.   Similar to other post-construction BMPs, the vegetated area
underneath the panels, the vegetated area receiving runoff, and any buffer
areas will need to be mapped, maintained in accordance with the stormwater
management operation and maintenance manual, and covered by the recorded
maintenance agreement described in Division VIII.
   f.   Depending on the layout and number of panels installed, the stormwater
disconnection BMP may address some or all of the stormwater management
requirements (WQv) for an individual project. Where the imperviousness is high
or there is other infrastructure (e.g., access roads, transformers), additional
runoff may need to be treated. Further reduction in the remaining required
water quality, channel protection, and peak flow control volumes is possible
through utilizing the BMPs described as part of the LID track in Division VIII.
   g.   A solar panel project should ideally be installed and placed outside of
the floodplain or detention facilities. If proposed to be placed within a
floodplain or in a dry detention facility, panels (all tilt positions) must be
installed at or above the flood protection grade (two (2) feet above the BFE)
or at or above the one hundred (100) year emergency overflow of the detention
facility plus one (1) foot. This includes all electrical systems associated
with the panels. If the solar array project is proposed within floodway portion
of the floodplain, the project shall also require a construction in floodway
permit from the IDNR.
Figure 9-450.1
Typical Solar Panel Installation with Slopes 5%
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3811.jpg]
 
Figure 9-450.2
Typical Solar Panel Installation with Slopes > 5 % and 10%
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3813.jpg]
Source: Maryland Department of the Environment: Stormwater Design Guidance —
Solar Panel Installations. (Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-451 through Sec. 9-453 Reserved for Future Use.
Appendix A
Sec. 1   Schererville Fees.
   This permit fee shall include construction site inspections for storm sewer
facilities, erosion control and BMP, inspection documentation and reporting
required for the SWQMP. These inspection fees apply only to the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana Storm Drainage Control Ordinance, as amended
from time to time.
   A.   Stormwater permit fee shall be assessed according to the following
chart. In mixed use developments, such as residential and non-residential in
one (1) development, cost allocation of permit fees shall be determined by the
Director of Planning and Building according to the area affected (please see
example 4. below). For the purposes of this section, a unit is defined as a
single occupied space within a multi-tenant building.
 
Project Type            Base Fee Per Lot Fee   Per Acre Fee   Re-Inspection Fee
Residential subdivision
development or unit     $500     $25           $50            $350
thereof
Residential building    $200     $100 per unit Not applicable $150
permit
Non-residential
subdivision development $1,000   $200          $100           $450
or unit thereof
Non-residential         $400     $250 per unit Not Applicable $250
building permit
 
   The greater of the fee calculations shall be applied to the permit fee.
   Permit fee example calculations:
      1:   Residential subdivision: with 50 acres and 120 residential lots.
         Base fee $500 + (120 lots x $35 per lot)= $4,700 permit fee
         Base FEe $500 + (50 acres x $50 per acre)= $3,000 permit fee
      In this case a permit fee of $4,700 would be required as it is the
greater of the fee calculations.
      2.   Single residential lot with single unit:
         Base fee $200 + $100 per one unit= $300 permit fee
      3.   Single residential lot with a duplex unit:
         Base fee $200 + (2 x $ 100 per unit)= $400 permit fee
      4.   Mixed use residential and non-residential of 100 acres total,
including residential: 75 acres and 200 residential lots and non-residential:
25 acres and 12 non-residential lots:
      Residential:
      Base fee $500 + (200 lots x $35 per lot)= $7,500 permit fee
      Base fee $500 + (75 acres x $50 per acre)= $4,250 permit fee
      Non-Residential:
      Base fee $1,000 + (12 lots x $200 per lot)= $3,400 permit fee
      Base fee $1,000 + (25 acres x $100 per acre)= $3,500 permit fee
   In this case a permit fee of $7,500 for residential and $3,500 for non-
residential for a total permit fee of $11,000 would be required as it is the
greater of the fee calculations.
      5.   Non-residential subdivision: with 15 acres and 6 lots.
         Base fee $1,000 + (6 lots x $200 per lot)= $2,200
         Base fee $1,000 + (15 acres x $100 per acre)= $2,500
      In this case a permit fee of $2,500 would be required as it is the
greater of the fee calculations.
      6.   Non-residential lot with a single unit:
         Base fee $400 + $250 per one unit= $650 permit fee
      7.   Non-residential lot with 5 units:
         Base fee $400 + (5 units x $250 per unit)= $1,650 permit fee
   B.   A re-inspection fee shall be applicable when inspections of site
improvements fail to meet approved plan submittals or where a violation of this
Article exists.
Prior to the commencement of construction, stormwater BMP's, in compliance with
this Article, shall be submitted and receive final engineering approval. Also,
the aforementioned BMP's shall be installed, inspected and approved with all
applicable fees paid prior to utility and infrastructure installation.
Section 2: Mapping Standards.
   A.   Size-drawing sheet(s) shall be prepared at 1"=50'-0", or numerically
less, on 1 lx17" or 24x36" standard sheets with title block containing name of
owner and/or developer of the project, and name, address and phone number of
the preparer.
   B.   Electronic file format - Drawings prepared with computer aided drafting
software shall be prepared for digital submission in an Autodesk® format, or
approved equal. The digital drawings shall follow the Town of Schererville GIS
layering standards. A list of the required layering standards and current
Autodesk® version are available upon request, in the Planning and Building
Department.
   C.   Horizontal datum - the project boundary shall be tied to Indiana State
Plan Coordinates NAD83. A list of Indiana State Plane markers within
Schererville is available upon request.
   D.   Vertical datum - elevations shall be adjusted to NAVD88 with accuracy
of one tenth foot (0.1') for ground elevations and one hundredth foot (0.01')
for structure elevations, such as manhole rim, pipe invert and pavement.
Section 3: Corrective Actions.
   A.   In the event that deficiencies are found by the Inspector, or duly
designated representatives of the town, requested corrective action or actions
will be identified on the inspection report.
   B.   In the event that connective action or actions are found incomplete
upon re-inspection, a notice of violation will be issued with completion date
identified.
   C.   In the event that corrective action or actions are found incomplete
after a notice of violation date has expired, a stop work order will be issued.
   D.   In the event that minimal or no action is taken to bring the work back
into compliance, the town will undertake the work and collect its costs from
the owner, using lien rights, if necessary.
Section 4: Re-inspection.
   A.   A re-inspection is required when:
      1)   Corrective action or actions are requested;
      2)   Notice of violation is issued;
      3)   Stop work orders are issued; and,
      4)   Illicit or illegal discharges are reported.
   B.   A re-inspection fee will be assessed for items 2) through 4) above.
Section 5: Stop Work Order.
   A.   A stop work order will be issued by the MS4 operator when corrective
action or actions arc found incomplete after a notice of violation date has
expired.
   B.   In the event of a major violation, the stop work order may include a
provision to suspend all discharges to the storm water drainage system to stop
actual or threatened discharge which presents, or may present, imminent or
substantial danger to:
      1)   The environment;
      2)   The health or welfare of persons;
      3)   The stormwater drainage system; or,
      4)   Waters of the State of Indiana.
   C.   Access to the stormwater drainage system will be reinstated after all
violations have been collected and written authorization from the MS4 operator.
   D.   No work at the site that is not directly related to corrective action
or actions, may proceed until a re-inspection shows that collective actions are
completed in a satisfactory manner.
Section 6: Penalties.
   A.   Penalties will be assessed according to the following table:
 
Extent of Violation
Potential Minor First  Minor      Moderate  Moderate   Major First Major
for Harm  Offense      Subsequent First     Subsequent Offense     Subsequent
                       Offense    Offense   Offense                Offense
Minor     $250 to $500 $500 to    $500 to   $1,000 to  $1,000 to   $2,000 to
                       $1,000     $1,000    $2,000     $2,000      $4,000
Moderate  $375 to $750 $750 to    $750 to   $1,500 to  $1,500 to   $3,000 to
                       $1,500     $1,500    $3,000     $3,000      $6,000
Major     $750, $1,500 $1,500 to  $1,500 to $2,500 to  $2,500 to   $5,000 to
                       $3,000     $3,000    $5,000     $5,000      $7,500
Re-inspection fee                           See Title II Stormwater Control
                                            Policy, Section 6
 
   B.   The MS4 operator shall determine the amount of the applicable penalty.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana, from taking such lawful action as is permitted under the Laws of the
State of Indiana to prevent, remedy or correct any violation of this storm
drainage control regulations, as amended from time to time. All costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the town regarding
enforcement of this storm drainage control regulations to prevent, remedy or
correct any violation shall accrue to the person or persons responsible
therefore.
   D.   The use or development of any land or real estate which is continued,
operated or maintained contrary to any of the provisions of this storm drainage
control regulations, as amended from time to time, is hereby declared to be a
violation of this Article, and unlawful. The Town Attorney shall, immediately
upon any such violation having been called to his attention, institute
injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or
remove such violation. Such action may be instituted by any property owner also
who may be especially damaged by any violation of this storm drainage control
regulations, as amended from time to time.
The remedies for enforcement provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
applicable law.
Section 7: Record Drawings.
   In addition to the paper copies of the preliminary and final drainage plans
submitted to the Plan Commission, record drawings shall be submitted with a
digital copy. The record drawings shall show design and actual locations and
elevations of all infrastructure improvements. Standards set out in Section 2
above shall apply. (Ord. No. 2009, passed 6-12-24)
Sec. 2   Individual Lot/Parcel Stormwater Pollution Prevention Requirements.
FOR COMPLIANCE WITH TOWN OF SCHERERVILLE STORM WATER CODE.
THE INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER OR OPERATOR IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE INSTALLATION AND
MAINTENANCE OF STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION CONTROLS UNTIL THE ENTIRE LOT
IS COMPLETE AND 100% STABILIZED.
   • Initial Stormwater controls such as construction entrances, curbside and
rear of lot storm inlet protection (geo-textile wrapped under grate is
prohibited), and perimeter controls (typically silt fence) must be in place
BEFORE ANY LOT DISTURBANCE begins.
   • All construction materials must be staged off of the street and on the lot
behind perimeter controls.
   • Portable toilets must be kept off of the street and should be placed on
even ground on the lot
behind perimeter controls.
   • All lots must provide and utilize appropriate trash containment for site
waste.
   • Contractors must use appropriate practices for concrete, mortar, and paint
washout. These materials must be properly contained and NQI enter the storm
drains or other conveyances.
   • Any off site tracking of sediment into the street, or off site
sedimentation into swales or drains
MUST be cleaned as soon as possible and by no later than the end of the day.
   • Lot frontage should be cleaned and acceptable in appearance at the end of
every business day.
   • Areas where operations have impacted adjacent lots or rear yard swales
MUST be repaired to
design condition and 100% stabilized.
PLEASE NOTE: ANY INSPECTI ON WILL FAIL IF THE CORRECT STORM WATER POLLUTION
PREVENT ION CONTRO LS ARE NOT IN PLACE AND PROPERL Y MAINTAI NED.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3821.jpg]
Construction Sequence
   1.    Install constructio n entrance.
      a.    Use #2 stone. Flare entrance at street so it can handle vehicle
turn radius. See detail.
   2.   Install perimeter protection.
      a.   Protection along the sides of the lot is only necessary if the
adjacent lot is built out or if storm water runoff will drain in that
direction.
      b.   Make sure perimeter protections are turned into the lot where they
terminate to create a ponding area. See above diagram.
      c.   Rear of lot perimeter protection should be installed to protect the
rear yard swale.
   3.   Install protections on storm inlets at curbside and at rear of lot.
      a.   Geo-textile or "fabric" wrapped underneath the grate is PROHIBITED.
      b.   Make sure curbside inlet protection leaves the top 3-4 inches of the
storm grate exposed to allow for overflow to enter the storm inlet, preventing
ponding.
   4.   Lot disturbance may begin once the controls listed above are in place.
   5.   Maintain lot controls at all times and repair as soon as possible when
a correction is needed.
      a.   If sediment is actively leaving the site due to a failing control
such as tracking or an operation such as de-watering, it must be corrected
IMMEDIATELY.
   6.   Stabilize all exposed soils with vegetation, mulch, or stone when
construction is complete.
      a.   Lot is considered stabilized once vegetation has reached 100%
coverage and 70% density.
   7.   Remove temporary stormwater pollution prevention controls.
      a.   These may be removed when exposed soils have been stabilized with
vegetation, sod, or mulch.
      b.   Seed alone is not a stabilization measure until it germinates and
achieves proper coverage.
BMP Details
   Silt Fence
   1.   Install silt fence parallel to the contour of the land.
   2.   Extend ends of silt fence upslope 3-4 feet to allow for ponding areas
behind the fence.
   3.   Excavate trench 8 inches deep and 4 inches wide.
   4.   Install with stakes on the down slope side of fence.
   5.   Bury 12 inches of fabric in the trench, extending the bottom 4 inches
toward the upslope side.
   6.   Backfill trench on both sides of fence and compact.
   7.    Join silt fence sections by wrappi ng two posts and driving them in
togethe r. Do not use any other method of joining.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3823.jpg]
   8.    Inspect weekly and within 24 hours of a ½" of rain. Silt fence should
be cleaned out when the sedime nt has reached 1/3 the height of the expose d
fencing. Repair silt fence where torn or damaged. Complete repairs before the
next anticipated rain and by no later than one week from the date they are
noticed.
   Construction Entrance
   1.   Install construction entrance from street to face of proposed building
or at a 50' minimum length. Use #2 stone at a 6" minimum depth.
   2.   A geo-textile is required underneath the entrance to extend its
functionality.
   3.   Flare out entrance where it meets the street so that vehicle turn
radiuses do not travel over disturbed ground.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e85e06abea71e28a277e1282468f54977a4f2573/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3825.jpg]
(Ord. No. 2009, passed 6- 12- 24)
Sec. 3    Forms and Applications.
   The followi ng forms and applications can be found in Appendix B of Ord.
2009:
   a.    Applic ation/checkli st for stormwater permit;
   b.   Construction/SWPPP technical review form;
   c.   Petition to Town of Schererville Drainage Board;
   d.   Statement of financial responsibility;
   e.   BMP maintenance agreement;
   f.   Project check-in checklist;
   g.   Construction self-monitoring report;
   h.   Certification of completion and compliance;
   i.   Termination inspection checklist;
   j.   Instructions for individual lot permit request;
   k.   Individual lot permit request application;
   l.   Individual lot typical erosion and sediment control plan and
certification; and
   m.   Plot plan review form.
(Ord. No. 2009, passed 6-12-24)
Sec. 9-451   through Sec. 9-454 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 12. Underground and Buried Utility District
Sec. 9-455 Area Established.
   The Town hereby establishes an Underground and Buried Utilities District
(“Area”) to be in effect and to apply throughout the Town’s rights-of-way
(ROW), within the Municipal Corporate boundaries, and is hereinafter defined as
follows:
   a.   In all areas of the Town where no overhead or above ground utilities,
utility facilities, overhead lines, or associated overhead structures used or
useful in supplying electric, communication or similar and associated services
currently exist;
   b.   In all areas of the Town where planned road projects, redevelopment
areas and/or economic development areas provide for and require underground
buried utilities and utility facilities, including but not limited to,
electric, communication or similar and associated services; and
   c.   All other areas of ROW or proposed ROW throughout the Town, whether or
not above ground utilities or utility facilities currently exist.
(Ord. No. 1904, § 2, 4-28-17)
Sec. 9-456 Regulations.
   a.   No person, corporation, or utility shall erect or construct within the
Town’s ROW, any pole, overhead line, or associated overhead structure used or
useful in supplying electric, communication or similar associated services.
   b.   Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Town Council, all
utilities located within the Town’s ROW shall be placed underground and/or
buried.
   c.   All existing overhead poles, wires, and/or utility transmission lines
may remain within the Town’s ROW, but may not be replaced or relocated without
prior written authorization of the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 1904, §§ 3 - 5, 4-28-17)
Sec. 9-457 through 9-460 Reserved for Future Use.
Chapter 10
Zoning and Subdivisions
Article 1. Zoning Ordinance.
   
Sec. 10-1   Adoption by Reference.
Article 2. Flood Plain Development Regulations.
   
Sec. 10-25   Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact.
   
Sec. 10-26   Statement of Purpose; Objectives.
   
Sec. 10-27   Definitions.
   
Sec. 10-28   General Provisions.
   
Sec. 10-29   Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit.
   
Sec. 10-30   Compliance.
   
Sec. 10-31   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
   
Sec. 10-32   Discrepancy Between Mapped Floodplain and Actual Ground
Elevations.
   
Sec. 10-33   Interpretation.
   
Sec. 10-34   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
   
Sec. 10-35   Penalties for Violation.
   
Sec. 10-36   Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC).
   
Sec. 10-37   Administration.
   
Sec. 10-38   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
   
Sec. 10-39   Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
   
Sec. 10-40   Specific Standards.
   
Sec. 10-41   Standards for Subdivision Proposals.
   
Sec. 10-42   Critical Facility.
   
Sec. 10-43   Standards for Identified Floodways.
   
Sec. 10-44   Standards for Identified Fringe.
   
Sec. 10-45   Standards for SFHAs Without Established Base Flood Elevation and/
or Floodways/Fringes.
   
Sec. 10-46   Standards for Flood Prone Areas.
   
Sec. 10-47   Variance Procedures.
   
Sec. 10-48   Conditions for Variances.
   
Sec. 10-49   Variance Notification.
   
Sec. 10-50   Historic Structures.
   
Sec. 10-51   Special Conditions.
Article 3. Reserved.
Article 4. Subdivision Control Ordinance.
Division I. General Provisions.
   
Sec. 10-225   Short Title.
   
Sec. 10-226   Purpose.
   
Sec. 10-227   Compliance.
   
Sec. 10-228   Waivers.
   
Sec. 10-229   Conflict.
   
Sec. 10-230   Jurisdictional Area.
   
Sec. 10-231   through Sec. 10-233 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Definitions.
   
Sec. 10-234   Inclusions.
   
Sec. 10-235   Terms.
   
Sec. 10-236   Definitions.
   
Sec. 10-237   Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Procedure for Submission of Plats.
   
Sec. 10-238   General.
   
Sec. 10-239   Pre-Application Conferences and Study Sessions.
   
Sec. 10-240   Preliminary Plat.
   
Sec. 10-241   Final Plat.
   
Sec. 10-242   Recording.
   
Sec. 10-243   through Sec. 10-244 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Plat Specifications.
   
Sec. 10-245   General.
   
Sec. 10-246   Proposal Plan.
   
Sec. 10-247   Preliminary Plat.
   
Sec. 10-248   Final Plat.
   
Sec. 10-249   Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Design Standards.
   
Sec. 10-250   General.
   
Sec. 10-251   Natural Features.
   
Sec. 10-252   Streets.
   
Sec. 10-253   Blocks.
   
Sec. 10-254   Lots.
   
Sec. 10-255   Easements.
   
Sec. 10-256   Water and Sewer Systems.
   
Sec. 10-257   Public Sites and Open Space.
   
Sec. 10-258   Planned Unit Development.
   
Sec. 10-259   Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Improvements.
   
Sec. 10-260   General.
   
Sec. 10-261   Monuments and Markers.
   
Sec. 10-262   Streets.
   
Sec. 10-263   Storm Drainage.
   
Sec. 10-264   Water Supply.
   
Sec. 10-265   Hydrant Spacing.
   
Sec. 10-266   Sewers.
   
Sec. 10-267   Utilities.
   
Sec. 10-268   Traffic Control Devices.
   
Sec. 10-269   Street Signs.
   
Sec. 10-270   Sidewalks.
   
Sec. 10-271   Street Lights.
   
Sec. 10-272   and Sec. 10-273 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Administration.
   
Sec. 10-274   Inspection/Fees.
   
Sec. 10-275   Maintenance.
   
Sec. 10-276   Pond Provisions/Requirements.
   
Sec. 10-277   Acceptance.
   
Sec. 10-278   Permits.
   
Sec. 10-279   Occupancy.
   
Sec. 10-280   Appeals.
   
Sec. 10-281   Validity.
   
Sec. 10-282   Penalties.
   
Sec. 10-283   Plat Committee.
   
Sec. 10-284   Appendix I-Plat Certification.
   
Sec. 10-285   through Sec. 10-289 Reserved for Future Use.
Article 1. Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 10-1 Adopted by Reference.
   The Schererville Town Zoning Ordinance Text Replacement Ordinance, attached
to Ordinance 1797, is hereby incorporated herein and adopted as the Replacement
Comprehensive Zoning Regulations for the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana, and covers the following topics and provisions:
   Title I.         General Provisions
   Title II.      Definitions
   Title III.      Open Land (O.L.) District
   Title IV.      Residential (R-1) District
   Title V.      Residential (R-2) District
   Title VI.      Residential (R-3) District
   Title VII.      Institutional (IN) District
   Title VIII.      Professional Office (P.O.) District
   Title IX.      Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) District
   Title X.      Community Commercial (C-2) District
   Title XI.      Highway Commercial (C-3) District
   Title XII.      Commercial Entertainment (C-4) District
   Title XIII.      Business Park (B.P.) District
   Title XIV.      General Industrial (G.I.) District
   Title XV.      Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
   Title XVI.      Overlay Districts
   Title XVII.      Supplementary District Regulations
   Title XVIII.      Landscape Regulations
   Title XIX.      Sign Regulations
   Title XX.      Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading Regulations
   Title XXI.      Non-Conforming Buildings, Uses and Lots
   Title XXII.      Performance Standards in Industrial Districts
   Title XXIII.      Sexually Oriented Business Regulations
   Title XXIV.      Administration and Enforcement
   Title XXV.      Fees
   Title XXVI.      Amendment of the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map
   Title XXVII.      Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
   Title XXVIII.      Printing and Publication
   Title XXIX.      Emergency
   To view Ordinance #1797 in its entirety go to www.schererville.org, go to
"downloads", then to "Planning/Building" and then go to "page 7".
(Ord. No. 1797, § 1, 12-28-11; Ord. No. 1833, 3-6-13; Ord. No. 1870, § 1,
passed 7-8-15; Ord. No. 1880, § 1, 4-13-16; Ord. No. 1939, § 1, 9-18-19; Ord.
No. 1940, § 1, 9-18-19; Ord. No. 1961, §§ 1-7, 12-30-20; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 2-
10-21; Ord. No. 1970, § 1, 7-14-21; Ord. No. 1979, §§ 1-5, 3-9-22; Ord. No.
2004, § 1, 4-10-24)
Article 2. Flood Plain Development Regulations.
Sec. 10-25 Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact.
   a.   Statutory Authorization. The Indiana Legislature has, in I.C. 36-7-
4 and I.C. 14-28-4, granted the power to local government units to control land
use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of
Schererville does hereby adopt the following replacement Floodplain Management
Regulations for the Town of Schererville.
   b.   Findings of Fact.
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the Town of Schererville are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities,
and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately flood-
proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-26 Statement of Purpose; Objectives.
   a.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Article to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage;
      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and,
      6.   Make federal flood insurance available for structures and their
contents in the Town by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   b.   Objectives. The objectives of this article are:
      1.   To protect human life and health;
      2.   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      3.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in floodplains;
      6.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas, and;
      7.   To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in
a flood area.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-27 Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this Article it’s most reasonable application.
   a.   A zone - means portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of
flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A
zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE5
Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The definitions
are presented below:
      1.   Zone A - areas subject to inundation by the one-percent (1%) annual
chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.
      2.   Zone AE and A1-A30 - Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent
(1%) annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in
place of Zones A1-A30.)
      3.   Zone AO - Areas subject to inundation by one-percent (1%) annual
chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
      4.   Zone AH - Areas subject to inundation by one-percent (1%) annual
chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
      5.   Zone AR - Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection.
      6.   Zone A99 - Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent (1%)
annual chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon
completion of an under-construction Federal flood protection system. These are
areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the
construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to
consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used
when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress
toward completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown.
   b.   Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) - means a structure with a
floor area 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a
minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be
designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory
structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay
sheds.
   c.   Addition (to an existing structure) - means any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by
a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed
addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.
   d.   Appeal - means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this Article or a request for a variance.
   e.   Area of shallow flooding - means a designated AO or AH Zone on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1)
to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow
may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   f.   Base Flood - means the flood having a one-percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   g.   Base Flood Elevation (BFE) - means the elevation of the one-percent
(1%) annual chance flood.
   h.   Basement - means that portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.
   i.   Boundary River - means the part of the Ohio River that forms the
boundary between Kentucky and Indiana.
   j.   Boundary River Floodway - means the floodway of a boundary river.
   k.   Building - see “Structure.”
   l.   Community - means a political entity that has the authority to adopt
and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   m.   Community Rating System (CRS) - means a program developed by the
Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in
the Regular Program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   n.   Critical facility - means facilities for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   o.   D Zone - means unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined,
but flooding is possible. Flood insurance is available in participating
communities but is not required by regulation in this zone.
   p.   Development - means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to:
      1.   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
      2.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) days;
      3.   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction of
roads, or similar projects;
      4.   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements, etc.;
      5.   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
      6.   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
      7.   Storage of materials; or
      8.   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      9.   Development does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.
   q.   Elevated structure - means a non-basement structure built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls),
pilings, or columns (posts and piers).
   r.   Elevation Certificate - is a certified statement that verifies a
structure’s elevation information.
   s.   Emergency Program - means the first phase under which a community
participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of
insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community
before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
   t.   Encroachment - means the advance or infringement of uses, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   u.   Existing Construction - means any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.
   v.   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision - means a manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   w.   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision - means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   x.   FEMA - means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   y.   Five-hundred year flood (500-year flood) - means the flood that has a
0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
   z.   Flood - means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   aa.   Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) - means an official map on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.
   bb.   Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) - means an official map of a
community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazard have been identified as Zone A.
   cc.   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a
community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   dd.   Flood Insurance Study (FIS) - is the official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   ee.   Flood Prone Area - means any land area acknowledged by a community as
being susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See “Flood”).
   ff.   Flood Protection Grade (FPG) - is the elevation of the regulatory
flood plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (see “Freeboard”).
   gg.   Floodplain - means the channel proper and the areas adjoining any
wetland, lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by
the regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.
   hh.   Floodplain management - means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
   ii.   Floodplain management regulations - means this Article and other
zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. Floodplain management
regulations are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain management
requirements.
   jj.   Floodproofing (dry floodproofing) - is a method of protecting a
structure that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities
and sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation
with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.
   kk.   Floodproofing certificate - is a form used to certify compliance for
nonresidential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a Registered Professional Engineer or
Architect.
   ll.   Floodway - is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of
any river or stream.
   mm.   Freeboard - means a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above
the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   nn.   Fringe - is those portions of the floodplain lying outside the
floodway.
   oo.   Functionally dependent facility - means a facility which cannot be
used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or
seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   pp.   Hardship (as related to variances of this Article) - means the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The Town of Schererville Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the
variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere
economic or financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience,
aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the
disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an
exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means
without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or
requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different
use than originally intended.
   qq.   Highest adjacent grade - means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
   rr.   Historic structure - means any structure individually listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic
Sites and Structures.
   ss.   Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) - means the cost to repair a
substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that
is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the
local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are
elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and
new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1,
1997, will include ICC coverage.
   tt.   Letter of Final Determination (LFD) - means a letter issued by FEMA
during the mapping update process which establishes final elevations and
provides the new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates
the six-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain
management regulations during this six-month period unless the community has
previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
   uu.   Letter of Map Change (LOMC) - is a general term used to refer to the
several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished
by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F). The definitions are
presented below:
      1.   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) - means an amendment to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA
through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is only
issued by FEMA.
      2.   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) - means an official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.
      3.   Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) - means an official
revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s
determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on
fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   vv.   Lowest adjacent grade - means the lowest elevation, after completion
of construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.
   ww.   Lowest floor - means the lowest of the following:
      1.   The top of the lowest level of the structure;
      2.   The top of the basement floor;
      3.   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure;
      4.   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars;
      5.   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters by
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a
minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area,
each shall have openings on exterior walls;
         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at least one (1)
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such
openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the exterior grade or the
interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   xx.   Manufactured home - means a structure, transportable in one (1) or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term manufactured home does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
   yy.   Manufactured home park or subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
   zz.   Map amendment - means a change to an effective NFIP map that results
in the exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally
described parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA
(i.e., no alterations of topography have occurred since die date of the first
NFL? map that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).
   aaa.   Map panel number - is the four-digit number followed by a letter
suffix assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first four (4) digits represent the
map panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel
has been revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the
first revision.)
   bbb.   Market value - means the building value, excluding the land (as
agreed to between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local
real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.
   ccc.   Mitigation - means sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate
long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The
purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to
minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery.
   ddd.   National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) - is the federal program that
makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating
communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal
Government and the private insurance industry.
   eee.   National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 as corrected in 1929
- is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   fff.   New construction - means any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced after the effective date of the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.
   ggg.   New manufactured home park or subdivision - means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   hhh.   Non-boundary river floodway - means the floodway of any river or
stream other than a boundary river.
   iii.   North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) as adopted in 1993 -
is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
   jjj.   Obstruction - includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   kkk.   One-hundred year flood (100-year flood) - is the flood that has a one
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood
zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent annual chance
flood. See “Regulatory Flood”.
   lll.   One-percent annual chance flood - is the flood that has a one percent
(1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that
begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent (1%) annual chance
flood. See “Regulatory Flood”.
   mmm.   Participating community - is any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
   nnn.   Physical Map Revision (PMR) - is an official republication of a
community’s FEMA map to effect changes to base (1-percent annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas,
or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.
   ooo.   Post-FIRM construction - means construction or substantial
improvement that started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of
the community or after December 31,1974, whichever is later.
   ppp.   Pre-FIRM construction - means construction or substantial
improvement, which started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
   qqq.   Probation - is a means of formally notifying participating
communities of violations and deficiencies in the administration and
enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations.
   rrr.   Public safety and nuisance - means anything which is injurious to the
safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable
number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or
basin.
   sss.   Recreational vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
      1.   Built on a single chassis;
      2.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   ttt.   Regular program - means the phase of the community’s participation in
the NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are
imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.
   uuu.   Regulatory flood - means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and
procedure that is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory
flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section
10-28b. of this Article. The Regulatory Flood is also known by the term “Base
Flood”, “One-Percent Annual Chance Flood”, and “100-Year Flood”.
   vvv.   Repetitive loss - means flood-related damages sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or
exceeded twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
   www.   Section 1316 - is that section of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that
intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in
flood-prone areas.
   xxx.   Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) - means those lands within the
jurisdictions of the Town subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The
SFHAs of the Town of Schererville are generally identified as such on the Lake
County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated January
18, 2012 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas
are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, Al-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).
   yyy.   Start of construction - includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first
placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a manufactured home on
a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   zzz.   Structure - means a structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   aaaa.   Substantial damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
   bbbb.   Substantial improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
“start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred “repetitive loss” or “substantial damage” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not include improvements of
structures to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code requirements or any alteration of a “historic structure”,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued
designation as a “historic structure”.
   cccc.   Suspension - means the removal of a participating community from the
NFIP because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper
floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   dddd.   Variance - is a grant of relief from the requirements of this
Article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
Article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   eeee.   Violation - means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with this Article. A structure or other development without
the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this Article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   ffff.   Watercourse - means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   gggg.   Water surface elevation - means the height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) or National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929 (NGVD) (other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes
and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
   hhhh.   X zone - means the area where the flood hazard is less than that in
the SFHA. Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2 percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on
older FIRMs) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of
flooding is less than 0.2 percent.
   iiii.   Zone - means a geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that
reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
   jjjj.   Zone A - (See definition for A zone).
   kkkk.   Zone B, C, and X - means areas identified in the community as areas
of moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and
C.)
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-28 General Provisions.
   a.   Lands to Which This Article Applies. This Article shall apply to all
SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Schererville.
   b.   Basis for Establishing Regulatory Flood Data. This Article’s protection
standard is the regulatory flood. The best available regulatory flood data is
listed below.
      1.   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville shall be as
delineated on the one-percent annual chance flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Lake County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas dated January
18, 2012 and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated January 18, 2012
as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.
      2.   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each
of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town of Schererville, delineated as
an “A Zone” on the Lake County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance
Rate Map dated January 18, 2012 as well as any future updates, amendments, or
revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most
recent date, shall be according to the best data available as provided by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area
from the subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, the party needs to replace existing
data with better data that meets current engineering standards. To be
considered, this data must be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources for review and subsequently approved.
      3.   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification
on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits of
any watercourse in the community’s known flood prone areas shall be according
to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater
than one square mile.
      4.   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD), any more
restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized
for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all
previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-29 Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit.
   A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this Article prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-30 Compliance.
   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this Article
and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall
hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this Article and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-31 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
   This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Article and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-32 Discrepancy between Mapped Floodplain and Actual Ground Elevations.
   a.   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
   b.   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   c.   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the
base flood elevation and not located in the floodway, that site shall be
considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.
The property owner should be advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-33 Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this Article all provisions shall
be:
   a.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   b.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   c.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-34 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this Article does not create any
liability on the part of the Town of Schererville, the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results
from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-35 Penalties for Violation.
   Failure to obtain a Floodplain Development Permit in the SFHA or failure to
comply with the requirements of a Floodplain Development Permit or conditions
of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this Article. All violations
shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance with
the provisions of the Zoning Code for The Town of Schererville. All violations
shall be punishable by a fine ranging from a minimum of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per day to a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
per day.
   a.   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation
continues to exist.
   b.   The Town of Schererville Town Council shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.
   c.   Nothing herein shall prevent the Town of Schererville from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-36 Increased Cost of Compliance (ICO).
   In order for buildings to qualify for a claim payment under ICC coverage as
a “repetitive loss structure”, the National Reform Act of 1994 requires that
the building be covered by a contract for flood insurance and incur flood-
related damages on two occasions during a 10-year period ending on the date of
the event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing
the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded twenty-five percent (25%)
of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-37 Administration.
   a.   Designation of Administrator. The Town Council of the Town of
Schererville hereby appoints the Zoning Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this Article and is herein referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator.
   b.   Permit Procedures. Application for a Floodplain Development Permit
shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her
prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to,
the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage
facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically the following
information is required:
      1.   Application stage:
         A.   A description of the proposed development;
         B.   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and streams;
         C.   A legal description of the property site;
         D.   A site development plan showing existing and proposed development
locations and existing and proposed land grades;
         E.   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD;
         F.   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed;
         G.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         H.   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any
watercourse changes submitted to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a Letter
of Map Revision. (See Section
10-38b.6. for additional information.)
      2.   Construction stage.
         A.   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an elevated structure
or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD
elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said certification shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same. The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the lowest floor elevation survey data submitted. The applicant
shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said
corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the
project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation certification
shall be at the applicant’s risk.
         B.   Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation of a
floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing certificate. Certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered professional
engineer and certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
floodproofing certification submitted.) The applicant shall correct any
deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is allowed to
proceed. Failure to submit the floodproofing certification or failure to make
correction required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
      3.   Finished Construction. Upon completion of construction, an elevation
certification (FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31 or any future updates)
which depicts the “as-built” lowest floor elevation is required to be submitted
to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing
measure, floodproofing certification (FEMA Floodproofing Certificate Form 81-65
or any future updates) is required to be submitted by the applicant to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-38 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
   a.   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Article. The
administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this Article,
which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
   b.   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this Article have been satisfied;
      2.   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete
substantial damage determinations;
      3.   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
Sections
10-43 and
10-45a. of this Article, and maintain a record of such authorization (either
copy of actual permit, letter of authorization or floodplain analysis/
regulatory assessment.)
      4.   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies
of such permits or letters of authorization are to be maintained on file with
the floodplain development permit;
      5.   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway.
      6.   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA;
      7.   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local permit
documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage determinations,
regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Change (LOMC), copies of DNR
permits, letters of authorization and floodplain analysis and regulatory
assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents, and “as-
built” elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed subject
to this Article.
      8.   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or Physical Map
Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community.
      9.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
      10.   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with Section
10-37b.;
      11.   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with
Section
10-37b.;
      12.   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance.
      13.   Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that all
applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been
satisfied. The first upon the establishment of the Flood Protection Grade
reference mark at the development site; the second upon the establishment of
the structure’s footprint/establishment of the lowest floor; and the final
inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished construction
elevation certificate. Authorized Town officials shall have the right to enter
and inspect properties located in the SFHA.
      14.   Stop Work Orders.
         A.   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this Article shall immediately cease.
         B.   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and
shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      15.   Revocation of Permits.
         A.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of this Article, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
         B.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the floodplain administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-39 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
   a.   General Standards. In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas the
following provisions are required:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
      2.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces;
      3.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG;
      4.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      5.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located at/
above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the FPG;
      6.   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
      7.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
      8.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
      9.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this Article shall meet
the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this Article; and
      10.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this Article, shall
be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further, extended, or
replaced.
      11.   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the volume
of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume of excavation
taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the
volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1 to 1) due to the fill or
structure.
         A.   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in the same
property in which the authorized fill or structure is located;
         B.   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be allowed to
take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that the
excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in the
same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will be
accessible to the regulatory flood water, will not be subject to ponding when
not inundated by flood water, and that it shall not be refilled;
         C.   The excavation shall provide for true storage of floodwater but
shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood water;
         D.   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way leading
to the floodplain;
         E.   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the
excavated area is accessible to the regulatory flood water;
         F.   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed stable enough
to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and shall include
provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any increased runoff or
drainage resulting from its placement; and
         G.   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled shall be
submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site work; once site
work is complete, but before the actual start of construction, the applicant
shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a certified survey of the
excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and excavation comply with
this section.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-40 Specific Standards.
   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:
   a.   In addition to the requirements of Section
10-39a., all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of any new structure having a floor area
greater than four hundred (400) square feet.
      2.   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the
cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the land).
      3.   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure (excluding the
value of the land) before damage occurred.
      4.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
      5.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This Article does not apply to returning the existing
manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed
to avoid flood damage.
      6.   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
      7.   Additions or improvement made to any existing structure with a
previous addition or improvement constructed since the community’s first
floodplain Ordinance.
   b.   Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest
floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of Section
10-40d.
   c.   Non-Residential Construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be
floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of
Section
10-40d. Structures located in all “A Zones” may be floodproofed in lieu of
being elevated if done in accordance with the following:
      1.   A Registered Professional Engineer or Architect shall certify that
the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in Section
10-38b.11.
      2.   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity.
   d.   Elevated Structures. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG. Elevated
structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs must
meet the following minimum criteria:
      1.   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings located in a minimum of two
(2) exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area); and
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot (1) above
the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher; and
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
      4.   Openings are to be not less than three inches (3) in any direction
in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole in the wall,
excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical foundation air vent
device; and
      5.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
      6.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned
or finished into separate rooms; and
      7.   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an elevation at
or higher than the exterior grade; and
      8.   Property owners shall be required to execute a flood openings/
venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as flood
vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the openings in any way will
violate the requirements of Section
10-40d. Periodic inspections will be conducted by the Floodplain Administrator
to ensure compliance. The affidavit shall be recorded in the office of the Lake
County Recorder.
      9.   Property owners shall be required to execute and record with the
structure’s deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the
lowest floor (where the interior height of the enclosure exceeds 6 feet) shall
not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the community will have the
right to inspect the enclosed area. The non-conversion agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the Lake County Recorder.
   e.   Structures Constructed on Fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following:
      1.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1) deep
before compacting to ninety-five percent 95% of the maximum density obtainable
with either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method. The results of the
test showing compliance shall be retained in the permit file.
      2.   The fill should extend at least ten feet (10) beyond the foundation
of the structure before sloping below the BFE.
      3.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three (3) horizontal to one (1)
vertical.
      4.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      5.   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or above
the FPG.
      6.   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
   f.   Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days must meet one
(1) of the following requirements:
      1.   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a
site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a
flood:
         A.   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
         B.   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in Section 10-04d.
         C.   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame or
foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      2.   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a
site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood:
         A.   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than thirty-six inches (36) in height
above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         B.   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in Section
10-40d.
         C.   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame or
foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      3.   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         A.   Be on site for less than one hundred eighty (180) days; and
         B.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions); or
         C.   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes” as stated earlier
in this section.
   g.   Accessory Structures. Relief to the elevation Relief to the elevation
or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such
structures must meet the following standards:
      1.   Shall not be used for human habitation.
      2.   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.
      3.   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      4.   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
      5.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG.
      6.   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in Section
10-40d.
   h.   Above Ground Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-41 Standards for Subdivision Proposals.
   a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
   b.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
   c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
   d.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of fifty (50) lots or five (5)
acres.
   e.   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/or
limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
   f.   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA for
pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-42 Critical Facility.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and
sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above
the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-43 Standards for Identified Floodways.
   a.   Located within SFHAs, established in Section
10-28b. are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an
identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant
to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications,
to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources is
required prior to die issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This
includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and
paving etc. undertaken before the actual start of construction of the
structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to
existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26
allows construction of non-substantial additions/ improvements to residences in
a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in
the floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Please note that
if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior
approval (construction in a floodway permit) for the fill is required from the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources.)
   b.   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a permit
or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the
floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit,
provided the provisions contained in Sections
10-39 through
10-46 of this Article have been met. The Floodplain Development Permit cannot
be less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
   c.   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in combination
with existing or future development, will adversely affect the efficiency of,
or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse affect is defined
as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least fifteen-
hundredths (0.15) of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood
elevation under the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway
condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.
   d.   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees), the Town of Schererville shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per
mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-44 Standards for Identified Fringe.
   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit provided the
provisions contained in Sections
10-39 through
10-46 of this Article have been met. The key provision is that the top of the
lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or
above the FPG.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-45 Standards for SFHAs Without Established Base Flood Elevation and/or
Floodways/Fringes.
   a.   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one (1) square mile:
      1.   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one (1) square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources for review and comment.
      2.   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the one-
percent annual chance flood elevation and the recommended Flood Protection
Grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
      3.   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit for
construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a Floodplain
Development Permit may be issued provided the conditions of the Floodplain
Development Permit are not less restrictive than the conditions received from
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions contained in
Sections
10-39 through
10-46 of this Article have been met.
   b.   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one (1) square mile:
      1.   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream
of the site is less than one (1) square mile, the Floodplain Administrator
shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the
limits of the floodplain and one-percent (1%) annual chance flood elevation for
the site.
      2.   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
Floodplain Development Permit, provided the provisions contained in Sections
10-39 through
10-46 of this Article have been met.
   c.   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot (1) and will not increase flood
damages or potential flood damages.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-46 Standards for Flood Prone Areas.
   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or
where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as
required per Sections
10-39 through
10-46.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-47 Variance Procedures.
   a.   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board of Zoning Appeals
of the Town of Schererville, as established by the Town Council of the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, shall hear and decide appeals and requests
for variances from requirements of this Article.
   b.   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board. The board shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this Article. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
board may appeal such decision to the Lake County Circuit or Superior Court.
   c.   Variance Procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Schererville Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations,
all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this
Article; and
      1.   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      4.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      5.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      6.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      7.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      8.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      9.   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and
      10.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-48 Conditions for Variances.
   a.   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
      1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship; and
      3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
   b.   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to Section
10-43 or Section
10-45a. of this Article may be granted.
   c.   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to Section
10-43 or Section
10-45a. of this Article will require a permit from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.
   d.   Variances to the Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction of Section
10-40, may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half (½) acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
   e.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   f.   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any
structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
   g.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the Flood Protection Grade and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation (See Section
10-49).
   h.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request (See Section
10-49).
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-49 Variance Notification.
   a.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest
floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be
given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the Flood
Protection Grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25) for one hundred dollars ($100)
of insurance coverage; and
      2.   Such construction below the Flood Protection Grade increases risks
to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   b.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-50 Historic Structure.
   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure” and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(Ord. No. 1879, § 1, 3-9-16)
Sec. 10-51 Special Conditions.
   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in Section
10-44.5, and the purposes of this Article, the Schererville Board of Zoning
Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this Article.
(Ord. No. 1803, 1-18-12)
ARTICLE 3. RESERVED.
ARTICLE 4. SUBDIVISIONS CONTROL ORDINANCE.
Divisions I. General Provisions.
Sec. 10-225 Short Title.
   This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Control
Ordinance of the Town of Schererville, Indiana, Lake County, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1095, § I-1, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-226 Purpose.
   This Ordinance is adopted in accordance with the Schererville Comprehensive
Plan for the following purposes:
   A.   To assist, approve and regulate the orderly and efficient development
of the Town.
   B.   To promote the promote health, safety, morals, convenience, order and
general welfare of the residents of the Town.
   C.   To insure equitable processing and review of all subdivision plans by
establishing and maintaining uniform procedures and standards.
(Ord. No. 1095, § I-2, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-227 Compliance.
   No lot in a subdivision shall be sold, nor any permit issued to erect, alter
or repair any building upon land in a subdivision, unless and until a
subdivision plan has been approved, and recorded. Furthermore, prior to
issuance of building permits, there shall be a minimum road access standard to
provide accessibility for emergency vehicles and installation of backed curbs
and temporary bench marks to provide data reference for foundation grades.
Minimum access surfaces shall consist of at least eight inches (8") of
compacted aggregate base material, and at least two inches (2") of binder
course, curb to curb with all associated utilities (storm, sanitary sewer,
water and the like) in place. Construction bench marks shall be located within
a six hundred (600) foot radius of all lots.
(Ord. No. 1095, § I-3, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-228 Waivers.
   A.   General. Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary hardship or
practical difficulty may result from the strict compliance with these
regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater
extent by alternative standards, ti may approve waivers to these subdivision
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured; provided that such waivers shall not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided the Plan
Commission shall not approve waivers unless it shall make written findings
based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      1.   The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other nearby property;
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based are
unique to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      3.   A particular hardship to the owner will result because of the
particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of these regulations is carried out; and
      4.   The waiver will not in any manner contravene the provisions of the
Town Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, or Official Map as interpreted by
the Plan Commission and the Town Engineer.
   B.   Conditions. In approving waivers, the Plan Commission may impose such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of
these regulations.
   C.   Procedure. A petition for any such waiver shall be filed separately by
the subdivider at the time when the petition for subdivision is filed for the
consideration of the Plan Commission. The petition shall state fully the
grounds for the waiver and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The
Plan Commission shall have no authority to grant waivers other than those
required on the petition for waivers.
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 2-9-05)
Sec. 10-229 Conflict.
   Whenever there is a difference between minimum standards of dimensions
specified herein and those contained in other Regulations, Resolutions or
Ordinances of the Town, County or State, the highest standards shall govern.
(Ord. No. 1095, § I-5, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-230 Jurisdictional Area.
   This Ordinance shall apply to all incorporated land within the Town of
Schererville, Indiana on the Jurisdictional Area Map on file with the County
Recorder, Lake County, Indiana.
(Ord. No. 1095, § I-6, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-231 through Sec. 10-233 Reserved for Future Use.
Division II. Definitions
Sec. 10-234 Inclusions.
   For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and phrases used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
   A.   The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other legal
entity.
   B.   The masculine includes the feminine.
   C.   The present tense includes the past and future tense, and the singular
number includes the plural.
   D.   The word or term "shall" is a mandatory requirement.
   E.   The word "may" is a permissive requirement.
   F.   The word and term "should" is a preferred requirement.
   G.   The words "used" or "occupied" shall be construed to include the words
"intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied".
   H.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot, parcel, and tract".
(Ord. No. 1095, § II-1, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-235 Terms.
   For the purpose of this Ordinance the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless otherwise specifically stated . If a term is not listed in
the definitions herein, the definition for that term found in the Town of
Schererville Zoning Ordinance #1046, as amended from time to time, will apply.
(Ord. No. 1095, § II-2, 12-14-88) (See § 10-3 and §
10-27 and § 10-53 for additional Definitions)
Sec. 10-236 Definitions.
   ALLEY: A permanent service right-of-way providing secondary means of access
to abutting lands.
   BLOCK: A block is a tract of land bounded by: A. Streets B. Public Parks C.
Railroad rights-of-way, when located at or above ground level, but not
including sidings or spurs in the same ownership as the zoning lot. D.
Waterways and Shorelines E. Corporate boundary lines of the Town of
Schererville.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES:  19  The legislative body of the Town of Schererville,
Lake County Indiana.
   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS: The Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of
Schererville, Lake County Indiana.
   BUILDING: A structure designed or intended for shelter, support or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, and is permanently
affixed to the land.
   BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the right-of-way line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district
in which the lot is located. (Also, see Building Setback Line in this section)
   BUILDING. LOWEST ELEVATION OF ENTRANCE: The lowest elevation of access to
the structure that will admit flowing water, by illustration and not
limitation, the following are examples: door threshold, window sills, garage
floor at entrance, walk-out basement door entrance thresholds, window sills in
basement windows.
   BUILDING SET-BACK LINE: A line beyond which a building shall not extend
unless varied according to procedures established by ordinance. This line is
also called a "building line".
   CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
   CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE: An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections
defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from the
intersection of street line.
   COMMISSION OR PLAN COMMISSION. The Schererville Plan Commission,
Schererville, Indiana.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE: An area within any development designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of all residents of the development, or for the use and
enjoyment of the public in general.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A development plan, or any portion thereof, recommended
by the Plan Commission, and adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
   CONSTRUCTION: The placing of construction materials, including landfill, in
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation,
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation, demolition or removal shall be
deemed construction.
   CONTIGUOUS: Abutting adjoining properties.
   COUNTY: Lake County, Indiana.
   CROSS WALK: A public right-of-way which crosses a block to furnish access
for pedestrians to adjacent streets or properties.
   CUL-DE-SAC: (See Street, Cul-de-sac, in this section.)
   CURB CUT: Lowering the grade level to allow motorized vehicular ingress to
and egress from property.
   CURB LINE: A line located on either edge of the roadway, but within the
right-of-way line.
   DEVELOPMENT DENSITY: A unit of measurement; number of dwelling units per
acre.
      A.   Low - Less than 2 dwellings per acre.
      B.   Medium - 2.0 to 6.0 dwellings per acre.
      C.   High - More than 6 dwellings per acre.
   DEVELOPMENT: The construction of new buildings or other structures on zoning
lots, the relocation of existing buildings on another zoning lot, or the use of
open land for a new use.
   DRAIN MUTUAL: A drain that:
      A.   Is located on two (2) or more tracts of land that are under
different ownership;
      B.   Was established by the mutual consent of all the owners;
      C.   Was not established under or made subject to any drainage statute or
ordinance.
   DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential purposes, including single-family, two-family, and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including mobile home, or other trailers or lodging rooms in
hotels, motels or lodging houses.
   EASEMENT: A right for one person or persons to use the land owned by another
person for a special purpose by grant or necessary implication.
   ENGINEER: The person duly appointed and designated as the Engineer of the
Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
   ENGINEER. CERTIFIED: A person or firm duly designated and licensed as a
certified professional to engage in engineering services under the rules and
regulations, laws, or authorities of the State of Indiana or any other
recognized regulatory authority.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead
gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission, or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call
boxes, traffic signals and hydrants in connection herewith, but not including
buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such
utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare.
   EXCAVATION: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and
ground care.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land area from the overflow of inland water.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream in those portions of the flood
plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the flood water or flood flow of any river or stream, and as defined
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   FLOODWAY FRINGE: That portion of a flood hazard area outside the limits of
the floodway, so designed by the Federal Insurance Administration and as
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   FLOOD PLAIN: Land subject in inundation by the maximum flood of reasonable
regional expectancy, (One Hundred Year Flood), as determined by the Department
of Natural Resourc-es, Division of Water of the State of Indiana, or any and
all other applicable State and Federal Regulatory Agencies, as defined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   FRONTAGE: The contact abutting property with a street which affords
unobstructed access to the property.
   GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of a building.
   GREEN STRIP: A solid planting strip, composed of grass and evergreen shrubs.
   HALF STREET: One side of a street divided longitudinally.
   HEALTH BOARD: The Indiana State Board of Health.
   IMPROVEMENTS: Street grading, street surfacing and paving, curb and gutter,
side-walks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, drainage
facilities, culverts, bridges, utilities, etc.
   INSPECTOR: A duly designated representative of The Town Council or the Plan
Commission assigned to make any or all necessary inspections of the development
in the Town of Schererville.
   LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or for development. In determining the size of a lot,
no part of a street right-of-way or cross walk may be included. Such lot shall
have frontage on an improved public street, or on an improved private street,
and may consist of a single lot of record or a portion of a lot of record.
   LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
   LOT. BUILDING: That part of a lot which is suitable for building purposes or
for use as a yard area. The area of the building lot must meet the minimum lot
size requirements listed for each zone or use before a Building Permit may be
issued.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot at the junction of two (2) or more streets.
   LOT DEPTH: The distance between the front and rear lot lines measured along
the median between the side lot lines.
   LOT DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot, the generally opposite ends of which both abut
on Streets- Also referred to as a Through Lot".
   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a
public street; for a corner lot, the Plan Commission may elect either street as
the front lot line.
   LOT INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or a double frontage through
street.
   LOT LINE FRONT: The boundary of a lot which abuts a street. On a corner lot,
the lot line having the shortest length abutting a Street line shall be the
front lot line, unless otherwise determined by the appropriate authority of the
Town.
   LOT LINE REAR: The lot line that is opposite the front lot line and farthest
from it, except that in the case of an irregularly shaped lot, it means the lot
line ten feet (10') long, parallel to the front lot line, and wholly with the
lot, that is farthest from the front lot line.
   LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines as measured on the
building line.
   LOT ZONING. A tract of land located within a single block, which at the time
of filing for a Zoning Permit, or if no Zoning Permit is required, at the time
of filing for a Certificate of Occupancy, is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract, all of which is to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
   LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated and dimensioned as a lot on a plat
of subdivision registered or recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of
Lake County, and which actually exists as so shown.
   MASTER PLAN: The Comprehensive Land Use Plan, including graphic and written
proposals, indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public
buildings, and all physical development of the Town of Schererville, Lake
County, Indiana, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment
to such plan or parts thereof. Such plan may or may not be recommended by the
Plan Commission and/or adopted by the Town Council.
   MUNICIPALITY: The Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana.
   PARKWAY: See definition under "Planting Strip".
   PERFORMANCE BOND SURETY BOND: An agreement by a subdivider or developer of
the Town for the amount of the estimated construction cost guaranteeing the
completion of physical improvements according to the plans and specifications,
within the time prescribed by the agreement.
   PERMIT ZONING: Written authorization allowing construction or use of a
parcel of property in conformance with the provisions of Zoning Ordinance
#1046, as amended from time to time, and all other Ordinances of the Town of
Schererville. (See Article 3)
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, or any other group which acts as a unit.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel or tract of land, initially under single
ownership or control, which contains two (2) or more principal buildings, and
one (1) or more principal uses, planned and constructed as a unified
development, and where certain regulations of Zoning Ordinance #1046, as
amended from time to time, for the zoning district where it is located are
modified with approval. (See Article 3 of this Chapter)
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: The development of an area of land as a single
entity for a number of uses, according to a plan which does not correspond in
lot size, bulk or type of building, density, lot coverage, or required open
space to the regulations otherwise required by this Zoning Ordinance, #1046, as
amended from time to time. (See Article 3)
   PLANTING STRIP: (Parkway) A strip of land between the roadway and the side-
walk or side-walk site.
   PLAT: A map or chart indicating the division of land, subdivision, or
resubdivision of land, intended to be filed for recording with the Recorder of
Lake County, Indiana.
   PROPERTY LINE: The line between any lot and contiguous lots.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: A person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board
or commission duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing under federal, state
or municipal regulations to the public, gas, steam, electricity, sewage
disposal, communication, transportation, or water.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: An easement in the land of property owners, obtained by lawful
means, for public use, such as a public street.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE: The dividing line between a lot and a public street,
legally open or officially platted by the Town, County or State or over which
the owners or tenants of two (21 lots held in a single or separate ownership
have the right-of-way.
   ROAD FRONTAGE: Being a local street or road auxiliary to and located on the
side of an arterial highway for service to abutting property and adjacent areas
and for control of access.
   SETBACK: The distance, as measured from the foundation of a structure,
required to obtain the minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions
of Zoning Ordinance #1046, as amended from time to time. (See Article 3 of this
Chapter)
   SETBACK LINE: A line established by the Zoning Ordinance #1046, as amended
from time to time, generally parallel with and measured from the lot line
(property line) defining the limits of a yard in which no buildings, other than
accessory buildings, or structures, may be located above ground, except as may
be provided in Zoning Ordinance #1046, as amended from time to time. (See
Article 3 of this Chapter)
   SIDEWALKS: The portion of a street or crosswalk intended for pedestrian use
only.
   STREET: A public way for purposes of vehicular traffic, including the entire
area within the right-of-way. The term ~street" also includes the terms
highway, parkway, road, roadway, public way, thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard,
lane, court, place, and other such terms; identified according to type of use
as follows:
      A.   Arterial Streets: A system of streets and roads which form an
integrated network of continuous routes primarily for through traffic. The
arterial system is stratified into principal and minor categories.
      B.   Principal Arterial Streets: A system of streets and roads which
serve corridor traffic movements having trip length and travel density
characteristics indicative of substantial state-wide or interstate travel, or
connect major population centers in rural areas, or serve major centers of
activity and the highest traffic volume corridors with the longest trip desires
in urban areas.
      C.   Minor Arterial Streets: A system of streets and roads which link
other cities, large towns and traffic generators, and provides a substantial
amount of interstate and intracounty service in rural areas, or interconnects
and augments with the principal arterials to provide service to trips of
moderate length for intracommunity continuity in urban areas.
      D.   Collector Streets: A system of streets and roads which serve travel
of primarily intra-area and intra county importance with approximately equal
emphasis to traffic circulation and land access service. The collector system
is generally further stratified into major and minor categories. The system
collects and distributes traffic between the arterial and local systems.
      E.   Cul-de-sac Streets: A local street open at one end only and with a
special provision for vehicles turning around.
      F.   Dead-end Streets: A local street open at one end only, and without a
special provision for vehicles turning around, not to exceed one lot in depth.
      G.   Feeder Streets: A local street which facilitates the collection of
traffic from local streets and which provides circulation within neighborhood
areas.
      H.   Frontage Streets: A local street or road auxiliary to and located on
the side of an arterial for service to abutting property and adjacent areas,
and for control of access.
      I.   Highway Streets: A term applied to streets and roads that are under
the jurisdiction of the Indiana State Highway Commission.
      J.   limited Access Streets: A street or road to which abutting
properties are denied access.
      K.   Local Streets: A system of streets and roads which primarily
provides land access service and access to higher order systems.
      L.   Loop Street: A local street with both terminal points on the same
street of origin.
      M.   Partial Street: A dedicated right-of-way providing only a portion of
the required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of
land.
      N.   Perimeter Street: Any existing street to which the parcel of land to
be subdivided abuts on only one (I) side.
      O.   Private Street: A local street that is not accepted for public use
or maintenance which provides vehicular and pedestrian access.
      P.   Public Street: A street under the control of and kept by the public,
established by regular governmental proceeding for the purpose, or dedicated by
the owner of the land and accepted by the proper authorities and for die
maintenance of which they are responsible.
      Q.   Secondary Street: Street designed to facilitate the collection of
traffic from feeder streets, and usually located on neighborhood boundaries.
   SUBDIVIDER: Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined
herein. The subdivider may be the owner of the authorized agent or the owner of
the land to be subdivided.
   SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into lots, parcels, tracts,
units or interests, i the manner defined and prescribed by this subdivision
Control Ordinance, as amended from time to time, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of development for residential, commercial or industrial
purposes.
   TOWN: The Town of Schererville, Lake County, Indiana
   TOWN BOARD: The Board of Trustees of the Town of Schererville, Lake County,
Indiana. (Now known as Town Council)
   TOWN STAFF: The duly designated official(s) or representative(s) of the Town
of Schererville, whether elected, appointed, or employed, who are assigned the
duties and responsibility of the review and control of planning, development
and the like, within the Town.
   WATERCOURSE: The watercourse shall include channel, creek, ditch, drain,
river, swale and stream.
   WETLANDS: Areas as defined by the appropriate State and federal agencies.
(Ord. No. 1095, § 11-2, 12-14-88)
 
Notes
19 19   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1095 Used "Board of Trustees" which has been
   replaced with "Town Council".
Sec. 10-237 Reserved for Future Use.
Division III. Procedure for Submission of Plats.
Sec. 10-238 General.
   No person proposing a subdivision shall sell, agree to sell, transfer, lease
or otherwise convey any lot, parcel or tract in a subdivision, or construct or
commence the construction of any building in a subdivision until the Final Plat
of the proposed subdivision is approved by the Plan Commission and recorded in
accordance with provision hereof.
   No person proposing a subdivision shall proceed with any grading and
improvements for streets or installation of public utilities until the Final
Plat of the proposed subdivision is approved by the Plan Commission, and
written authorization of the Plan Commission has been obtained, the final plat
recorded with the Recorder of Lake County, Indiana .
(Ord. No. 1095, § 111-1, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-239 Pre-Application Conferences and Study Sessions.
   A person desiring approval of a plat shall first meet with the Town Staff,
at a Pre-application Conference, to discuss the general proposal. The
subdivider shall then appear before the Plan Commission at a Study Session to
discuss the proposal before filing an application for preliminary plat
approval. No fee or formal application is required for this meeting. The
subdivider should be prepared to discuss the details of his proposed
subdivision, including but not limited to such items as follows:
   Letter of Intent: A concise summary of proposed development including the
following items:
      A.   Location
      B.   Ownership and control of property
      C.   Area (Acreage)
      D.   Flood plain check
      E.   Existing zoning & land use / Proposed zoning & land use
      F.   Existing covenants and land use restrictions
      G.   Land characteristics -Topo concept -Aesthetics
      H.   Soil information (i.e. published soil survey)
      I.   Availability of utilities
         1.   Water line size -location
         2.   Sanitary line size -location
         3.   Storm sewers and drainage
         4.   Nipsco, Ind. Bell, U.S. Cable availability
         5.   Other Town services availability (Fire, Police, Water Treatment,
etc.) J. Number of phases
      K.   Number of lots/units/buildings/density per phase and per total
development.
      L.   Proposed Protective Covenants or Deed Restrictions, if any.
      M.   Projected dates for start & completion per phase and per total
development.
      N.   Adequate drawing of proposed development with street patterns
         1.   Ingress / egress
         2.   Proposed street width and improvement to existing streets
         3.   Cul-de-sacs, street stubs, etc.
         4.   Sidewalks & curbing
         5.   Street signs & traffic control devices
         6.   Fire & Police approval/review
         7.   Easements
      O.   Proposed utilities -location, connections, stubs, etc.
         1.   Nipsco, Ind. Bell, U.S. Cable
         2.   Water (Town Staff approval/recommendation)
         3.   Sanitary (Town Staff approval/recommendation)
         4.   Fire hydrant - location
         5.   Street light - location
         6.   Street light energy cost (i.e. Nipsco, etc.)
      P.   Proposed storm drainage
         1.   Individual storm sewer taps
         2.   Appropriate catch basins & connections
         3.   Retention and outflow
      Q.   Proposed public and/or recreational areas
      R.   Any other pertinent information
   The subdivider shall be responsible for providing all information and
documentation deemed necessary and required by the Town and shall bear the
burden of proof for the subdivision approval before the Plan Commission.
(Ord. No. 1095, § III-2, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-240 Preliminary Plat.
   After the Pre-Application Conferences, the Study Session, and Staff
Conferences, the subdivider shall submit an application for approval of a
Preliminary Plat to the Plan Commission (copy) and the Clerk-Treasurer
(original) with payment to the Town Clerk-Treasurer in the manner required by
the Town. The subdivider shall further be required to pay the prescribed
application fee, as stated hereinafter, at the time of the filing of the
application to the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   A.   The application shall be submitted to the Town Clerk-Treasurer, with a
copy provided to the Plan Commission, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
Public Hearing and shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   Five (5) copies of all maps and data as set forth in Section
10-247 of Division IV of this Article, as amended from time to time.
      2.   A certified check or money order, in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per lot in the
subdivision with a minimum charge of one hundred fifteen dollars ($115.00) to
cover the cost of all plat matters.
   B.   At the time of the Public Hearing, notice of which shall have been
published at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, not including the date
of the meeting, pursuant to the applicable Indiana Statutes, as amended from
time to time, in papers of general distribution, together with the required
adjacent property notification, the Plan Commission shall take either one or
more of the following actions:
      1.   Approve the Preliminary Plat;
      2.   Require additions, corrections, changes or other information
necessary for compliance with this Ordinance, as amended from time to time, or
approval of Preliminary Plat; or
      3.   Reject the subdivision proposal when it finds the proposal does not
comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time,
or other Ordinances of the Town of Schererville, or where a proposed
subdivision would adversely affect the public health, safety, moral,
convenience, order or general welfare of the community and residents of the
Town.
   C.   The Plan Commission shall so advise the subdivider of the action taken
in writing not more than ten (10) working days following the date of the public
hearing at which the action is taken.
   D.   The subdivider shall be required to submit with the Preliminary Plat
the written recommendation of all utility and public service companies, such as
Indiana Bell Telephone Company, Northern Indiana Public Service Company, and
the like, proving the easements as shown or any changes that have been
requested.
   E.   Any person feeling himself aggrieved at any action of the Plan
Commission upon the proposed plat or replat, may apply in writing, by certified
mail, to the Plan Commission, prior to its next regular monthly meeting, for
modification of the action complained of, and such application shall be
considered by the Commission, at such time and in such a manner as it may
determine.
   F.   The approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Plan Commission implies the
general acceptability of the layout and the engineering proposals submitted;
however, the Plan Commission may require additions and changes for approval of
the Final Plat and Engineering.
   G.   Preliminary Plat approval shall be effective for a maximum period of
twelve (12) months, unless upon application by the subdivider in writing, an
extension of time is requested, the Plan Commission, finding reasonable grounds
therefore, grants an extension which shall not be for a longer period of time
than twelve (12) months; provided however that Final Plat approval of any
portion of the Preliminary Plat shall automatically extend the remainder of the
Preliminary Plat for an additional twelve (12) months from the time of Final
Plat approval of the particular phase for which Final Plat approval was
granted.
(Ord. No. 1095, § III-3, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-241 Final Plat.
   After Preliminary Plat approval is obtained, the subdivider shall submit a
Final Plat to the Plan Commission as set forth in Section
10-248 of Divsions IV of this Article, as amended from time to time.
   A.   The Subdivider shall be required to appear before the Plan Commission
for Final Plat Approval at a Public Meeting no sooner than the next regularly
scheduled Public Meeting of the Plan Commission after obtaining Preliminary
Plat Approval. The Plan Commission shall review the request of the Subdivider
for Final Plat Approval to determine whether the Final Plat is in accordance
with the requirements of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
   B.   The Subdivider shall be required to submit the following for Final Plat
Approval:
      1.   Five (5) black or blue line prints and two (2) original mylars -
reproducible print of the plat.
      2.   A certificate that all improvements required by this Ordinance, as
amended from time to time, have been installed in strict accordance with the
Standards of Construction of the Town; or, a guarantee that the improvements
will subsequently be installed by the owner. This can be in the form of a bond
by a Company entered and licensed to do business in the State of Indiana or a
deposit of funds or securities in escrow that will cover the cost of the
Improvements as estimated by the Engineer and approved by the Town. Said bond
may be reduced in proportion to the amount of the improvements constructed and
accepted, but shall not be reduced to less than ten per cent (10%) of the
estimated cost of improvements. This ten per cent (10%) Bonding Fee will be
retained until such time as the petitioner posts the required Maintenance Bond
as required in Section
10-275 of Division VII of this Ordinance. There will be an annual review of
said bond by the duly designated Town authorities.
      3.   A certified check or money order, in the amount of ten dollars
($10.00) plus fifty cents ($ .50) for each lot in the subdivision with a
minimum total charge of twenty-five ($25.00) to cover the cost of checking and
verifying the proposed plat.
   C.   If the Plan Commission finds that the Final Plat is in accordance with
the requirements of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time, they shall
affix the seal of the Plan Commission upon the plat and the President and
Secretary, or other authorized members, shall endorse the plat and return it to
the subdivider. If disapproved, the President shall attach to the original
tracing o£ the final plat, a statement of the reasons for such action and
return it to the subdivider.
(Ord. No. 1095, § III-4, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-242 Recording.
   The subdivider shall present a copy of the approved final plat to the County
Recorder. Unless the plat is duly recorded within one hundred eighty days (180)
from the date of final plat approval, the Commission approval of the final plat
shall expire and shall be of no effect unless subsequently reinstated.
(Ord. No. 1095, § III-5, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-243 and Sec. 10-244 Reserved for Future Use.
Division IV. Plat Specifications.
Sec. 10-245 General.
   In a subdivision for residential use of less than five (5) lots and where
the lots abut existing public roads and utilities, the Plan Commission may
waive data requirements such as topographic, street and utility information,
where the Plan Commission deems such information unnecessary.
(Ord. No. 1095, § IV-1, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-246 Proposal Plan.
   The subdivider shall prepare a proposal plan to present to the Plan
Commission Study Session after the Pre - Application Conference; the subdivider
shall be prepared to address the matters contained in the check list found in
Section
10-235 of Division in of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time. This
proposal plan may be drawn as a concept drawing for the Pre-Application
Conference, but before the proposal goes before the Plan Commission at the
Study Session, the subdivider shall have a more detailed proposal plan as
required by the Town Staff.
(Ord. No. 1095, § IV-2, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-247 Preliminary Plat.
   The following maps and data shall be submitted with the application for
Preliminary Plat Approval. The maps and data may be on separate sheets or
combined on one (1) sheet, depending on the size and complexity of the proposed
subdivision.
   A.   A location map of the proposed subdivision showing:
      1.   Location within the Town and a metes and bounds description tied to
a U.S. Land Survey Section Corner.
      2.   Zoning of the tract and adjacent properties, as well as indication
of any covenants on the property.
      3.   Gross land area and density (# lots/acre).
      4.   Contours of the site at vertical intervals of two feet (2'), with
reference to USGS data.
      5.   Character and location of natural or artificial features existing on
the land which would affect the design of the subdivision, such as wooded
areas, streams, direction and gradient of ground slope, embankments, retaining
walls, buildings, or nonresidential usage of land; and wetland areas.
      6.   Existing and proposed street patterns, rights-of-way, including
approximate gradients; types and widths of pavements, curbs and sidewalks;
distances and the like.
      7.   Existing and proposed easements, including widths and purposes.
      8.   Existing utilities, including the size, capacity, and location of
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, and
power lines on adjacent properties.
      9.   Areas subject to periodic overflow of flood or storm waters (Flood
Plain information).
      10.   Subsurface conditions, including information about ground water
levels and stability of subsoils; soil type -(Soil Map of Lake County).
      11.   Tract boundary lines by calculated distances and bearings, with
reference to a Section Comer.
      12.   Title, graphic scale, north point and date.
      13.   Site map of all lands within one hundred feet (100') boundaries.
   B.   A Subdivision Plat of the proposed subdivision drawn at a scale no
smaller than one hundred feet (100') to one inch (1") showing:
      1.   Subdivision Name
      2.   Names and addresses of owner, subdivider, and the person who
prepared the plat.
      3.   Street pattern, including the names (which shall not duplicate
existing streets in the Town unless it is an extension of an existing street),
widths of rights-of-way of streets, widths of easements for alleys, approximate
grades of streets where they exceed eight percent (8%).
      4.   Layout of lots, including dimensions and total square footage, lot
and address numbers, building set-back lines, front yard lines, and width of
lot at building set-back line.
      5.   Parcels of land to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks,
playgrounds or other public or community use.
      6.   Key plan, legend, notes, graphic scale, north point and date.
      7.   Legal description of property to be subdivided with exact length and
bearings of the first degree of accuracy of the exterior boundaries.
   C.   Engineering Plans for the proposed subdivision showing:
      1.   Plan and profile of the proposed street, sanitary and storm sewers,
and water distribution system.
      2.   General explanatory data concerning the installation of water
distribution systems, storm sewers, and sanitary sewers, as said improvements
relate to the total utility system.
      3.   Approval of connection to an existing sewer system, service load of
the subdivision and capacity of the treatment plant, by the appropriate Town
Staff. In the event that a lift station is required, as per Town Staff, it
shall be designed to accommodate the present and future development of the
total area that may be serviced. The subdivider shall be responsible for the
cost of maintaining said lift station for a period of two (2) years.
      4.   If connection to a public sewerage system is not feasible, a report
on the feasibility of on-lot sewerage disposal, including a detailed map of the
physical conditions of the site, contours, finished grades, water courses,
ground water table elevations, and the results of soil percolation tests for
each individual lot conducted in accordance with the recommended practices of
the Indiana State Board of Health.
      5.   Proposed storm retention/detention design and calculations.
Detention areas, when possible, should be part of a subdivision lot and should
be maintained by the lot owner, and shall discharge into an adequate drainage
system. Detention areas shall be at a slope of five (5) to one (1) or as
approved by the Town Engineer. Detention areas reserved for public use shall be
covered with four (4) inches of black dirt, graded and seeded before dedication
and acceptance by the Town.
      6.   Relationship of the subdivision's storm drainage system to the total
water shed.
      7.   Bench marks located within a fifteen hundred (1500) feet radius of
each lot, referenced by USGS Datum.
      8.   Each lot shall bear an elevation notation which is not lower than 16
inches (16") above the top of the curb(s) at the average point of the curb(s)
adjoining the lot, related to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
Datum, of the minimum elevation of the entrance into any principal use
structure built on that lot. Said elevation shall be planned to avoid direct
flow of storm water runoff into the principal use structure, provided however,
that under unusual topographical conditions the lowest elevation entrance
requirements may be waived by the Plan Commission on the original plat, or by
the Town Engineer in writing on a form approved by the Plan Commission.
Elevations of the proposed building's entry level, the ground elevations at the
corners of the building, and elevations of the lots corners as well as the
overland flow shall also be shown on the plan.
   D.   Restrictions: a draft of the protective covenants or private
restrictions to be adopted in the final subdivision plat.
(Ord. No. 1095, § IV-3, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-248 Final Plat.
   The final plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller that one hundred feet
(100') to one inch (1"), with water proof, non-fading india ink on tracing
cloth or equally acceptable material. The Final Rat shall show:
   A.   Subdivision names, name and addresses of owner and subdivider, source
of title of land as shown by the books of the County Recorder, graphic scale,
north point, date, certificate of approval of Plan Commission.
   B.   Survey data with certification by a registered professional engineer or
land surveyor, showing:
      1.   Legal description of the property being subdivided.
      2.   Calculated distances and bearings of the subdivision boundaries,
lots, lot sizes with total square footage, utility easements, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, building set-back lines, width of lots at building set-back line,
lot grades, and parcels of reserved or dedicated land for community purposes,
and total area of the Plat.
      3.   Location and distances to the nearest established street corners or
official monuments and of the streets intersecting the boundaries of the
subdivision. Subdivision corners shall be marked with a one inch (1") diameter
pipe, twenty-four inches (24") long, encased in six inch (6") diameter
concrete.
      4.   Location, type, material and size of monuments.
      5.   Vicinity map (small scale) and exact location of subdivision tied to
a Section Comer, Township and Range.
      6.   Lot numbers, street names, house numbers, street light placement,
and hydrant placement.
      7.   Each lot shall bear an elevation notation which is not lower than
sixteen (16) inches above the top of the curb(s) at the average point of the
curb(s) adjoining the lots, related to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
Datum, of the minimum elevation of the following: (Said notations may be in
tabular form.)
         a.   Entry way
         b.   Main floor
         c.   Ground grade at each comer of building
         d.   Ground grade at the four (4) lot corners
         e.   Direction of overland flow
   C.   Notations as to whether improvements are dedicated or not.
   D.   Protective covenants or private restrictions shall be included on the
Final Plat or on a separate document recorded with the Final Plat.
   E.   Final engineering plans, in addition to the information required for
preliminary approval, shall include:
      1.   Plan and profiles, cross-sections and specifications for proposed
street, sanitary, storm and water improvements.
      2.   Other explanatory data concerning installation of the water
distribution system, storm sewers and sanitary sewers.
      3.   Certification by a Certified Engineer that storm water design
installation shall not damage the land being developed, as well as not damage
the adjacent and downstream properties; by certification that reads as follows:
I, the undersigned state that to the best of my knowledge and belief, the
drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of this
subdivision, or that if such surface water drainage will be changed, reasonable
provision has been made for the collection and diversion of such surface waters
into public areas or drains which the subdivider has the right to use, and that
such surface waters will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining
property because of the construction of this subdivision.
(Ord. No. 1095, § IV-4, 12-14-88)
   The final subdivision plat shall provide that all lots which contain more
than one (1) living unit, shall indicate the total number of units per lot on
the subdivision plat. The individual living units shall be designated
numerically on each lot. For example, if there are four (4) living units per
lot then each lot should bear the numbers 1, 2, 3, and 4 as designation for the
individual living units.
   This designation is not intended to be a legal description, but is put in
place on the final subdivision plat solely for the purpose of identifying
property taxpayers who will ultimately own the individual units.
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 5-12-99)
Sec. 10-249 Reserved for Future Use.
Division V. Design Standards,
Sec. 10-250 General.
   The Plan Commission shall not approve any plat unless the land whereon
buildings are to be constructed shall be of such character that it can be used
for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or
other hazards.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-1, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-251 Natural Features.
   Existing natural features which would add value to the subdivision and the
Town, such as trees, valleys, watercourses, historic spots and similar
irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved, insofar as possible, through
harmonious design of the subdivision.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-2, 12- 14-88)
Sec. 10-252 Streets.
   The Plan Commission shall not approve any plat unless all streets shown
thereon shall be of sufficient width and proper grade, and shall be so located
as to accommodate the anticipated volume of traffic thereon, afford adequate
light and air, facilitate fire protection, provide a coordinated system of
streets conforming to the Thoroughfare Plan of the Town.
   A.   Local streets shall be so planned as to discourage through traffic.
   B.   Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or
alley along a boundary of the tract being subdivided, the remainder of said
street or alley, to the prescribed width, shall be platted within the proposed
subdivision.
   C.   Half streets shall not be provided, except where it is essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformance with the requirements
of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
   D.   Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than six hundred feet (600'), including
a turn-around which shall be provided at the closed end with an outside curb
radius of at least fifty feet (50') and a right-of-way radius of not less than
sixty feet (60'). The maximum grades of the turn-around portion of the cul-de-
sac shall be five percent (5%).
   E.   Alleys shall not be provided in residential zoning districts but shall
be included in commercial and industrial zoning districts where needed for
loading or unloading or access purposes.
   F.   The minimum distance between center line of parallel or approximately
parallel streets intersecting a cross street from the opposite directions shall
be one hundred twenty-five feet (125').
   G.   Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be
avoided.
   H.   Dead-end streets shall be prohibited unless provided with a turn-around
or cul-de-sac arrangement. If an extension of the street is planned for the
near future, the subdivider shall provide a temporary turn-around until such
time as the street is extended.
   I.   Subdivisions shall be developed and planned with more than one (1)
access, as per the requirements of the Plan Commission.
   J.   Right-of-way requirements may be increased due to anticipated traffic
flow. Drainage easements shall reasonably parallel right-of-ways. Any required
increased width shall be established by the Plan Commission.
   K.   Minimum right-of-way widths, paving widths, angle of intersection, curb
radius, distance along sides of sight triangles, horizontal alignments,
vertical alignments shall be in accordance with Table 1 hereafter. Maximum
grade shall also be in accordance with Table 1 hereafter.
   Table 1
              Major    Minor
              Arterial Arterial  Local Streets Cul-De-Sacs Cross Walks Alleys
              Streets  Collector
                       Streets
Right-of Way  80'      66'       60'           60'         12'         30'
Width
Paving Width
(back to back 45'      36'       33'           50'         10'         20'
of curb)
Maximum Grade 7.5%     8%        10%           10%         -           -
Minimum
Angle/        90       80        80            80          -           70
Intersection
Minimum Curb  35'      15'       16.5'         16.5'       -           5'
Radius
Grades/25'
Before        3%       3%        3%            3%          3%          3%
Intersection
Site
Triangles
(Distance     500'     500'      300'          300'        -           50'
along sides   /30'     /30'      /25'          /25'        -           /20'
of) Through
Street/Stop
Street
Horizontal
Alignment
(Minimum      600'     400'      300'          100'        -           100'
Radius of
Center Line)
Vertical
Curves
(Minimum      500'     300'      300'          100'        -           100'
Sight
Distance)
 
   The Town reserves the right to adjust these specifications when warranted by
traffic or other conditions.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-3, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-253 Blocks.
   Blocks shall ordinarily not exceed one thousand feet (1000') in length.
Where it is necessary for blocks to exceed this length, pedestrian ways and/or
easements shall be located near the center of the block-
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-4, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-254 Lots.
   The lot and yard sizes shall conform with the requirements of the Town
Zoning Ordinance #1046, as amended from time to time, set forth in Article 3 in
this Chapter, and the lots shall be designed in accordance with the following
design standards:
   A.   Every lot shall be provided with access adequate for the use of public
safety vehicles and other public and private purposes and shall be served by a
public or private street system, improved in accordance with this Ordinance, as
amended from time to time, and connected to the general street system.
   B.   Side lines of lots shall be approximately right angles to straight
streets and on radial lines on curved streets. Pointed or very irregular lots
shall be avoided.
   C.   Double-frontage lots shall be avoided.
   D.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than required building lots and
there is no covenant preventing resubdivision of the lots, such lots or parcels
shall be so arranged as to permit a logical location and opening of future
streets and resubdivisions with provision for adequate utility connections for
each subdivision.
   E.   All lot comers shall be designated with an iron pipe, set by a land
surveyor, before a building permit is issued.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-5, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-255 Easements.
   Easements for utilities and drainage shall have a minimum width of ten feet
(10') on each lot with access available to all portions of said easement. Where
a subdivision is traversed by a water course, there shall be provided a storm
water easement or drainage right-of-way of a width sufficient for the purpose.
No building or structure will be constructed within a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet of the top perimeter of any mutual drain. In the event the Plan
Commission determines the above easement requests are not adequate or are
excessive owing to special conditions related to the property being subdivided,
then the Plan Commission may increase or decrease the easement request. No
permanent or other structures shall be erected or maintained upon any
easements, and owners of lots shall take their title to property subject to the
rights of easements for public use.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-6, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-256 Water and Sewer Systems.
   The water supply and sewage disposal systems for the subdivision shall meet
the design standards and requirements of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (E.P.A.), the Indiana Department of Environmental Management
(I.D.E.M.), the Indiana State Board of Health, the Town of Schererville Water
and Sewer Departments, and any and all other applicable Federal, State, or
local regulatory authorities. The Town shall be copied as to any correspondence
with the above mentioned agencies, related to the subdivision for which
approvals are requested.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-7, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-257 Public Sites and Open Space.
   A.   No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for development by
reason of flooding, collecting of ground water, inadequate drainage or any
other features likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the
future residents of the subdivision or the community. Such lands shall remain
unsubdivided until such time as the conditions causing the unsuitability are
corrected.
   B.   Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown in
the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the
Plan Commission may require the reservation of such areas.
   C.   Where deemed essential by the Plan Commission, Town Board and Park
Board, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed in the
subdivision, and especially in large scale developments not anticipated in the
Comprehensive Plan, the Town may require the reservation of such other areas or
sites of a character, extent and location suitable to the needs created by such
development for schools, parks and other neighborhood purposes. The Plan
Commission may demand compensation in lieu of land, if it is deemed that the
development area is not in need of additional land for the purposes described
above.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-8, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-258 Planned Unit Development.
   The design standards of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time, may be
modified by the Plan Commission in the case of a plan utilizing an unusual
concept of development which meets the requirements of this section. The
planned unit development provision is intended to encourage original and
imaginative subdivision design which preserves the natural amenities of the
site and provides for the general welfare of the Town.
   A.   The unit plan shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this
Ordinance, as amended from time to time, including but not limited to bonding,
inspection fees, and all Town inspections and requirements.
   B.   The unit plan shall conform to the "Planned Unit Business and
Industrial Projects" requirements of the Town Zoning Ordinance, as amended from
time to time.
   C.   The area of land to be developed shall not be less than ten (10) acres.
   D.   Properties adjacent to the unit plan shall not be adversely affected.
   E.   Any P.U.D. development cannot be sold or transferred until all
improvements are complete.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V-9, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-259 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VI. Improvements.
Sec. 10-260 General.
   All of the required improvements specified in this Title shall be
constructed in accordance with the Town Standards for Construction and all
other applicable Town, County, State, and Federal regulations.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-1, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-261 Monuments and Markers.
   Concrete monuments shall be set at the intersection of all lines forming
angles in the boundary of the subdivision. Iron or steel markers shall be set
at the beginning and ending of all curves along street property lines, and all
block corners.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-2, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-262 Streets.
   The streets shall be graded to the grades and dimensions shown on plans and
profiles approved by the Plan Commission and shall include the following
improvements:
   A.   Suitable drainage structures, culverts, storm sewers, ditches, and
related installations shall be provided to insure adequate drainage of all
points along the streets.
   B.   Curbs of concrete shall be required on all streets.
   C.   Pavement shall be required on all residential streets and shall be of a
material and thickness as follows: eight inches (8") of compacted aggregate
material, two inches (2") of binder course, and one inch (1") of final coat.
All commercial and industrial development streets shall be designed to meet the
anticipated traffic loads and in accordance with the Indiana State Highway
Codes and design standards.
   D.   There shall be soil compaction tests performed at a minimum of every
six hundred (600) feet. The soil boring requirement may be waived if the Town
is adequately notified and performs inspections prior to the installation of
the following:
      1.   Base material.
      2.   Binder course.
      3.   Surface final coat.
      4.   Sanitary Sewers.
      5.   Storm Sewers.
      6.   Water Mains.
      7.   Sanitary, storm and water services.
      8.   Sidewalks.
   E.   Street shoulders shall be constructed which are uniformly and
thoroughly compacted by rolling and level with the tops of curbs.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-3, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-263 Storm Drainage.
   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with an adequate storm water
sewer system. When the surface drainage is adequate, easements for such surface
drainage shall be provided. The construction of a storm drainage system shall
conform to the following requirements:
   A.   Each lot shall have its own individual storm sewer tap. No downspouts
shall connect to any storm drainage system and flow from said downspouts shall
not drain onto the adjoining lot or parcel of land.
   B.   Drainage piping serving drain tile that is located below the catch
basin of the main storm sewer shall discharge into an approved water-tight sump
or receiving tank, so located as to receive the water by gravity. From such
sump or receiving tank, the water shall be lifted and discharged a minimum of
twenty-four (24) inches above the catch basin level of the main storm sewer and
flow by gravity to the [catch basins].
   C.   Catch Basins shall be designed to prevent ponding of storm water within
the street right-of-way for a storm frequency of ten (10) years.
   D.   Drainage ditches or channels shall be designed to prevent erosion of
the ditch and shall have a minimum design velocity (slope) of two feet (2') per
second.
   E.   All lot elevations as stated in the plans shall be maintained by the
subdivider, builder and any subsequent owners of the lot. No elevation shall be
altered unless approved by the Town Engineer.
   F.   Rear yard drains shall be provided to prevent ponding in the rear yard
areas and shall be connected to an enclosed storm drainage system.
   G.   The subdivider shall be required to clean and maintain any mutual
drains which are utilized for the storm drainage of subdivision, as required by
the Town, in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Town, prior
to the acceptance of the storm drainage system.
   H.   The subdivider shall clean the storm drainage system and maintain the
same in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Town, prior to
the acceptance of the storm drainage system by the Town.
   I.   If there are any open watercourses, they shall have adequate capacity
and erosion control to insure safe and healthful disposal of storm water.
   J.   When top soil has been removed from the surface of a lot on a slope
where erosion will cause a displacement of loose materials, the subdivider
shall be required to seed or provide other means to prevent the wash from
damaging adjacent property or accumulation on street surfaces.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-4, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-264 Water Supply.
   Where public water supply is available as determined by the Commission, the
subdivider shall connect to such public water supply and construct a system of
water mains with a connection for each lot, and whenever possible all water
lines shall be placed to insure looping of the water line system.
   a.   Where public water is not available, the subdivider shall provide
acceptable evidence of the availability of water. The subdivider may be
required to make one or more test wells in the area to be platted if such
evidence is deemed not acceptable. Copies of well logs from said test test
wells which are obtained shall include the name and address of t submitted with
the plan to the Commission.
   b.   If a private water supply is permitted, individual private wells shall
be located at least twenty-five feet (25') from property lines; fifty feet
(50') from all septic tanks; approximately one hundred feet (100') from all
tile disposal fields and other sewage disposal facilities; ten feet (10') from
all cast iron sewer lines; thirty feet (30') from any vitrified sewer tile
line, and shall not be located within any floor plan.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-S, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-265 Hydrant Spacing.
   Hydrants should be placed near each street intersection and intermediate
hydrants placed where the distance between intersections exceeds three hundred
and fifty feet (350'), or as otherwise required by either the Indiana State
Fire Marshal's Office, the Director of Public Works, the Planning and Building
Department, or the Schererville Fire Chief. Hydrant placement shall be shown on
the final engineering plan.
(Ord. No. 1459, § 1, 5-12-99)
Sec. 10-266 Sewers.
   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer
system to be connected to the municipal sanitary system. The system shall be
designed in that the following conditions are met:
   a.   Will not include any sewer of which the purposed is to carry any
combination of storm and sanitary sewerages.
   B.   Will not allow the inflow of any uncontaminated groundwater sources
into the sanitary system.
   C.   Drainage piping serving fixtures that are located below the crown level
of the main sewer shall discharge into an approved water-tight sump or
receiving tank, so located as to receive the sewage or other liquid wastes
shall be lifted and discharged a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above the
crown level of the main sewer and flow by gravity to the main sewer.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-7, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-267 Utilities.
   Every lot in a subdivision shall be capable of being served by utilities,
and the necessary easements shall be provided. Electric, gas and other utility
distribution lines shall be installed in the rear utility easement or within
properly designated platted easements, designed to reach the rear utility
easements. Municipal utilities, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, and water lines
shall be run in the street right-of-way, and to the fullest extent possible,
underground utility lines located in the street right-of-way shall not be
installed beneath existing or proposed paved areas and in any case shall be
installed prior to the placement of any paving.
   A.   Water Service Shut-offs (Buffalo Boxes) shall not be placed in
sidewalks, curbing or driveways.
   B.   All utilities shall extend to the end of the subdivision, with shut-off
valves and manholes at the end of the property lines.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-8, 12-14-88)
   C.   All utilities, including, but not limited to, N1PSCO, telephone and
cable television, shall be installed and maintained underground.
(Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 10-12-94)
Sec. 10-268 Traffic Control Devices.
   Traffic control devices shall be provided in a number, manner and location
as approved by the Plan Commission upon recommendation from the Chief of
Police.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-9, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-269 Street Signs.
   Street name signs and other regulatory signs of a type adopted or approved
by the Town shall be installed at each street intersection by the subdivider,
on a location approved by the Plan Commission, pursuant to State Highway
Department regulations and/or Town regulations or requirements.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-10, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-270 Sidewalks.
   Sidewalks shall be required by the Plan Commission and shall be a minimum of
five (5) feet in width. Sidewalks shall be located in the street right-of-way
on both sides of the street at the outside edge of the street right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VI-11, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-271 Street Lights.
   Street lights shall be provided in a number, manner and intervals as
recommended by the Town Engineer and Plan Commission, and their placement shall
be shown on the final engineering plan. The subdivider shall be responsible and
pay for street light energy costs for two (2) years from the date of
installation. Street lights shall be timely installed as per the discretion of
the Town.
(Ord. No. 1095, § V1- 12, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-272 and Sec. 10-273 Reserved for Future Use.
Division VII. Administration.
Sec. 10-274 Inspection/Fees.
   When the plans of streets and other improvements have been approved as
provided in this Subdivision Control Ordinance, as amended from time to time, a
Subdivider shall first notify the designated Town Officials of the intention to
proceed with the construction or installation of said streets and improvements.
Notification shall be made at least forty-eight (48) hours before any such
construction or installation shall commence so as to provide the Town an
opportunity to inspect the site prior to the commencement of construction of
said streets and improvements during the course of work being performed.
   In order to defray a portion of the costs incurred by the Town in the
administration, planning, inspection, review, and all other direct or indirect
expenses in by it in connection with review and inspection of the installation
of all improvements required by this ordinance, as amended from time to time,
the Subdivider shall present a certified check or money order made payable to
the Town in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the cost of the
improvements, as estimated by the Town Engineer.
   The improvement inspection fee shall be determined and verified by the Town
Engineer. Notwithstanding the two percent (2 %) improvement inspection fee
described above, there shall be a minimum improvement inspection fee charged
per plat in the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) if the fee would be less
than the amount calculated on the cost of the required improvements.
   The two percent (2%) improvement inspection fee shall be paid by the
Subdivider at the time of the submission of the engineering for the proposed
Plat and no later than the submission of the Final Plat of the proposed
Subdivision to the Plan Commission for approval.
(Ord. No. 1181, § 1, 7-10-91; Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 11-26-97)
   In addition to the two percent (2%) costs of improvements, there shall also
be a charge for professional fees incurred by the Town of Schererville for
engineering and legal services provided for the review of Petition submitted
for Subdivision approval and this fee shall be charged to the Petitioner, and
collected as other fees in connection with such Petition, as follows:
   a.   The fee charged to the Town of Schererville for engineering services,
based upon the current hourly rate, but this amount shall not include any fees
charged for attendance by the engineer at regularly scheduled meetings.
   b.   The fee charged to the Town of Schererville for legal services, based
upon the current hourly rate, but this shall not include the fee charged for
attendance by the Attorney at regularly scheduled meetings.
   c.   The fees incurred by Petitioner related to engineering and legal
expenses shall be in addition to any and all other costs and fees associated
with the present two percent (2%) costs of improvements fee imposed upon a
Petitioner seeking Subdivision approval.
   d.   The fees related to engineering and legal costs shall be determined by
the Planning and Zoning administrator and shall be submitted to the Petitioner
for payment prior to final Subdivision approval.
   e.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall notify the
Planning and Zoning administrator of the payment of fees so collected no later
than five (5) days after payment is received.
   f.   All fees so collected by the Town of Schererville shall be paid to
Clerk-Treasurer and placed in the general fund of the Town of Schererville,
Indiana.
   g.   No Mylar shall be signed by the authorized members of the Plan
Commission of the Town of Schererville until payment of both the two percent
(2%) improvement fee and the fee related to engineering and legal services is
received by Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1399, § 1, 11-26-97)
Sec. 10-275 Maintenance.
   Prior to the acceptance by the Town of any improvements, as hereinafter
provided, the subdivider shall post a Maintenance Bond and/or other security
naming the Town as Obligee in an amount deemed adequate by the Town to insure
maintenance of said improvements. The Maintenance Bond shall be in an amount
equal to ten percent (10%) of the construction cost and shall run for a minimum
period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance. However, the Maintenance
Bond shall continue in full force and effect until a certificate of release
shall be issued by the Town Official or Staff designated by the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VII-2, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-276 Bond Provisions/Requirements.
   Any bond called for forfeiture by the Town shall include not only the full
value of the bond, but also all expenses of the Town, including but not limited
to reasonable attorney's fees. There will be an annual review of all bonds by
the duly designated Town Officials or Town Staff.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VII-3, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-277 Acceptance.
   After streets and improvements have been installed and constructed pursuant
to the requirements contained in this Ordinance, as amended from time to time,
the subdivider shall notify the appropriate Town Officials that the
construction or installation has been completed, and shall supply the Town with
a minimum of five (5) copies of the as-built plans on which the street or
improvements in question will be shown as they were constructed or installed.
The five (5) copies of the as built plans shall show the plan and contain a
notice thereon as to where and when the plat was recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder. The portion of street improvement which the subdivider seeks
to have the Town accept shall be shaded, colored, or clearly designated on each
of the five (5) copies. The as built plans shall also clearly designate the
number of lineal feet of said street or improvement which the subdivider seeks
to be accepted by the Town.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VII-4, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-278 Permits.
   No excavating, foundations or building shall be commenced without first
obtaining the required building permits. No permits shall be issued without the
required subdivision improvements, as required by this Ordinance, as amended
from time to time. No building/zoning permit shall be issued without a proper
plat of survey, certified by a Professional Engineer, showing all the
dimensions for the applicable building setback requirements, as per the Town
Zoning Ordinance #1046, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VII-5, 12-14-88) [See Article 3 of this Chapter]
Sec. 10-279 Occupancy.
   No persons shall occupy any structure prior to receiving the proper
Occupancy Permits. All Occupancy Permits are subject to all Federal, State, and
Local regulations (i.e. Building Codes); including, but not limited-to the
following: Final lot grading in accordance with the subdivision engineering
design elevations; proper gutter, downspout and drainage design; hard surface
coat on driveway; completion of sidewalks and entrance walkways, if applicable;
stairways and appropriate railings to all outside entrances, posting of address
with three inch (3") contrasting numeral; etc.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VII-6, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-280 Appeals.
   Any decision or requirement of the Plan Commission made pursuant to the
terms and provisions of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time, is
subject to the right of appeal and review by certiorari.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VII-7, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-281 Validity.
   Should any provision of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time, be
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such derision shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance, as amended from time to time, as a whole
or of any other provisions thereof.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VII-8, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-282 Penalties.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance, as amended from
time to time, shall be subject to fines and penalties, which fines and
penalties shall be not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than
two thousand, five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day a violation shall
continue constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1095, § VII-9, 12-14-88)
Sec. 10-283 Plat Committee.
   (a)   There is created a Plat Committee, which shall consist of five (5)
members appointed by the Plan Commission. One member shall be the Chief
Building Inspector, one member shall be the Planning and Zoning Administrator;
one member shall be the Secretary of the Plan Commission; two (2) members shall
be appointed from the membership of the Town Council and not of the same
political party. In the event that the composition of the Town Council does not
permit the appointment of individuals from differing political parties, then,
and in that event, an individual from the community must be selected who is of
a differing political party than that of the member of the Town Council, and
further, must be able to demonstrate that he or she voted in the primary of the
opposing political party in the last three (3) primary elections prior to the
appointment. All members of the Plat Committee shall serve a one (1) year term,
and be subject to removal in accordance with appropriate Indiana State
Statutes.
   (b)   The Plat Committee shall have the authority to review and approve
applications for platting of minor subdivisions, subject to the following:
      (1)   Subdivision of land for single-family residential purposes which:
         (a)   Involves no more than two (2) lots;
         (b)   Does not involve opening a new public street or road;
         (c)   Complies with the Subdivision Control Ordinance and Zoning
Ordinance in all other respects.
(Ord. No. 1206, § 1(a)(b), 5-13-92)
      (2)   Subdivision of land in all residentially zoned districts for the
purpose of converting a metes-and-bounds description to that of a lot of record
legal description.
(Ord. No. 1206A, § 1, 11-11-93)
   (c)   Proposed applications for subdivisions pursuant to the procedure set
forth in this Ordinance shall be referred to the Plat Committee for primary
approval without public hearing.
   (d)   The Plat Committee shall establish rules and procedures for examining
and granting primary approval to minor subdivisions. If primary approval is
granted, the plat shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for secondary
approval. If the Plat Committee denies primary approval, the applicant may
appeal to the Plan Commission in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-4-
708 or any successor provisions.
(Ord. No. 1206, § 1(c)(d), 5-13-92)
Sec. 10-284 Professional Fees and Procedures.
   (a)   The professional fees currently charged to the Town of Schererville
for engineering and legal services provided for the review of petitions
submitted for subdivision approval shall be charged to the Petitioner, and
collected as other fees in connection with such Petition as follows:
      1.   The fee charged to the Town of Schererville for engineering
services, based upon the current hourly rate, but shall not include the fee
charged for attendance at regularly scheduled meetings.
      2.   The fee charged to the Town of Schererville for legal services,
based upon the current hourly rate, but shall not include the fee charges for
attendance at regularly scheduled meetings.
      3.   Such fees incurred by Petitioners, pursuant to this Ordinance, shall
be in addition to any and all other costs and fees currently imposed upon a
Petitioner seeking subdivision approval.
      4.   Such fees shall be determined by the Planning and Building
Department and shall be submitted to the Petitioner/Developer on a regular
periodic basis no more often than monthly.
   The Petitioner/Developer shall be required to pay the fee invoice upon
receipt, and not later than thirty (30) days after the date of invoice. All
outstanding invoices for fees are required to be paid in full for the next
consideration and action by the Plan Commission, Planning and Building
Department Staff, or Town Officials. All actions for any application before the
Town by a Petitioner/Developer shall be stayed pending payment in full of all
outstanding fee invoices.
      5.   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville shall notify the
Planning and Zoning Administrator of the payment of fees so collected no later
than five (5) days after payment is received.
      6.   All fees so collected by the Town of Schererville shall be paid to
the Clerk-Treasurer and placed in the Planning and Building Department
Subdivision Review Professional Fee Special Non-Reverting Fund of the Town of
Schererville, to be utilized consistent with applicable law and in conformance
with the requirements of said fund as established by appropriate ordinance.
      7.   No mylar shall be signed by the appropriate member of the Plan
Commission of the Town of Schererville until payment of the aforementioned fees
is received by the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Schererville.
(Ord. No. 1238, § 1, 6-9-93; Ord. No. 1238A, § 1, 5-14-08)
Sec. 10-285 Appendix I - Plat Certification.
   The following forms shall be used in Final Plats:
      Each Final Plat submitted to the Plan Commission for approval shall carry
a deed of dedication in substantially the following form:
      "We, the undersigned (names), Owners of the real estate shown and
described herein, do hereby certify that we have laid off, platted and
subdivided, and do hereby lay off, plat and subdivide, said real estate in
accordance with the Plat.
      This Subdivision shall be known and designated as (name), an addition to
(name). All street, alleys and easements shown and not heretofore dedicated,
are hereby dedicated, to the Town of Schererville.
      Front and side yard building set-back lines are hereby established as
shown on this Plat, between which line and the property lines of the Street,
there shall be erected or maintained no building or structure. There are strips
of ground (number) feet in width as shown on this Plat and marked "Easement",
as further described hereafter, reserved for the use of public utilities for
the installation of water and sewer mains, poles, ducts, lines and wires,
subject at all times to the proper authorities and to the easement herein
reserved. No permanent or other structures are to be erected or maintained upon
said strips of land, but owners of lots in this subdivision shall take their
titles subject to the rights of public utilities."
      "Easements for Public Utilities are hereby granted to Northern Indiana
Public Service Company, Indiana Bell Telephone Company, the Town of
Schererville and Cable Television Companies, jointly and severally, together
with their respective heirs, successors and assigns to install, lay, erect,
construct, renew, repair, operate and maintain sewers, water mains, gas mains,
conduits, cables and wires, both overhead and underground, in upon, along and
over those strips of ground designated on the plat by dotted lines and marked
"Easement" including those immediate areas not so marked but extending from
said strips of ground, whereupon overhead or underground facilities as stated
above shall exist for the direct service to the real estate herein platted for
the purpose of serving the public in general with sewer, gas, electric,
telephone and cable television service, including the right to use said
easement for the conveyance, channelization, collection and dispersal of
surface water runoff and the right to use both public and private Street right-
of-ways when necessary, together with the right to enter upon said easements at
all times for any and all of the purposes aforesaid, and to trim and keep
trimmed any trees, shrubs, or sapplings that interfere with the normal use,
operation or maintenance of any such utility equipment, together with the right
to grade or regrade the surface or to remove obstructions to surface drainage.
No permanent building or structures shall be placed on said easement, but the
same may be used for gardens, planting, landscaping, fencing and other purposes
that do not interfere with the use of said easement for said Public Utility and
drainage purposes."
      (Additional dedications and protective covenants or private restrictions
would be inserted here upon the Subdivided initiative or the recommendations of
the Plan Commission; important provisions are those specifying the use to be
made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the minimum floor
area.)
      Where covenants or restrictions are inserted in any Plat, they shall
provide that invalidation of any one of the same by judgment or Court Order
shall in no way affect any of the other covenants or restrictions which shall
remain in full force and effect. The covenants and restrictions shall further
provide the right to enforce those provisions by injunction, together with the
right to cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part
hereof erected or maintained in violation thereof, is hereby dedicated to the
Public, and reserved to the several Owners of the several lots in said
Subdivision and to their Heirs and Assigns.
(Ord. No. 1145, § 1, 4-11-90)
Acknowledgment
   Each Final Plat submitted to the Plan Commission for approval shall carry an
acknowledgment in substantially the following form:
   I.    State of Indiana    )
               )SS:
      County of Lake    )
      Submitted to, and approved by the Plan Commission of the Town of
Schererville, Lake County, Indiana, this day of___, 19_.
   By:   ______________       Attest:      ___________
        Plan Comm. President            Plan Comm. Secretary
   II.   State of Indiana    )
               )SS:
      County of Lake    )
   Before me the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State,
personally appeared (name), (name), and each, separately and severally,
acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary
act and deed, for the purpose therein expressed. Witness my hand and Notarial
Seal this _ day of _, 19_.
                        ________________
                        Notary Public
   Resident of________County.
   Commission Expires:_______
(Ord. No. 1145, § 2, 4-11-90)
Sec. 10-286 through Sec. 10-299 Reserved for Future Use.
 
Chapter 11
Comparative Tables
   This Chapter is designed as a research tool to assist the reader in
accessing information in the 1997 Schererville Town Code.
   The first table refers to section of the Schererville Town Code of 1982 and
refers to the New Section of the 1997 Schererville Town Code.
   The second table refers to the original Park Board Resolution Number, the
date of adoption and the New Section of the 1997 Schererville Town Code where
the resolution is now located.
   The third table refers to the original Utility Board Resolution Number, the
date of adoption and the New Section of the 1997 Schererville Town Code where
the resolution is now located.
   The fourth table refers to the original Resolution Number, the date of
adoption and the New Section of the 1997 Schererville Town Code where the
resolution is now located.
   The fifth table refers to the original Ordinance Number, the date of passage
by the Town Council and the New Section of the 1997 Schererville Town Code
where the ordinance is now located.
Table 1. 1982 Code to the 1997 Code
Section of the 82 to 97 New Code Section
Section of the 82 to 97 New Code Section
1-8-2                   3-95,
                        3-96
2-4-4                   3-8,
                        3-10
2-4-5                   3-11
2-4-7                   3-13
2-4-9                   3-14
2-5-1—2-5-6           2-170
2-6-1—2-6-4           2-5—
                        2-8
2-7-1—2-7-25          2-48—
                        2-71
2-10-1                  2-135
2-10-4                  2-137,
                        2-138
2-10-94                 2-137
2-11-1-1                2-82
2-11-1-2                2-83
2-11-1-4                2-84
2-12-4                  2-39
2-13-1—2-13-6         2-210—
                        2-215
2-14-1                  2-226
2-14-                   2-229
2-14-4                  2-225
2-19-2                  3-19
3-6-3                   4-202
3-7-1                   2-396
3-10-1                  2-399
5-1-1—5-1-17          4-30—
                        4-45
5-4-1—5-4-8           4-18—
                        4-25
5-6-1—5-6-5           4-50—
                        4-54
8-2-3                   8-63
8-2-4                   8-64
8-2-6                   8-65,
                        8-66
8-2-16                  8-140
8-2-17                  8-122
8-2-18—8-2-22         8-123—
                        8-127
8-2-23—8-2-24         8-22,
                        8-23
8-2-25                  8-36
8-2-26—8-2-33         8-78—8-33
8-2-38—8-2-41         8-1—
                        8-4
8-2-42—8-2-51         8-10—
                        8-18
8-2-55                  8-141
8-2-56                  8-142
8-4-1—8-4-2           8-34,
                        8-35
8-5-1—8-5-4           8-50—
                        8-53
8-5-5—8-5-10          8-54—
                        8-59
8-5-11                  8-63
8-5-12                  8-64
8-5-13                  8-65
8-5-14                  8-66
8-5-15                  8-62
8-5-17                  8-68
8-5-18                  8-69
8-5-19—8-5-20         8-60,
                        8-61
8-6-1—8-6-4           8-115—
                        8-118
8-7-1                   8-105
8-7-2                   8-106
8-7-3                   8-107
8-7-4                   5-83
8-9-1                   4-201
8-10-1—8-10-4         4-10—
                        4-13
8-15-16                 8-67
9-1-2                   2-2
                        9-88,
10-1-20                 9-90,
                        9-92
10-1-21                 9-106,
                        9-107
10-2-4                  9-140
10-2-5                  9-141
10-2-6                  9-144
10-2-7                  9-145
10-2-8                  9-147
10-2-11                 9-150
10-2-13                 9-155,
                        9-157
10-2-14                 2-261,
                        9-155
10-2-23—10-2-29       9-125—
                        9-131
                        
 
Table 2. Park Board Resolutions And Plans.
Resolution No. Date of Adoption New Code Section
Resolution No. Date of Adoption New Code Section
88-4, § 1     08-04-88         5-16
88-4, § 2     08-04-88         5-17
88-4, § 3     08-04-88         5-18
88-4, § 4     08-04-88         5-19
88-4, § 5     08-04-88         5-20
88-4, § 6     08-04-88         5-21
88-4, § 7     08-04-88         5-22,
                                5-23
88-4, § 8     08-04-88         5-24
88-4, § 9     08-04-88         5-25
88-4, § 10    08-04-88         5-26
88-4, § 11    08-04-88         5-27
88-4, § 12    08-04-88         5-28
88-4, § 13    08-04-88         5-29
88-4, § 14    08-04-88         5-30
88-4, § 15    08-04-88         5-31
88-4, § 16    08-04-88         5-32
88-4, § 17    08-04-88         5-33
88-4, § 18    08-04-88         5-34
88-4, § 19    08-04-88         5-35
89-1           08-03-89         5-6
Plan           1989             5-7
 
Table 3. Utility Board Resolutions.
 
Resolution No. Date of Adoption New Code Section
                               
 
Table 4. Town Council Resolutions
Resolution No. Date of Adoption New Code Section
Resolution No. Date of Adoption New Code Section
93-1           02-10-93         2-302
93-10, § 1    06-09-93         9-93
93-10, § 2    06-09-93         9-94
93-10, § 3    06-09-93         9-95
93-10, § 4    06-09-93         9-96
93-10, § 5    06-09-93         9-97
94-1           01-12-94         2-12
94-6, §§ 1-2 02-23-94         3-53
96-9           04-10-96         2-410
99-24, § 1    08-11-99         2-9A
99-31          10-13-99         9-300
2022-1         1-12-22          2-89
2022-01, § 1  12-7-22          5-53
                               
 
Table 5. Town Council Ordinances
   The researcher should be aware that the Date of Passage is the constant
factor in this TABLE. In light of the fact that the Town of Schererville often
identifies an amendment to an ordinance by referring to its original number,
and the fact that the Ordinance No. assigned to a particular ordinance has not
been consistent chronologically over the years, we have included that in its
chronological date of passage for reference purposes.
Ordinance No. Date Of Passage New Code Section
Ordinance No.  Date Of Passage New Code Section
24, § 5       ___ - ___ - ___ 6-186
78             05-08-35        6-30
342, § 1      10-17-61        3-52
418, § 8      12-08-65        6-186
419            ___ - ___ - ___ 9-88
437, § § 1-4 01-11-67        6-190
438, § 1      01-11-67        6-178
438, § 3      01-11-67         
487            ___ - ___ - ___ 9-88
498            ___ - ___ - ___ 9-88,
                               9-90
                               8-55,
                               8-57,
560            10-11-72        8-58,
                               8-59,
                               8-63
572a, § 1     02-14-73        2-112
594, § 1      11-14-73        7-110
594, § 2      11-14-73        7-111
594, § 3      11-14-73        7-112
594, § 4      11-14-73        7-113
594, § 5      11-14-73        7-114
594, § 6      11-14-73        7-115
594, § 7      11-14-73        7-116
594, § 8      11-14-73        7-117
594, § 10     11-14-73        7-119
623 § 1       11-13-74        4-50
623 § 2       11-13-74        4-51
623 § 3       11-13-74        4-52
623 § 4       11-13-74        4-53
623 § 5       11-13-74        4-54
623 § 6       11-13-74        4-55
623 § 7       11-13-74        4-56
623 § 8       11-13-74        4-57
623 § 9       11-13-74        4-58
623 § 10      11-13-74        4-59
623 § 11      11-13-74        4-60
623 § 12      11-13-74        4-61
624 § 1       11-13-74        6-148
624 § 2       11-13-74        6-149,
                               6-150
628 § 1       12-11-74        7-140
628 § 2       12-11-74        7-141
658            4-14-76         8-35
665            8-11-76         2-289
648B, § 2     10-27-76        9-141
648B, § 3     10-27-76        9-142
648B, § 4     10-27-76        9-144
648B, § 7     10-27-76        9-147
648B, § 10    10-27-76        9-150
671, § 1      10-27-76        9-155
671, § 2      10-27-76        9-156
671, § 3      10-27-76        9-157
672, § 1      10-27-76        9-125
672, § 2      10-27-76        9-126
672, § 3      10-27-76        9-127
672, § 4      10-27-76        9-128
672, § 5      10-27-76        9-129
672, § 6      10-27-76        9-130
672, § 7      10-27-76        9-131
686            __-__-__        9-88
692            __-__-__        8-63
693 § 1       06-08-77        7-125
693 § 2       06-08-77        7-126
693 § 3       06-08-77        7-127
693 § 4       06-08-77        7-128
693 § 5       06-08-77        7-129
693 § 6       06-08-77        7-130
693 § 7       06-08-77        7-131
693 § 8       06-08-77        7-132
693 § 9       06-08-77        7-133
693 § 10      06-08-77        7-134
693 § 11      06-08-77        7-135
693 § 12      06-08-77        7-136
693 § 13      06-08-77        7-137
751            __-__-__        2-210–
                               2-215
760            09-13-78        7-118
769, § 1      12-27-78        2-135
769, § 3      12-27-78        2-137,
                               2-150
769, § 4      12-27-78        2-138
770            12-27-78        2-137
770, §§ 1-4  12-27-78        7-26
791            09-12-79        8-29
                               8-63,
791, § 1      09-12-79        8-64,
                               8-65,
                               8-66
794, §§ 1-3  11-28-79        9-98
795, § 2      09-26-79        9-82
848            03-11-81        2-344–
                               2-347
580            03-11-81        2-172
851            03-11-81        3-19
854            04-22-81        2-268–
                               2-272
856            04-22-81        8-54
868            08-26-81        2-393
871, § 1      09-09-81        8-50
871, § 2      09-09-81        8-51
871, § 3      09-09-81        8-51,
                               8-52
871, § 4      09-09-81        8-53
881, § 1      02-10-82        8-123
881, § 2      02-10-82        8-124
881, § 3      02-10-82        8-125
881, § 4      02-10-82        8-126
881, § 5      02-10-82        8-127
                               8-115,
882            02-15-82        8-116,
                               8-117,
                               8-118
882, § 1      02-15-82        6-170
882, § 2      02-15-82        6-171
882, § 3      02-15-82        6-172
882, § 5      02-15-82        6-173
885, § 1      03-10-82        3-30
885, § 2      03-10-82        3-31
885, § 3      03-10-82        3-32
885, § 4      03-10-82        3-33
885, § 5      03-10-82        3-34
885, § 6      03-10-82        3-35
885, § 7      03-10-82        3-36
887, § 1      05-12-82        7-98
887, § 2      05-12-82        7-99
887, § 3      05-12-82        7-100
887, § 4      05-12-82        7-101
887, § 5      05-12-82        7-102
887, § 6      05-12-82        7-103
887, § 7      05-12-82        7-104
887, § 8      05-12-82        7-105
                               5-83,
890            06-09-82        8-105,
                               8-106,
                               8-107
896, I         07-14-82        7-78
896, II        07-14-82        7-79,
                               7-80
896, III       07-14-82        7-82
896, IV        07-14-82        7-84
                               7-86,
896, V         07-14-82        7-87,
                               7-89,
                               7-90
896, VII       07-14-82        7-91
896, VIII      07-14-82        7-92
897, § 2      07-14-82        6-154
897, § 3      07-14-82        6-155
897, § 4      07-14-82        6-156
897, § 5      07-14-82        6-157
897, § 6      07-14-82        6-158
897, § 7      07-14-82        6-159
897, § 9      07-14-82        6-161
897, § 10     07-14-82        6-162
897, § 11     07-14-82        6-163
897, § 12     07-14-82        6-165
900, §§ 1-4  08-11-82        2-396
11             09-13-82        2-5
930, § 1      08-10-83        2-360
930, § 2      08-10-83        2-361
930, § 3      08-10-83        2-362
930, § 4      08-10-83        2-363
930, § 5      08-10-83        2-364
930, § 6      08-10-83        2-365
930, § 7      08-10-83        2-366
936, § 1      08-14-83        4-100
936, §§ 2-3  08-14-83        4-101
936, § 4      08-14-83        4-102
936, § 5      08-14-83        4-103
936, § 6      08-14-83        4-104
936, § 7      08-14-83        4-105
936, § 8      08-14-83        4-106
936, § 9      08-14-83        4-107
936, § 10     08-14-83        4-108
936, § 11     08-14-83        4-109
936, § 12     08-14-83        4-110
949, § 1      04-11-84        7-70
949, § 2      04-11-84        7-71
949, § 3      04-11-84        7-72
949, § 4      04-11-84        7-73
949, § 5      04-11-84        7-74
951            04-25-84        2-261
951            04-25-84        9-155
957, § 1      06-13-84        4-201
959, § 1      06-27-84        9-107
966, § 1      09-12-84        9-142
967, § 1      09-12-84        9-158
974            _-_-_           9-140,
                               9-144
976, § 1      03-13-85        3-97
976, § 2      03-13-85        3-98
976, § 3      03-13-85        3-99
976, § 4      03-13-85        3-100
977, § 1      04-10-85        4-65
977, § 3      04-10-85        4-67
977, § 4      04-10-85        4-68
977, § 6      04-10-85        4-70
977, § 7      04-10-85        4-71
977, § 8      04-10-85        4-72
977, § 9      04-10-85        4-73
977, § 10     04-10-85        4-76
977, § 11     04-10-85        4-77
977, § 12     04-10-85        4-78
985, § 1      08-26-85        4-114
985, § 2      08-26-85        4-115
985, § 3      08-26-85        4-116
985, § 4      08-26-85        4-117
985, § 5      08-26-85        4-118
989, §§ 1, 2 10-09-85        2-394
991, §§ 1-4  11-14-85        2-399
1001, § 1     02-12-86        6-78
1001, § 2     02-12-86        6-79
1001, § 3     02-12-86        6-80
1001, § 4     02-12-86        6-81
1001, § 5     02-12-86        6-82
1001, § 6     02-12-86        6-83
1001, § 7     02-12-86        6-84
1001, § 8     02-12-86        6-85
1001, § 9     02-12-86        6-86
1001, § 10    02-12-86        6-87
1001, § 11    02-12-86        6-88
1001, § 12    02-12-86        6-89
1001, § 13    02-12-86        6-90
1001, § 14    02-12-86        6-91
1001, § 15    02-12-86        6-92
1001, § 16    02-12-86        6-93
1001, § 17    02-12-86        6-94
1001, § 18    02-12-86        6-95
1001, § 19    02-12-86        6-96
1001, § 20    02-12-86        6-97
1001, § 21    02-12-86        6-98
1001, § 22    02-12-86        6-99
1001, § 23    02-12-86        6-100
1001, § 24    02-12-86        6-101
1001, § 25    02-12-86        6-102
1001, § 26    02-12-86        6-103
1001, § 27    02-12-86        6-104
1001, § 28    02-12-86        6-105
1001, § 29    02-12-86        6-106
1001, § 30    02-12-86        6-107
1001, § 31    02-12-86        6-108
1002           _-__-86         8-63
1031, § 1     06-10-87        4-30
1031, § 2     06-10-87        4-31
1031, § 3     06-10-87        4-32
1031, § 4     06-10-87        4-33
1031, § 5     06-10-87        4-34
1031, § 6     06-10-87        4-35
1031, § 8     06-10-87        4-37
1031, § 9     06-10-87        4-38
1031, § 10    06-10-87        4-39
1031, § 11    06-10-87        4-40
1031, § 13    06-10-87        4-42
1031, § 14    06-10-87        4-43
1031, § 15    06-10-87        4-44
1031, § 16    06-10-87        4-45
1033, §§ 1-6 06-10-87        2-170
1031A          08-12-87        4-36,
                               4-41
1048, § 1     11-10-87        2-48
1048, § 2     11-10-87        2-49
1048, § 3     11-10-87        2-50
1048, § 4     11-10-87        2-51
1048, § 5     11-10-87        2-52
1048, § 6     11-10-87        2-53
1048, § 7     11-10-87        2-54
1048, § 8     11-10-87        2-55
1048, § 9     11-10-87        2-56
1048, § 10    11-10-87        2-57
1048, § 11    11-10-87        2-58
1048, § 12    11-10-87        2-59
1048, § 13    11-10-87        2-60
1048, § 14    11-10-87        2-61
1048, § 16    11-10-87        2-62
1048, § 17    11-10-87        2-63
1048, § 18    11-10-87        2-64
1048, § 19    11-10-87        2-65
1048, § 20    11-10-87        2-66
1048, § 21    11-10-87        2-67
1048, § 22    11-10-87        2-68
1048, § 23    11-10-87        2-69
1048, § 24    11-10-87        2-70
1048, § 25    11-10-87        2-71
1055, § 1     01-13-88        3-95
1055, § 2     01-13-88        3-96
1058           __-_-88         9-106
                               4-149,
1059, § A     03-09-88        8-131,
                               8-133
1059, § B     03-09-88        8-132,
                               8-134
1069, § 1     06-08-88        2-402
1072           07-13-88        9-88
1075, § 1     07-13-88        2-398
1075, § 1     07-13-88        2-398
1075, §§ 2-4 07-13-88        2-398
1083, § 2     09-14-88        4-66
1083, § 3     09-14-88        4-69
1084, § 1     09-14-88        4-18
1084, § 2     09-14-88        4-19
1084, § 3     09-14-88        4-20
1084, § 4     09-14-88        4-21
1084, § 5     09-14-88        4-22
1084, § 6     09-14-88        4-23
1084, § 7     09-14-88        4-24
1084, § 8     09-14-88        4-25
1086           10-12-88        9-80, 9-81
1087, § 1     10-12-88        4-200
1087, § 5     10-12-88        4-200
1093, § 2, 5  12-04-88        2-303
1093, § 4     12-14-88        2-401
1094, § 1     12-14-88        4-160
1094, § 2     12-14-88        4-161
1095, § I-1   12-14-88        10-225
1095, § I-2   12-14-88        10-226
1095, § I-3   12-14-88        10-227
1095, § I-5   12-14-88        10-229
1095, § I-6   12-14-88        10-230
1095, § II-1  12-14-88        10-234
1095, § II-2  12-14-88        10-235,
                               10-236
1095, § III-1 12-14-88        10-238
1095, § III-2 12-14-88        10-239
1095, § III-3 12-14-88        10-240
1095, § III-4 12-14-88        10-241
1095, § III-5 12-14-88        10-242
1095, § IV-1  12-14-88        10-245
1095, § IV-2  12-14-88        10-246
1095, § IV-3  12-14-88        10-247
1095, § IV-4  12-14-88        10-248
1095, § V-1   12-14-88        10-250
1095, § V-2   12-14-88        10-251
1095, § V-3   12-14-88        10-252
1095, § V-4   12-14-88        10-253
1095, § V-5   12-14-88        10-254
1095, § V-6   12-14-88        10-225
1095, § V-7   12-14-88        10-256
1095, § V-8   12-14-88        10-257
1095, § V-9   12-14-88        10-258
1095, § V1-1  12-14-88        10-260
1095, § VI-2  12-14-88        10-261
1095, § VI-3  12-14-88        10-262
1095, § VI-4  12-14-88        10-263
1095, § VI-5  12-14-88        10-264
1095, § VI-7  12-14-88        10-266
1095, § VI-8  12-14-88        10-267
1095, § VI-9  12-14-88        10-268
1095, § VI-10 12-14-88        10-269
1095, § VI-11 12-14-88        10-270
1095, § V1-12 12-14-88        10-271
1095, § VII-2 12-14-88        10-275
1095, V11-3    12-14-88        10-276
1095, § VII-4 12-14-88        10-277
1095, § VII-5 12-14-88        10-278
1095, § VII-6 12-14-88        10-277
1095, § VI1-7 12-14-88        10-278
1095, § VII-8 12-14-88        10-281
1095, § VII-9 12-14-88        10-282
1097, § 1     02-08-89        6-112
1097, § 2     02-08-89        6-114
1097, § 3     02-08-89        6-115
1097, § 4     02-08-89        6-119
1097, § 5     02-08-89        6-120
1097, § 6     02-08-89        6-121
1097, § 7     02-08-89        6-122
1097, § 8     02-08-89        6-123
1097, § 9     02-08-89        6-124
1098, § 1     03-08-89        4-10
1098, § 2     03-08-89        4-11
1098, § 3     03-08-89        4-12
1098, § 4     03-08-89        4-13
1101, § 1     04-12-89        2-111
1101, §§ 3-5 04-12-89        2-111
1101, §§ 4-8 04-12-89        2-111
1112, § 1     06-14-89        2-82
1112, § 2     06-14-89        2-83
1112, § 4     06-14-89        2-84
1112, § 5     06-14-89        2-85
1117, § 1     06-14-89        2-370
1117, § 2     06-14-89        2-371
1117, § 3     06-14-89        2-372
1117, § 4     06-14-89        2-373
1117, § 5     06-14-89        2-374
1117, § 6     06-14-89        2-375
1117, § 7     06-14-89        2-376
1127           09-13-89        8-122
1128, § 1     09-13-89        2-28
1039, § 1     10-14-89        7-45
1039, § 2     10-14-89        7-46
1039, § 3     10-14-89        7-47
1039, § 4     10-14-89        7-48
1039, § 5     10-14-89        7-49
1039, § 6     10-14-89        7-50
1039, § 7     10-14-89        7-51
1039, § 8     10-14-89        7-52
1039, § 9     10-14-89        7-53
1039, § 10    10-14-89        7-54
1039, § 11    10-14-89        7-55
1039, § 12    10-14-89        7-56
1039, § 13    10-14-89        7-57
1039, § 14    10-14-89        7-58
1039, § 15    10-14-89        7-59
1039, § 16    10-14-89        7-60
1039, § 17    10-14-89        7-61
1039, § 18    10-14-89        7-62
1039, § 19    10-14-89        7-63
1039, §§ 20-210-14-89        7-64
1039, § 23    10-14-89        7-65
843A, § 1     12-11-89        2-335
843A, § 3     12-11-89        2-337
843A, § 4     12-11-89        2-338
1137, § 5     12-11-89        3-3
1139, § 1     01-10-90        6-58
1139, § 2     01-10-90        6-59
1139, § 3     01-10-90        6-60
1139, § 4     01-10-90        6-61
1139, § 5     01-10-90        6-62
1139, § 6     01-10-90        6-63
1141, § 1     02-14-90        4-200
1142           02-14-90        5-103
1145, § 1     04-11-90        10-285
1145, § 2     04-11-90        10-285
1150, II § 1  06-13-90        7-35
1150, II § 2  06-13-90        7-36
1150, II § 3  06-13-90        7-37
1150, II § 4  06-13-90        7-38
1150, II § 5  06-13-90        7-39
1150, II § 6  06-13-90        7-40
1150, II, § 7 06-13-90        7-41
1151           06-13-90        2-301
1152, §§ 1-3 07-11-90        2-81
1153, § 2     07-11-90        4-188
1153, § 3     07-11-90        4-188
1164, § 1     10-10-90        2-108 -
                               2-110
1172, § 1     01-09-91        5-45
1175, § 1     03-13-91        9-48
1175, § 3     03-13-91        9-50
1175, § 4     03-13-91        9-51
1175, § 5     03-13-91        9-52
1175, § 6     03-13-91        9-53
1177           05-08-91        2-260
1181, § 1     07-10-91        10-274
1188, §§ 1-3 07-09-91        2-390
1175A, § 1    10-09-91        9-49
1194, §§ 1-4 11-18-91        2-80
1195, § 1     12-11-91        9-40
1195, § 2     12-11-91        9-41
1195, § 3     12-11-91        9-42
1195, § 4     12-11-91        9-43
1195, § 5     12-11-91        9-44
1202, § 1     03-11-92        7-18
1202, § 2     03-11-92        7-20 -
                               7-25
                               6-160,
1203, § 1     04-08-92        8-68,
                               8-130
1203, §§ 1-2 04-08-92        4-148,
                               8-130
1204, § 1     05-13-92        4-190
1204, § 2     05-13-92        4-191
1204, § 3     05-13-92        4-192
1204, § 4     05-13-92        4-193
1204, § 5     05-13-92        4-194
1205, § 1     05-13-92        6-31
1205, § 2     05-13-92        6-32
1205, § 3     05-13-92        6-33
1205, § 4     05-13-92        6-34
1205, § 5     05-13-92        6-35
                               2-280—
1206, § 1     05-13-92        2-283,
                               10-283
1208, §§ 1, 205-13-92        2-391
1209, §§ 1, 205-13-92        2-397
1211, § 1     06-29-92        4-74
1211, § 2     06-29-92        4-75
1212, § 1     09-09-92        7-1
1212, § 2     09-09-92        7-2
1212, § 3     09-09-92        7-3
1212, § 4     09-09-92        7-4
1212, § 5     09-09-92        7-5
1212, § 6     09-09-92        7-6
1212, § 7     09-09-92        7-7
1212, § 8     09-09-92        7-8
1212, § 9     09-09-92        7-9
1212, § 10    09-09-92        7-10
1212, § 11    09-09-92        7-11
1212, § 12    09-09-92        7-12
1212, § 13    09-09-92        7-13
1213, § 1     11-25-92        9-45
1213, § 2     11-25-92        9-45
1213, § 3     11-25-92        9-45
1215, §§ 1-2 09-09-92        2-400
1216, §§ 1-7 09-09-92        2-300
1217, § 1     09-23-92        9-30
1217, § 2     09-23-92        9-31
1217, § 3     09-23-92        9-32
1217, § 4     09-23-92        9-33
1217, § 5     09-23-92        9-34
1217, § 6     09-23-92        9-35
1219, § 1     10-14-92        6-40
1219, § 2     10-14-92        9-45
1219, § 3     10-14-92        9-45
1219, § 4     10-14-92        9-45
1219, § 5     10-14-92        2-400
1224, § 1.1   12-23-92        2-300
1224, § 1.2   12-23-92        9-30
1224, § 1.3   12-23-92        9-31
1224, § 1.4   12-23-92        9-32
1224, § 2.1   12-23-92        9-33
1224, § 2.2   12-23-92        9-34
1224, § 2.3   12-23-92        9-35
1224, § 2.4   12-23-92        6-40
1224, § 2.5   12-23-92        6-41
1224, § 2.6   12-23-92        9-183
1224, § 2.7   12-23-92        9-184
1224, § 3.1   12-23-92        9-188
1224, § 3.2   12-23-92        9-189
1231, § 1     04-14-93        2-404
1231A, § 2    06-09-93        2-404
1231B, §§ 1-312-29-93        2-404
1236, § 1     05-12-93        6-11
1236, § 2     05-12-93        6-12
                               4-175 -
1236, § 3     05-12-93        4-185,
                               6-13
1236, § 4     05-12-93        4-186.
                               6-14
1236, § 5     05-12-93        6-15
1236, § 6     05-12-93        6-16
1236, § 7     05-12-93        6-17
1236, § 8     05-12-93        6-18
1236, § 9     05-12-93        6-19
1236, § 10    05-12-93        6-20
1236, § 11    05-12-93        6-21
1236, § 12    05-12-93        6-22
1236, § 13    05-12-93        6-23
1236, § 14    05-12-93        6-24
1236, § 15    05-12-93        6-25
1236, § 16    05-12-93        6-26
1236, § 17    05-12-93        6-27
1237, § 1     04-14-93        5-90
1237, § 2     04-14-93        5-91
1237, § 3     04-14-93        5-92
1238, § 1     06-09-93        10-284
1239           06-09-93        9-148
1212A, § 6    06-09-93        7-6
1241           07-14-93        9-10
1241, § 1     07-14-93        9-11
1241, § 2     07-14-93        9-12
1241, § 3     07-14-93        9-13
1241, § 4     07-14-93        9-14
1241, § 5     07-14-93        9-15
1241, § 6     07-14-93        9-16
1241, § 7     07-14-93        9-17
1241, § 8     07-14-93        9-18
1241, § 9     07-14-93        9-19
1241, § 10    07-14-93        9-20
1241, § 11    07-14-93        9-21
1241, § 12    07-14-93        9-22
1241, § 13    07-14-93        9-23
1242           07-14-93        9-36
1248, § 2     10-13-93        9-146
1248, § 3     10-13-93        9-146
1250, § 1     10-20-93        3-2
1206A, § 1    11-11-93        10-283
1257, § 2     11-10-93        9-60
1257, § 2f    11-10-93        9-66
1257, § 3g    11-10-93        9-70
1257, § 3i    11-10-93        9-72
1257, § 3j    11-10-93        9-73
1263, § 1     01-12-94        2-176
1266, §§ 2-3 01-26-94        2-174
                               5-15 -
1267, § 1     01-26-94        5-26,
                               5-27 -
                               5-35
1267, § 2     01-26-94        5-27
1269, §§ 1-5 02-09-94        5-103
1270, § 1     02-09-94        5-45
1270, § 2     02-09-94        5-48
1270, § 3     02-09-94        5-49
1270, § 4     02-09-94        5-50
1270A, § 1    02-23-94        5-48
1270A, § 2    02-23-94        5-48
1272, § 1     02-23-94        10-25
1272, § 2     02-23-94        10-26
1272, § 3     02-23-94        10-27
1273, § 1     02-23-94        3-70
1273, § 2     02-23-94        3-71
1273, § 3     03-09-94        3-72
1273, § 4     03-09-94        3-73
1273, § 5     03-09-94        3-74
1273, § 6     03-09-94        3-75
1273, § 7     03-09-94        3-76
1273, § 8     03-09-94        3-77
1273, § 9     03-09-94        3-78
1273, § 10    03-09-94        3-79
1271, § 1     07-13-94        9-143
1271, § 2     07-13-94        9-144
1271, § 3     07-13-94        9-145
1274, § 1     07-13-94        2-38,
                               2-155
1274, § 2     07-13-94        2-156
1274, § 4     07-13-94        2-255,
                               2-256
                               9-61,
                               9-62,
1257A          07-13-94        9-63,
                               9-64,
                               9-65,
                               9-68
1276, §§ 1, 207-13-94        5-103
1278, § 1     05-11-94        4-210
1278, § 2     05-11-94        4-211
1278, § 3     05-11-94        4-212
1278, § 4     05-11-94        4-213
1278, § 5     05-11-94        4-214
1278, § 6     05-11-94        4-215
1278, § 7     05-11-94        4-216
1278, § 8     05-11-94        4-217
1279, § 1     05-11-94        4-205
1279, § 2     05-11-94        4-205
1271, § 3     09-14-94        9-145
1287           08-22-94        4-206
1289, § 1     10-12-94        10-267
1291, § 1     10-12-94        6-118
1301, §§ 1, 205-09-95        5-103
1316, § 1     11-08-95        6-230
1316, § 2     11-08-95        6-231
1317, §§ 1, 211-08-95        3-24
1323, § 1     12-13-95        2-72
1323, § 2     12-13-95        2-72
1325, § 1     01-24-96        6-13
1326, § 1     01-24-96        6-116
1326, § 2     01-24-96        6-116
1326, § 3     01-24-96        6-117
1326A, § 1    03-13-96        6-116
1329, § 1     02-14-96        10-7
1334, §§ 1-2 04-10-96        2-121
1334, § 7     04-10-96        2-178
1336, §§ 1-3 05-08-96        2-405
1266A          05-08-96        2-175
1339, § 1     06-10-96        6-235
1339, § 2     06-10-96        6-235
1339, §§ 2-4 06-10-96        6-236
1358, § 1     06-13-96        2-115
1344, § 1     07-17-96        3-120
1344, § 2     07-17-96        3-121
1344, § 3     07-17-96        3-122
1345, §§ 1-4 07-17-96        1-15
1346A, § 1    08-14-96        3-110
1346A, § 2    08-14-96        3-111
1346A, § 3    08-14-96        3-112
1347, § 1     08-14-96        6-138
1347, § 4     08-14-96        6-140
1347, § 5     08-14-96        6-141
1347, § 7     08-14-96        6-142
1347, § 8     08-14-96        6-143
1347, § 9     08-14-96        6-144
1347, § 10    08-14-96        6-145
1257B, § 1    08-21-96        9-60,
                               9-74
1212B, §§ 1-212-11-96        7-9,
                               7-10
                               8-24,
                               8-25,
1360           12-11-96        8-26,
                               8-27,
                               8-28,
                               8-86
1363, §§ 1-6 12-26-96        6-40 -
                               6-45
1364, §§ 1-7 12-26-96        6-237
1365, §§ 1-3 12-26-96        8-144
843B, §§ 1-4 01-01-97        2-335,
                               2-338
1369, §§ 1-3 02-12-97        4-203
                               2-336,
1370           02-12-97        4-225,
                               9-157
1371           2-12-97         2-395
1371, §§ 1-2 02-12-97        2-114
985A, §§ 1-2 03-12-97        4-114,
                               4-115
1208A, 51      03-12-97        2-391
1374, §§ 1-2 03-12-97        2-406
1375           03-12-97        4-208
1378           04-09-97        4-23, et seq.
1266B, §§ 1-204-09-97        2-175
1253A, §§ 1-407-09-97        9-146
1379A, §§ 1-707-09-97        8-161,
                               8-162
1385A, §§ 1-107-09-97        4-65, et seq.
1371A, §§ 1-209-10-97        2-114
1391, §§ 1-4 09-10-97        2-407
1393, §§ 1-3 09-10-97        2-408
1394, §§ 1-3 09-10-97        2-408
1395, §§ 1-3 09-10-97        2-409
1397, §§ 1-2 10-08-97        2-410
1398, §§ 1-3 10-29-97        3-2
1399, § 1     11-26-97        10-274
1400, §§ 1-1311-26-97        5-10, et seq.
1374A, § 1    12-30-97        2-406
1419, §§ 1-4 05-13-98        2-411
1421, §§ 1, 205-13-98        4-207,
                               2-411
1426           06-10-98        2-38,
                               2-160, et seq.
1375B, § 1    06-10-98        4-208
1428, §§ 1-5 07-08-98        2-430, et seq.
1432, §§ 1-4 07-08-98        2-38,
                               2-160, et seq.
1375C, § 1    08-12-98        4-208
1441, §§ 1, 210-14-98        2-241
1442, §§ 1, 210-14-98        2-412
1445, §§ 1-4 12-09-98        9-68.1
1450, § 2     ___ - ___ -99   2-406
1451, §§ 1-3 02-10-99        4-203
1258A, §§ 1, 03-10-99        4-218
1334A, § 1    03-10-99        2-87
1448, § 1     03-10-99        2-176
1208B, §§ 1, 04-14-99        2-391
1084A, §§ 1-404-14-99        4-26
1456, §§ 1-2 04-14-99        2-413
1457, § 1-2   04-14-99        2-414
1375D, §§ 1-304-14-99        4-208
1452A, §§ 1, 04-14-99        2-88
1458, § 1     05-12-99        10-248
1459, § 1     05-12-99        10-265
1762, §§ 1-3 06-09-99        2-9B
1358A, § 1    06-09-99        2-115
1700A, § 1    06-09-99        5-103
1471, §§ 1-7 10-13-99        9-300, et seq.
985B, §§ 1-2 10-13-99        4-115
1474, §§ 1-4 12-08-99        2-261
1476, §§ 1-8 12-08-99        2-10, et seq.
1478           01-04-00        2-293, et seq.
843C, §§ 1-4 01-12-00        2-335, et seq.
1481, §§ 1, 203-08-00        5-52
1483, §§ 1-3 03-08-00        2-415
                               4-148,
1487, § 1     05-10-00        6-160,
                               8-68,
                               8-130
1488, § 1     05-10-00        6-235
1489, § 1     05-10-00        2-10
1496, §§ 1, 207-12-00        8-2,
                               8-35
1497, §§ 1-3 07-12-00        2-416
1498, § 1     07-12-00        6-116
1499, §§ 1-3 07-12-00        2-417
1501, § 1     10-11-00        2-108
1502, § 1     10-11-00        2-111
1334B, § 1    11-8-00         2-178
1505, §§ 1-4 12-09-00        2-418
1515, § 2     03-14-01        2-180
1516           03-14-01        4-114
1517           03-14-01        4-120,
                               4-195
                               8-2,
1519, §§ 1-5 03-14-01        8-37,
                               8-38
1519A, §§ 1, 04-11-01        8-37,
                               8-38
1524, § 1     04-11-01        2-417
1525, §§ 1-5 04-11-01        6-130, et seq.
1527, § 1     05-09-01        2-421
1075A, §§ 1-406-13-01        2-398
1531, § 1     06-13-01        2-418
1532           06-13-01        2-419
1533           08-08-01        4-204
1534, §§ 1-3 08-08-01        2-419.1
1541, §§ 1-7 10-17-01        2-124, et seq.
1546, § 1     01-23-02        8-126
1547, § 1     01-23-02        9-89
1549, §§ 1-1701-23-02        4-175, et seq.,
                               6-11, et seq.
1175B, § 1    06-12-02        9-49
1195A, § 1    06-12-02        9-41
1326A, §§ 1-306-12-02        6-116, et seq.
1558, §§ 1-5 06-12-02        6-40, et seq.
1559, § 1     8-20-02         2-174
1560           9-11-02         9-49
1563, §§ 1-3 12-12-02        3-1,
                               3-2
1564           12-11-02        4-204A
1565           12-11-02        4-204A
1566           12-11-02        9-41
1567           12-11-02        9-49
1575 §§ 1, 2 3-12-03         9-69
1576 §§ 1-4  3-12-03         2-434
1578 § 1      3-12-03         2-174
1580 §§ 1-3  4-9-03          2-419.2
1581 §§ 1-4  4-9-03          2-174
1584 §§ 1-4  5-14-03         2-419.3
1400B § 1     6-11-03         5-100,
                               5-103
1589 §§ 1, 2 6-11-03         5-53
1578A § 1     7-9-03          2-174
1591 §§ 1, 2 9-10-03         9-69
1594 § 1      11-21-03        5-100,
                               5-103
1595 § 1      11-21-03        1580 §§ 1-3
1605 §§ 1-2  1-21-04         5-53
1608 §§ 1-5  3-10-04         2-181
1609 §§ 1-10 3-10-04         2-423
1610 § 1      4-14-04         2-367
1612 § 1      4-14-04         6-250
1612 § 2      4-14-04         6-251
1612 § 3      4-14-04         6-252
1620 §§ 1-2  7-14-04         5-53
1621 § 1      7-14-04         6-42
1622 §§ 1-4  7-14-04         2-419.4
1608A § 1     8-11-04         2-181
1608A § 2     8-11-04         2-174
1624 § 1      8-11-04         2-174
1625 §§ 1-5  8-11-04         2-174
1623 § 1      9-8-04          4-232
1626 § 1      10-13-04        6-11
1626 § 2      10-13-04        4-186,
                               6-14
1626 § 3      10-13-04        6-16
1626 § 4      10-13-04        6-17
1626 § 5      10-13-04        6-22
1626 § 6      10-13-04        6-23
1581-A § 3    11-10-04        2-174
                               4-148,
1636 § 1      1-19-05         6-160,
                               8-68,
                               8-130
1638 § 1      2-9-05          10-228
1639 § 1      2-9-05          8-54
985C § 1      3-9-05          4-114
985D § 1      4-13-05         4-114
1257C § 1     4-13-05         9-73
1641 § 1      4-13-05         2-419.5
1643 §§ 1 - 44-13-05         5-56
1644 § 1      5-11-05         9-41
1646 § 1      6-8-05          9-49
1642 § 1      6-13-05         5-53
1649 § 1      7-13-05         4-31
1650 § 2      7-13-05         6-112
1650 § 3      7-13-05         6-125
1650 § 4      7-13-05         6-128
1652 § 1      8-10-05         6-17
1652 § 2      8-10-05         6-22
1652 § 3      8-10-05         6-23
1660           5-10-06         4-208,
                               9-63
                               9-61 -
                               9-65,
1661           1-16-06         9-68,
                               9-69,
                               9-73
985E           2-8-06          4-114
1665           6-14-06         2-368
1669           6-14-06         5-53
                               6-66,
1672           6-14-06         6-68 -
                               6-73
1674           7-12-06         4-200
1677           9-13-06         6-138
1681           9-27-06         2-419.6
1683           9-27-06         2-419.7
1686           12-13-06        4-204A
                               4-148,
1687           12-13-06        6-160,
                               8-68,
                               8-130
1688           12-13-06        4-204A
1692           3-14-07         2-419.12
1691           4-11-07         9-75
1694 § 1      5-23-07         6-139
1694 § 2      5-23-07         6-141
1695           4-11-07         5-53
1452C          5-9-07          2-111,
                               2-121
1706           5-23-07         6-66 -
                               6-73
1709           6-13-07         6-48 -
                               6-51
1710           7-11-07         2-419.8
1713           8-8-07          4-204
1714           9-12-07         8-163
1557A § 1     9-12-07         6-240
1557A § 2     9-12-07         6-241
1557A § 3     9-12-07         6-242
1557A § 4     9-12-07         6-243
1557A § 5     9-12-07         6-244
1708A          4-9-08          9-356
1716           10-10-07        9-106
1717           10-10-07        2-419.9
1718           11-20-07        2-419.10
1721           12-12-07        2-419.11
1723 § 1      1-17-08         Repeals Ord. No. 607 & 622
1723 § 2      1-17-08         2-224
1723 § 3      1-17-08         2-225
1723 § 4      1-17-08         2-226
1725           1-17-08         9-69
1726 § 1      1-17-08         1-20
1726 § 2      1-17-08         1-21
1726 § 3      1-17-08         1-22
1726 § 4      1-17-08         1-23
1726 § 5      1-17-08         1-24
1726 § 6      1-17-08         1-25
1726 § 7      1-17-08         1-26
1727 § 1      1-17-08         2-392
1728 § 1      2-13-08         6-116
1729           3-12-08         2-419.13
1238A          5-14-08         10-284
1731           5-14-08         2-419.14
1733 § 1      6-11-08         5-103
1734           7-9-08          2-400
1358B          7-9-08          2-115
1736 § 1      8-13-08         7-21
1738 § 1      8-13-08         5-53
1739 § 2      9-10-08         9-249
                               7-18,
1744 § 2      11-12-08        7-21 -
                               7-24
1749 § 1      2-11-09         6-116
1750 § 1      2-25-09         1-20
1750 § 2      2-25-09         1-21
1750 § 3      2-25-09         1-22
1750 § 4      2-25-09         1-24
1750 § 5      2-25-09         1-25
1750 § 6      2-25-09         1-26
1692A § 1     4-8-09          2-419.12
1752 § 1      4-22-09         6-260 -
                               6-274
1751 § 1      5-13-09         5-22
1751 § 2      5-13-09         5-40
1751 § 3      5-13-09         5-45
1751 § 4      5-13-09         5-48
1751 § 5      5-13-09         5-49
1751 § 6      5-13-09         5-50
1751 § 7      5-13-09         5-90
1271A § 1     11-10-09        9-143
1271A § 2     11-10-09        9-145
1375E § 1     12-9-09         4-208
1762 § 1      12-9-09         5-53
1766 § 1      2-10-10         6-116
1692A § 1     3-10-10         2-419.12
1767 §§ 1-9  3-10-10         2-9C
1773 § 2      7-21-10         9-69
1782 § 1      12-8-10         5-53
1783 §§ 1-10 12-8-10         6-238
1683A §§ 2, 35-11-11         2-419.7
1787 §§ 1, 2 6-8-11          6-133,
                               6-134
1788 §§ 1-5  6-8-11          2-419.15
1794 §§ 1-5  9-14-11         2-419.15
1798 § 1      12-14-11        5-53
1799 § 1      12-14-11        6-16
1797 § 1      12-28-11        10-1
1801           2-8-12          6-113
1804           2-8-12          2-293 -
                               2-296G
1805           3-14-12         6-116
1692C          3-28-12         2-419.12
1813           3-28-12         2-400
1810           5-9-12          2-431
1812 §§ 1-14 6-13-12         2-182
1814           7-11-12         6-133
1816           7-11-12         2-419.17
1817           7-18-12         2-419.18
1818           8-8-12          9-69
1820           8-8-12          4-148
1819           9-12-12         4-204B
1822           10-10-12        2-419.16
1829           12-12-12        3-2
1833           3-6-13          10-1
1834 § 1      4-10-13         5-53
1836 § 1      7-10-13         5-53
1837 §§ 1-6  7-10-13         2-400
1838 § 1      7-10-13         5-103
1847 §§ 1-4  1-30-14         2-419.19
1848 §§ 1-4  1-30-14         2-419.20
1849 § 1, 2   2-12-14         9-69
985H § 1      6-11-14         4-114
1856 § 1      9-25-14         5-53
1860 § 1      1-21-15         5-53
                               9-170 -
                               9-174,
                               9-178 -
                               9-184,
                               9-188 -
                               9-193,
                               9-196 -
                               9-203,
                               9-206 -
                               9-212,
                               9-215 -
                               9-229,
                               9-230,
1862, §§ 1-162-11-15         9-231,
                               9-234,
                               9-236,
                               9-238 -
                               9-245,
                               9-248 -
                               9-250,
                               9-254 -
                               9-259,
                               9-264 -
                               9-266,
                               9-269,
                               9-270,
                               9-273 -
                               9-276
1866, § 1     4-8-15          5-53
1868, §§ 1-7 5-13-15         2-419.21
1869, § 1     6-10-15         5-97
1870, § 1     7-8-15          10-1
1871           7-8-15          2-95 -
                               2-106B
985I, § 2     1-13-16         4-115
1692D, § 1    3-9-16          2-419.12
1879, § 1     3-9-16          10-25 -
                               10-51
1880, § 1     4-13-16         2-369
1881, § 1     4-13-16         5-53
1882, § 1     4-13-16         10-1
1884, §§ 1, 25-11-16         2-419.22
1885, §§ 1-6 7-13-16         2-400
1886, §§ 1-5 7-13-16         2-419.23
1889, §§ 1, 28-10-16         2-419.24
1890, § 1     8-10-16         5-53
1900, § 1     4-12-17         7-28
1900, § 2     4-12-17         7-29
1900, § 3     4-12-17         7-30
1900, § 4     4-12-17         7-31
1900, § 6     4-12-17         7-32
1900, § 7     4-12-17         7-33
1900, § 8     4-12-17         7-34
1900, § 9     4-12-17         7-34.1
1900, § 10    4-12-17         7-34.2
1903, § 1     4-12-17         5-53
1904, § 2     4-28-17         9-455
1904, § 3     4-28-17         9-456
1901, §§ 1, 25-10-17         9-69
1909, § 1     8-9-17          8-170
1909, § 2     8-9-17          8-171
1909, § 3     8-9-17          8-172
1909, § 4     8-9-17          8-173
1909, § 5     8-9-17          8-174
1908A, § 1    10-11-17        9-68,
                               9-89
1836A, § 1    3-14-18         5-53
1921, § 1     3-14-18         5-53
1925, § 1     6-13-18         2-174
1926, § 1     7-11-18         5-103
1928, § 1     9-12-18         5-53
1933, § 1     1-16-19         2-174
1934, § 2-7   1-16-19         2-177
1935, § 1     2-13-19         6-240
1935, § 2     2-13-19         6-241
1935, § 3     2-13-19         6-242
1935, § 4     2-13-19         6-243
1935, § 5     2-13-19         6-244
1936, § 3     3-20-19         2-400
1937, § 1     4-10-19         5-53
1939, § 1     9-18-19         10-1
1940, § 1     9-18-19         10-1
1944, § 1     12-11-19        2-422
1948, § 2     12-11-19        5-40
1948, § 3     12-11-19        5-45
1948, § 4     12-11-19        5-48
1948, § 5     12-11-19        5-49,
                               5-50
1949, § 1     12-11-19        5-53
1950, § 1     1-15-20         7-26
1955, § 1     5-13-20         6-116
1956, § 1     5-13-20         2-174
1961, §§ 1-7 12-30-20        10-1
1962, § 1     2-10-21         10-1
1964, §§ 1-6 3-10-21         2-400
1965, §§ 1, 24-14-21         2-369.1
1966, § 2     5-12-21         2-419.25
1967, §§ 1-3 5-12-21         2-394
1968, §§ 1, 25-12-21         2-419.26
1969, §§ 1-3 5-12-21         2-419.27
1970, § 1     7-14-21         10-1
985J, § 1     7-14-21         4-114
1977, § 1     12-8-21         3-2
1979, §§ 1-5 3-9-22          10-1
1980           3-9-22          2-89
1981, §§ 1-6 5-11-22         3-26
1983, §§ 1-3 5-11-22         8-73
1271B, § 1    9-14-22         9-143,
                               9-145
1990, § 1     12-14-22        5-53
1956A          4-12-23         2-174
1992           3-8-23          4-148
1993           5-10-23         4-204A
1995           10-11-23        2-180
2000           12-12-23        2-336
2002, § 1     3-13-24         5-27
2003, § 1     4-10-24         6-116
2004, § 1     4-10-24         10-1
2005, § 1-4   4-10-24         8-163
2006, § 1, 2  4-10-24         6-36
2006, § 3-5   4-10-24         2-149.28
2007, § 2     5-8-24          9-69
2008, § 1     5-8-24          4-82
2008, § 2     5-8-24          4-83
2008, § 3     5-8-24          4-84
2008, § 4     5-8-24          4-85
2008, § 5     5-8-24          4-86
2008, § 6     5-8-24          4-87
2008, § 7     5-8-24          4-88
2008, § 8     5-8-24          4-89
2009, § 1     6-12-24         9-340 et. seq.
2010, § 1     7-10-24         9-41
2011, § 1     7-10-24         9-49
985K, § 2     10-16-24        4-115
 
 
