WARRICK COUNTY, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-25 Supplement, current through
County Commissioners Ordinance 2025-15, passed 9-8-25
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NUMBER 1999-12
WARRICK COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the County of Warrick supplement to the Code of Ordinances of Warrick
County, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
County; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the County Commissioners to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
County and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the County that this ordinance take effect immediately;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of Warrick
County, Indiana, as follows:
   Section 1. That the supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Warrick as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2. Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the County Commissioners and the County Auditor is
hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Auditor.
   Section 3. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect immediately.
Passed this 26th day of July, 1999.
         BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF WARRICK COUNTY INDIANA
                           W. David Rector /s/
   W. David Rector, President
   Larry Barr /s/
   Larry Barr, Commissioner
   Jack Pike /s/
   Jack Pike, Commissioner
ATTEST:
Richard I. Kixmiller /s/
Richard Kixmiller, Auditor
ORDINANCE NUMBER 2000-19
WARRICK COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the County of Warrick supplement to the Code of Ordinances of Warrick
County, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
County; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the County Commissioners to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
County and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the County that this ordinance take effect immediately;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of Warrick
County, Indiana, as follows:
   Section 1. That the supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the County of
Warrick as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2. Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the County Commissioners and the County Auditor is
hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Auditor.
   Section 3. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect immediately.
Passed this 13th day of September, 2000.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF WARRICK COUNTY INDIANA
   W. David Rector /s/
   W. David Rector, President
   Larry Barr /s/
   Larry Barr, Commissioner
   Jack Pike /s/
   Jack Pike, Commissioner
ATTEST:
Richard I. Kixmiller /s/
Richard Kixmiller, Auditor
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   NON-DISCRIMINATION
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the County of Warrick shall be
designated as the Code of Warrick County and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or subsection.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing law refer to the new code numbers assigned to that law.
   (G)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted, or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered
by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only, and do not affect the meaning,
application, or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only, and is not a part of the section.
   (H)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent
or context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of such persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving such authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include thesingular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Board of County Commissioners.
      CLERK. The Clerk of the County.
      COUNCIL. The County Council.
      COUNTY. Warrick County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department of the county.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing, or other modes
of representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person's
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation
isincorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date of that ordinance or
subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties, or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then such named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which such duties,
liabilities, powers, and rights were transferred. (I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not reviewed unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under
such section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. Such section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture,
or liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code shall not be affected by
the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
thiscode, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (I.C. 36-5-2-2) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This county shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see
I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway right-of-
ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Power to prescribe fines up to $2,500 granted, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
CHAPTER 11: NON-DISCRIMINATION
Section
   
11.01   Purpose and intent
   
11.02   Definitions
   
11.03   Discriminatory practices prohibited
   
11.04   Non-discrimination clauses
§ 11.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide to all Warrick County citizens
the equal opportunity for employment for county jobs, access to public
facilities, contracts entered into by the county, and/or other activities
necessarily related to the public services available to county citizens without
regard to race, color, religion, ancestry, age, national origin, disability,
sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or United States military service
veteran status.
(BC Ord. 2020-15, passed 7-13-20)
§ 11.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISABILITY. “Disability” as that term is defined in the Americans with
Disabilities Act (the “ADA”), as may be amended from time to time, and as that
definition may be interpreted by federal courts. To the extent that the ADA
would require a person to be a “qualified individual with a disability” in
order to be protected from a specific form or type of discrimination under the
ADA, then the same is true with respect to this chapter.
   GENDER IDENTITY. A person’s actual or perceived gender-related attributes,
self-image,  appearance, expression, or behavior, whether or not such
characteristics differ from those traditionally associated with the person’s
assigned sex at birth.
   GOVERNMENT CONTRACT. Any contract or agreement between Warrick County and a
person, including those that are entered into pursuant to, and in accordance
with the requirements of, §
31.08 of the Warrick County, Indiana Code of Ordinances.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations,
labor organizations, corporations, cooperatives, legal representatives,
trustees in bankruptcy, trustees, receivers, governmental agencies and
departments, including, without limitation, Warrick County and any of its
departments, offices, and/or other organized groups.
   PUBLIC FACILITY. Any facility or establishment, other than an educational
institution, which is owned, operated, or managed by, or on behalf of, Warrick
County.
   PUBLIC SERVICES. Any service offered by Warrick County to the general public
in the course of business as a governmental unit.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. Male or female sexuality, real or perceived, by
orientation or practice.
(BC Ord. 2020-15, passed 7-13-20)
§ 11.03 DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   Warrick County, and/or any of its offices or departments, shall be
prohibited from denying, excluding from, or failing or refusing to extend any
person, equal opportunities in:
      (1)   Employment as an employee of Warrick County;
      (2)   Access to and use of public facilities;
      (3)   Awarding of government contracts; or
      (4)   Other programs or activities relating to the public services
available to the residents of Warrick County;
on the basis of such person's race, color, religion, ancestry, age, national
origin, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or United States
military service veteran status.
(Ord. 2020-15, passed 7-13-20)
§ 11.04 NON-DISCRIMINATION CLAUSES.
   (A)   In each contract to which Warrick County, or any board, office, or
department of the county, is one of the executing parties, Warrick County shall
ensure that such contract shall contain a provision requiring the governmental
contractor and subcontractors not to discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment in the performance of said contract, with respect to
hiring, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, or any matter
directly or indirectly related to employment, because of race, color, religion,
ancestry, age, national origin, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, or United States military service veteran status. Breach of such
provision may be regarded as a material of breach of said contract.
   (B)   Warrick County shall ensure that all applications, postings,
announcements, and/or advertisements recruiting for employment with Warrick
County shall conspicuously include the prompt that reads as follows:
      “An Equal Employment Opportunity Employer.”
(Ord. 2020-15, passed 7-13-20)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS; COUNTY COUNCIL
      
31.   PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT
      
33.   OTHER DEPARTMENTS, COUNCILS AND COMMITTEES
      
34.   ELECTIONS AND VOTING
      
35.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
36.   TAXATION
      
37.   FUNDS AND FEES
      
38.   COUNTY CORRECTIONAL FACILITY
      
39.   COUNTY POLICY
      
40.   FIXED ASSET CAPITALIZATION POLICY
           
APPENDIX A: FIXED ASSET NOTIFICATION FORM
      
41. HEALTH DEPARTMENT FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS; COUNTY COUNCIL
Section
Board of Commissioners
   
30.01   Warrick County Board of Commissioner districts
   
30.02   Full time commissioner
   
30.03   Communications specifications
   
30.04   Electronic meetings policy
County Council
   
30.15   Warrick County Council districts
   
30.16   Electronic meetings policy
   
30.17   Rules for individuals attending public meetings held by the County
Council
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
§ 30.01 WARRICK COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONER DISTRICTS.
   The election districts for the Board of Commissioners of Warrick County are
as follows:
   (A)   District 1 shall be comprised of all precincts of Anderson and Ohio
Townships.
   (B)   District 2 shall be comprised of all precincts in Boon, Campbell, and
Greer Townships.
   (C)   District 3 shall be comprised of all precincts in Hart, Lane, Owen,
Pigeon, and Skelton Townships.
(BC Ord. 1991-13, passed 4-8-91; Am. BC Ord. 2013-30, passed 12-9-13; Am. B.C.
Ord. 2021- 43, passed 12-13-21)
§ 30.02 FULL TIME COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   One of the members of the Board of Commissioners, selected by the
Board of Commissioners, shall serve in a full time capacity.
   (B)   The selection of the member to serve as a full time Commissioner shall
be made annually for a term of one year at the reorganization meeting of the
County Commissioners held in January of each year.
   (C)   The selection and appointment of a full time Commissioner shall be
with the agreement and consent of the person so selected.
   (D)   The selection and appointment of a full time Commissioner shall be
contingent upon the approval of an appropriate salary for said position from
the Common Council.
   (E)   There is no restriction on the number of one year terms that a
Commissioner may occupy the position as a full time Commissioner.
   (F)   The individual filling the position as a full time Commissioner may
terminate his full time status upon written notice to the Commissioners and
upon said notice being presented to the County Auditor.
(BC Res. 1986-4, passed 7-7-86)
§ 30.03 COMMUNICATIONS SPECIFICATIONS.
   The communications specifications adopted by the Board of Commissioners on
May 11, 1984, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code as
if set forth in full herein.
(BC Ord. passed 5-11-84)
§ 30.04 ELECTRONIC MEETINGS POLICY.
   (A)   Title of policy and incorporation by reference.
      (1)   This section shall be known as the "Electronic Meetings Policy" of
the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   The provisions of I.C. 3-14-1.5-1, et seq., including any and all
definitions, are hereby incorporated into this policy by reference.
   (B)   Electronic participation.
      (1)   Subject to divisions (C) and (E), below, any Commissioner may
participate in a meeting by any electronic means of communication that:
         (a)   Allows all Commissioners to simultaneously communicate with each
other; and
         (b)   Except for a meeting that is an executive session, allows the
public to simultaneously attend and observe the meeting.
      (2)   A Commissioner who participates by an electronic means of
communication:
         (a)   Shall be considered present for purposes of establishing a
quorum; and
         (b)   May participate in final action only if the Commissioner can be
seen and heard.
      (3)   All votes taken during a meeting in which a Commissioner
participates by an electronic means of communication must be taken by roll call
vote.
   (C)   Attendance by electronic means.
      (1)   At least two Commissioners must be physically present at a meeting
during which a Commissioner is participating by electronic means of
communication. No more than one Commissioner may participate by means of
electronic communication at the same meeting.
      (2)   A Commissioner shall not attend more than 50% of meetings in a
calendar year by electronic means of communication, unless the Commissioner's
electronic participation is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
      (3)   A Commissioner may attend two consecutive meetings by electronic
communication. In the event a Commissioner attends two consecutive meetings by
electronic communication, said Commissioner must be physically present at the
next subsequent meeting, unless the Commissioner's absence is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
   (D)   Electronic meeting minutes. The minutes of a meeting at which a
Commissioner participates by electronic means of communication shall:
      (1)   Identify each Commissioner who:
         (a)   Was physically present at the meeting;
         (b)   Participated in the meeting by electronic means of
communication; and
         (c)   Was absent.
      (2)   Identify the electronic means of communication by which:
         (a)   A Commissioner participated in the meeting; and
         (b)   Members of the public attended and observed the meeting if the
meeting was not an executive session.
   (E)   Final action not permitted. No Commissioner who is participating in a
meeting by means of electronic communication shall participate in taking final
action if the Board of Commissioners is attempting to take final action to:
      (1)   Adopt a budget;
      (2)   Make a reduction in personnel;
      (3)   Initiate a referendum;
      (4)   Impose or increase a fee;
      (5)   Impose or increase a penalty;
      (6)   Exercise the governing body's power of eminent domain; or
      (7)   Establish, impose, raise, or renew a tax.
(BC Res. 2021-07, 5-24-2021)
COUNTY COUNCIL
§ 30.15 WARRICK COUNTY COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The election districts for the Warrick County Council are as follows:
      (1)   District 1 shall be comprised of the following precincts: Ohio 03,
Ohio 04, Ohio 08, Ohio 09, Ohio 10, Ohio 11, Ohio 15, Ohio 17, Ohio 19, Ohio
20, Ohio 22, Ohio 27, Ohio 28, Ohio 32.
      (2)   District 2 shall be comprised of the following precincts: Campbell,
Ohio 06, Ohio 07, Ohio, Ohio 13, Ohio 14, Ohio 21, Ohio 23, Ohio 24, Ohio 30,
Ohio 31, Ohio 34.
      (3)   District 3 shall be comprised of the following precincts: Anderson,
Boon 03, Boon 10, Boon 15, Ohio 01, Ohio 02, Ohio 05, Ohio 16, Ohio 25, Ohio
26, Ohio 33.
      (4)   District 4 shall be comprised of the following precincts: Boon 05,
Boon 06, Boon 07, Boon 08, Boon 09, Boon 11, Boon 12, Boon 13, Boon 14, Greer
01, Greer 02, Hart, Lane, Owen, Pigeon, Skelton.
   (B)   The remaining members of the Warrick County Council shall be “at-large
members” and shall be elected by the voters of the entire Warrick County
pursuant to I.C. 36-2-3-4(a).
(BC Ord. 1994-1, passed 1-1-94; Am. BC Ord. 2013-30, passed 12-9-13; Am. B.C.
Ord. 2021- 42, passed 12-13-21)
§ 30.16 ELECTRONIC MEETINGS POLICY.
   (A)   General electronic participation provisions. 
      (1)   A Council member may participate electronically in a Council
meeting, subject to this policy and the requirements of I.C. 5-14-1.5, only if:
         (a)   All participating Council members can simultaneously
communicate;
         (b)   The public can simultaneously attend and observe the meeting,
except for executive sessions; and
         (c)   At least 50% of the Council members are physically present at a
meeting.
      (2)   All votes during a meeting in which a Council member participates
electronically shall be taken by roll call.
      (3)   Meeting minutes for meetings at which a Council member participates
electronically must include the following:
         (a)   The name of each Council member physically present;
         (b)   The name of each Council member participating electronically;
         (c)   The name of each absent Council member;
         (d)   The electronic means of communication used by Council members;
and
         (e)   The electronic means of communication used by the public to
attend.
      (4)   A Council member who participates electronically is considered
present for purposes of establishing a quorum.
      (5)   A Council member participating electronically may participate in
final action only if the Council member can be seen and heard.
      (6)   Technological failures that disrupt or prevent simultaneous
communication between a Council member or a member of the public who are not
physically present do not prevent the Council from conducting the meeting or
taking final action as long as the Council members physically present satisfy
the quorum and voting requirements.
      (7)   A Council member cannot attend more than 50% of the meetings in a
year electronically, unless the electronic participation is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
      (8)   A Council member cannot attend more than two consecutive meetings
by electronic participation, unless the Council member's absence is due to one
of the above exceptions. Otherwise, two consecutive meetings of electronic
participation shall be followed by the Council member's physical presence at
the next meeting.
      (9)   Electronic participation is prohibited, and all Council members
must be physically present at a meeting, for the Council to take the following
final actions:
         (a)   Adopting a budget;
         (b)   Making a reduction in personnel;
         (c)   Initiating a referendum;
         (d)   Establishing or increasing a fee;
         (e)   Establishing or increasing a penalty;
         (f)   Using eminent domain authority; and
         (g)   Establishing, raising, or renewing a tax.
   (B)   Electronic participation during disaster emergency.
      (1)   These provisions apply if:
         (a)   The Governor declares a disaster emergency under I.C. 10-14-3-
12; or
         (b)   The County Commissioners declare a local disaster emergency
under I.C. 10-14-3-29.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the general electronic participation provisions of
this policy, the Council members are not required to be physically present at a
meeting until the disaster emergency or local disaster emergency is terminated.
      (3)   Council members may meet by electronic means if:
         (a)   At least a quorum participates electronically or in person;
         (b)   The public can simultaneously attend and observe the meeting,
except for executive sessions; and
      (c)   The meeting memoranda includes:
         1.   The name of each Council member participating electronically;
         2.   The name of each absent Council member;
         3.   The electronic means of communication used by Council members;
and
         4.   The electronic means of communication used by the public to
attend.
      (4)   All votes during a meeting under this section shall be taken by
roll call.
(CC Res. 2021-08, passed 6-3-21)
§ 30.17 RULES FOR INDIVIDUALS ATTENDING PUBLIC MEETINGS HELD BY THE COUNTY
COUNCIL.
   (A)   The County Council hereby adopts the following rules to apply to
individuals attending public meetings of the Council.
      (1)   This section does not expand or add any additional right(s) an
individual may have regarding a public meeting of the Council, including
attending and/or commenting on its meetings.
      (2)   Although members of the general public have no right to speak
during a public meeting of the Council, the Council, at its sole discretion,
may provide for a public comment period, during which time individuals may be
given an opportunity to address the Council.
      (3)   Prior to addressing the Council during any public comment period,
individuals wishing to speak will be required to sign a speaker registration
sheet and provide their name, address, and the issue
or topic they wish to address. Individuals will be called to speak in the order
in which they have signed the speaker registration sheet.
      (4)   Individuals who wish to speak and have signed the speaker
registration sheet may waive their opportunity to speak once called upon.
However, an individual who waives their opportunity to speak will not be
permitted to speak at a later time.
      (5)   Once called upon, all speakers shall first state their name, their
county of residence, and the issue upon which they wish to speak. Speakers may
only speak from a podium and must speak loudly and clearly into the microphone
provided.
      (6)   Any speaker wishing to provide documents to the Council at the
meeting shall provide one copy for each of the seven Council members. However,
speakers are encouraged to bring additional copies of any documents they intend
to distribute during the meeting.
      (7)   Each speaker may only speak once and will be given a maximum of
three minutes to speak unless a shorter period of time is set forth by the
Council. Time may not be reserved or yielded to other speakers. Once an
individual is finished speaking, their remaining time, if any, is waived.
      (8)   Each speaker will be notified when their allotted time to speak is
exhausted. Any speaker that does not immediately conclude their remarks at the
expiration of their allotted time will be deemed out of order and will be asked
to stop.
      (9)   Comments that are duplicative or repetitive will be deemed out of
order and the speaker will asked to stop.
      (10)   Any speaker who is discourteous, argumentative, accusatory, or
insulting will be deemed out of order and will be asked to stop.
      (11)   Once a speaker is deemed out of order for any reason, their
remaining time, if any, will be forfeited and the speaker will not be granted
an opportunity to make any further comment or presentation.
      (12)   All individuals attending a public meeting will be expected to
adhere to these rules. Any person failing to do so will be deemed out of order.
      (13)   The Council is authorized, and has sole discretion, to request
that any person deemed out of order leave the meeting. Once requested to leave,
a person must immediately leave the meeting room.
      (14)   In extreme cases, if a person refuses to leave the meeting after
being asked to do so, and continues to disrupt the proceedings in a way that is
obviously hostile to the purpose of the meeting, the Council may order that the
person be removed by members of the County Sheriff’s Department.
   (B)   A copy of the rules stated herein shall be provided outside the
Council's meeting room, and made available to the general public through the
internet on the county website (https://www.warrickcounty.gov/).
(CC Res. 2024-10, passed 8-8-24)
CHAPTER 31: PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
31.01   Regular business hours for county offices
   
31.02   Membership in state-wide associations
   
31.03   Mileage reimbursement for county employees
   
31.04   Per diem rates for meals and lodging for county employees
   
31.05   Money for travel and entertainment in certain circumstances
   
31.06   Public Employees Retirement Fund
   
31.07   Medical Insurance for Retired County Employees
   
31.08   Purchasing policy for the procurement of equipment, goods, materials
and services
   
31.09   Employee Handbook amendments
   
31.10   Disclosure of contracts with relatives
   
31.11   Nepotism prohibited
   
31.12   Cell phone usage
   
31.13   Conflict of interest policy and minimum threshold
   
31.14   Use of county vehicles and fringe benefit policy
   
31.15   Photo identification policy
 
   
31.99   Penalty
§ 31.01 REGULAR BUSINESS HOURS FOR COUNTY OFFICES.
   (A)   Establishment of regular business hours.
      (1)   Each county office maintained for the transaction of business with
the public or with other county offices shall be kept open for the transaction
of such business at least each week, Monday through Friday, inclusive, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., prevailing local time.
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners shall annually establish a schedule of
holidays during which each county office may be closed.
      (3)   Those offices with only one full time, regular employee or no
employees in addition to the elected office holder may be closed during a lunch
break not exceeding 12:00 noon until 1:00 p.m. of each day providing notice of
such closing is posted in a conspicuous place near the public entrance to said
office.
      (4)   It shall be the duty of the elected office holder in elected
offices and the appointed superior in appointed offices to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (B)   County offices excluded from this section.
      (1)   The County Circuit Court; The County Superior Court; the County
Prosecuting Attorney and those offices funded through the budgets of those
respective offices; the County Department of Public Welfare; the County
Emergency Medical Service; the County Sheriff's office; the County Landfill;
the County Highway Department; and the County Agriculture Stabilization
Conservation Service are excluded from the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Commissioners may by resolution exempt other offices from the terms
of this section or establish different hours of operation in accordance with
the individual needs of those respective offices.
   (C)   Injunction proceedings.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners may institute a suit for injunction in
the circuit or superior courts of the county to restrain an individual from
violating the provisions of this section.
      (2)   In the event the Board of Commissioners is successful in its suit
for injunction herein, the defendant shall bear the costs of the action.
(BC Ord. CO-1982-1, passed 10-15-82; Am. BC Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-1-09; Am. BC
Ord. 2009-30, passed 12-28-09) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.02 MEMBERSHIP IN STATE-WIDE ASSOCIATIONS.
   (A)   The County Auditor, County Assessor, County Treasurer, County
Recorder, County Circuit and Superior Courts Clerk, County Surveyor, County
Council, Board of Commissioners, County Area Planning Commission members and
employees, the Director and employees of the County Department of Public
Welfare and the County Prosecuting Attorney and his employees are authorized to
join state-wide associations of like elected officials and public servants.
   (B)   Said office holders and public servants are hereby authorized to
submit claims to the county for the payment of all dues and assessments to
offset the costs of operation of said association upon a proper appropriation
of funds for the payment of the same in the respective budgets.
(BC Ord. 1985-7, passed 2-4-85)
§ 31.03 MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT FOR COUNTY EMPLOYEES.
   County employees who have been authorized to use their personal vehicles for
county business shall be reimbursed at a rate of $0.49 per mile.
(CC Ord. 1988-1, passed 2-11-88; CC Ord. 2001-04, passed 9-6-01; CC Ord. 2004-
02, passed 2-5-04; CC Ord. 2005-01, passed 11-3-05; CC Ord. 2008-04, passed 9-
4-08; CC Ord. 2022-02, passed 8-4-22)
§ 31.04 PER DIEM RATES FOR MEALS AND LODGING FOR COUNTY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   APPROVED COUNTY BUSINESS. Shall mean mandatory trainings, continuing
education conferences, employment related trips, immunization clinics, or other
employment related activities that are attended by a Warrick County office
holder, department head, or employee that the office holder or department head,
in his or her discretion, would deem appropriate and necessary for the conduct
of his or her business or the business of his or her office.
   (B)   Lodging reimbursements.
      (1)   Warrick County shall reimburse any Warrick County employee for
expenses incurred in overnight accommodations while on approved county business
not to exceed $175 per night per employee upon written reimbursement request
supported by receipt. Actual overnight expenses in excess of $175 per night per
employee may be approved under the following conditions:
         (a)   At least seven days prior to the first overnight accommodation
for the approved county business, the employee submits to the Warrick County
Auditor no less than three quotes for lodging accommodations which are in the
vicinity of the approved county business for which the employee is needing
lodging accommodations;
         (b)   The three or more lodging quotes submitted under division (B)(1)
(a) are for costs that exceed $175;
         (c)   The employee submits to the Warrick County Auditor a statement
explaining the reason(s) why no reasonable lodging accommodations are available
at a rate of $175 or less; and
         (4)   The employee’s statement submitted pursuant to division (B)(1)
(c) includes a written approval of said expenses totaling over $175 per night
from his or her supervising office holder or department head.
      (2)   Employees shall reserve and pay for overnight lodging
accommodations for approved county business using a personal credit card or a
county issued credit card, and shall submit a copy of Warrick County’s tax
exemption certificate at the time of checking in. Alternatively, an employee
may pay the lodging expenses using a pre-approved, Warrick County-issued check
if requested by submitting an appropriate written request to the Warrick County
Auditor at least seven days in advance of the approved county business. An
employee’s request for lodging reimbursements shall not include any payment of
taxes under this section.
   (C)   Meal reimbursements, generally. When a Warrick County employee is
participating in approved county business that does not involve or require
overnight accommodations but rather takes place over a period of time that
includes the employee’s lunch break, then in that event the office holder or
department head may provide lunch for said employee at a cost not to exceed the
sum of $10 per day per employee. A Warrick County office holder or department
head may request a meal reimbursement under this division (C) in advance by
submitting an appropriate written request to the Warrick County Auditor at
least seven days in advance of the approved county business.
   (D)   Meal reimbursements for overnight trips. 
      (1)   When a Warrick County employee is on approved county business with
approved overnight accommodations said employee shall be reimbursed for meal
costs in a total amount of $50 per diem per employee. For purposes of this
chapter, PER DIEM is measured as beginning at 12:00 a.m. and ending at 11:59
p.m. A Warrick County employee may request a per diem meal reimbursement under
this division (D) in advance by submitting an appropriate written request to
the Warrick County Auditor at least seven days in advance of the approved
county business.
      (2)   If a Warrick County employee is traveling for approved county
business in any location outside Warrick County said employee shall be
reimbursed for meal costs actually incurred, that are not otherwise
reimbursable according to the per diem reimbursements of this division (D), in
an amount not to exceed $20 per day upon written reimbursement request
supported by receipt.
(CC Ord. 1989-7, passed 11-7-89; Am. BC Ord. 2009-27, passed 11-23-09; Am. BC
Ord. 2011-06, passed 2-14-11; Am. BC Ord. 2017-04, passed 4-24-17; Am. BC Ord.
2018-31, passed 11-26-18; Am. BC Ord. 2019-14, passed 6-10-19; Am. BC 2020-20,
passed 9-28-20)
§ 31.05 MONEY FOR TRAVEL AND ENTERTAINMENT IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES.
   (A)   Upon prior express approval of the Board of Commissioners, employees
of the county may incur expenses for transportation, meals and lodging of
individuals who are not county employees for purposes as set forth hereinabove
or related purposes.
   (B)   In order to obtain approval of the Board of Commissioners, said
employee requesting authority to incur such expenditures shall first present
said request to the Board of Commissioners in open meeting, either regular or
special called meeting, for review and determination.
(BC Ord. 1989-21, passed 11-6-89)
§ 31.06 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   The County Council elects to become a participant in the Public
Employees Retirement Fund as established by I.C. 5-10.3-1 et seq.
   (B)   The County Council agrees to make the required contributions under the
Public Employees Retirement Fund Act, I.C. 5-10.1-1-1 et seq.
   (C)   The following are declared to be covered by the Fund: elected
officials, all salaried and full time hourly employees.
   (D)   None of the classifications or positions specified in division (C)
above are compensated on a fee basis or of an emergency nature, or in a part-
time category.
(CC Res. passed 6-10-75)
§ 31.07 MEDICAL INSURANCE FOR RETIRED COUNTY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Eligibility.
      (1)   Any person, who has qualified for and obtained retirement status
for service rendered to Warrick County, and shall have been a full-time
employee of Warrick County for a minimum of 15 years shall be entitled to
obtain and extend coverage from medical insurance policies which are in effect
with Warrick County, for the retiree and spouse so long as the retiree or
spouse shall pay 50% of the COBRA premiums incurred by Warrick County for
coverage of the retiree and/or spouse.
      (2)   Any person, who has qualified for and obtained retirement status
for service rendered to Warrick County, and shall have been a full-time
employee of Warrick County for a minimum of 20 years shall be entitled to
obtain and extend coverage from medical insurance policies which are in effect
with Warrick County, for the retiree and spouse so long as the retiree or
spouse shall pay 25% of the COBRA premiums incurred by Warrick County for
coverage of the retiree and/or spouse.
      (3)   Any person, who has qualified for and obtained retirement status
for service rendered to Warrick County, and shall have been a full-time
employee of Warrick County for a minimum of 25 years shall be entitled to
obtain and extend coverage from medical insurance policies which are in effect
with Warrick County, for the retiree and spouse so long as the retiree or
spouse shall pay 15% of the COBRA premiums incurred by Warrick County for
coverage of the retiree and/or spouse.
      (4)   Any person, who has qualified for and obtained retirement status
for service rendered to Warrick County, and shall have been a full-time
employee of Warrick County for a minimum of 30 years shall be entitled to
obtain and extend coverage from medical insurance policies which are in effect
with Warrick County, for the retiree and spouse so long as the retiree or
spouse shall pay 10% of the COBRA premiums incurred by Warrick County for
coverage of the retiree and/or spouse.
      (5)   The phrase COBRA PREMIUMS shall be defined as the COBRA premium
established by the third-party administrator or Warrick County’s insurance
agent as the may determine from time to time. For example, if the total cost
for Warrick County to provide insurance to a retiree and/or his or her spouse
is $500 per month following the retiree’s retirement, the retiree shall pay an
amount equal to $500 multiplied by the applicable percentage above.
   (B)   Qualifying for and obtaining retirement status.
      (1)   A person is qualified for retirement statuses under division (A) of
this section if, on the date of retirement:
         (a)   Such person is at least 55 years of age, is not eligible for
Medicare, and is an active, full-time employee of Warrick County as of the date
of the retirement; or
         (b)   Such person is at least 50 years of age, is not eligible for
Medicare, and is an active, full-time law enforcement merit employee of Warrick
County as of the date of retirement.
      (2)   To obtain retirement status under this section, a person who is
qualified for retirement status under division (B)(1) shall notify the Warrick
County Auditor of his or her intent to retire 60 days prior to retirement from
Warrick County.
      (3)   Within 15 days of receipt of notice under division (B)(2), the
Warrick County Auditor shall notify the prospective retiree as to whether he or
she is qualified for retirement status as defined herein, and, if such person
is qualified for retirement status, shall notify that person of his or her
rights relating to such coverage.
      (4)   Within 30 days of receipt of notice under division (B)(3), the
prospective retiree shall make application for such coverage.
   (C)   Events affecting coverage.
      (1)   In the event that a retiree from Warrick County is divorced, then
the spouse is no longer eligible for any benefits pursuant to this section.
      (2)   In the event that a retiree from Warrick County marries after
retirement, the spouse shall not be eligible for any benefits pursuant to this
section.
      (3)   A spouse of a retiree who is otherwise qualified for, and has
obtained, retirement status, shall be ineligible for continued coverage under
this section if, after the retiree’s retirement from Warrick County, said
spouse of a retiree obtains employment through an employer that provides group
medical insurance.
      (4)   Any retiree who shall hereafter terminate his or her insurance
coverage with Warrick County for whatever reason, including non-payment of
premiums as described in division (D), below, shall thereafter be forever
ineligible to return to Warrick County’s medical insurance programs as provided
in this section. Additionally, any spouse of a retiree who shall hereafter
terminate his or her insurance coverage with Warrick County for whatever reason
including, but not limited to, obtaining group medical insurance with a
subsequent employer, shall thereafter be ineligible to return to Warrick
County’s medical insurance program as provided in this section.
      (5)   In the event that the retiree dies, the surviving spouse who
otherwise qualifies to receive insurance coverage with Warrick County shall be
eligible to retain medical insurance benefits pursuant to this section so long
as the surviving spouse does not remarry or obtain employment through an
employer that provides group medical insurance.
   (D)   Premium contributions and payment.
      (1)   The retiree and his or her spouse, if applicable, shall contribute
a portion of the monthly COBRA premiums in accordance with the percentage
schedule referenced in division (A) of this section. Such premium contributions
shall be altered in accordance with defined calculations when the total cost of
insurance to Warrick County changes based on policy renewal or applicable
changes to the plan.
      (2)   Payment of premium contributions shall be due the first of each
month and delivered to the Warrick County Auditor. Payment shall be made by
check or money order payable only to the Warrick County Treasurer. Payments
shall be late if received after the tenth day of the month when payment is due,
in which event the retiree shall be assessed a late fee of $25.
      (3)   If payments of a premium contribution get two months in arrears,
the retiree, and if applicable, the spouse’s medical insurance premium account
shall be placed on probationary status until premium contributions and late
fees are paid in full. If payments of premium contribution go three months in
arrears, the Warrick County Auditor shall notify the retiree, and if
applicable, the spouse, in writing that the retirement medical benefit shall be
terminated in 30 days if premium contributions and late fees are not paid in
full. If payments of a premium contribution become four months in arrears, the
medical insurance for that retiree, and if applicable, the spouse and any
dependents shall be terminated and the Warrick County Auditor shall notify the
retiree and spouse in writing.
   (E)   Conversion to Medicare supplement plan. When the retiree attains the
age of 65 years or the spouse, if applicable, attains the age of 65 years, the
medical insurance coverage shall be converted to a Medicare supplement plan
which is in effect between the Warrick County and a private insurer. The
portion of the premium contribution paid by the retiree, spouse, and Warrick
County shall remain the same as provided in division (A) of this section.
   (F)   The term WARRICK COUNTY AUDITOR as identified in this section shall
mean the Warrick County Human Resources Director so long as the position is in
existence at the time of the prospective retiree’s retirement date.
(CC Ord. 1998-15, passed 11-23-98; Am. BC Ord. 2002-13, passed 11-20-02; Am. BC
Ord. 2009-07, passed 8-10-09; Am. BC Ord. 2012-21, passed 6-25-12; Am. BC Ord.
2014-09, passed 3-24-14; Am. BC Ord. 2014-13, passed 5-12-14; Am. BC Ord. 2017-
31, passed 11-27-17)
§ 31.08 PURCHASING POLICY FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF EQUIPMENT, GOODS, MATERIALS
AND SERVICES.
   (A)   Introduction. This chapter outlines the Warrick County purchasing
policy for the procurement of equipment, goods, materials and services. This
chapter does not apply to public works as defined in I.C. 36-1-12 et seq. It
follows state purchasing laws but may be stricter than the state law at the
discretion of the Warrick County Board of Commissioners. I.C. 5-22-3-3 states:
“The purchasing agency of a governmental body may establish written policies
for purchases made by the purchasing agency. The written policies may apply to
all purchases generally or to a specific purchase as stated in the solicitation
for the purchase.” A written policy may supplement this section or a rule
adopted by the purchasing agency's governmental body and not be inconsistent
with this section or a rule adopted by the purchasing agency's governmental
body. The purchasing agent as herein defined shall purchase the equipment,
goods, materials and services for all Warrick County departments and offices.
   (B)   Authority and definitions.
      (1)   The provisions herein are to be construed consistent with the
provisions of I.C. 5-22 and I.C. 36-1-12.
      (2)   The definitions in I.C. 5-22 shall apply herein unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise. Below are some definitions found within this
policy.
         EMERGENCY. A situation, which threatens injury or death to any person,
damage to property or disruption of governmental services.
         EQUIPMENT. Any articles or physical resources needed by employees of
Warrick County to equip them to perform their job requirements, such as
implements, motorized vehicles and tools, and electronic and computerized
devices.
         GOODS and MATERIALS. Shall both mean any tangible item not otherwise
equipment that are needed by employees of Warrick County to perform their job
requirements.
         MBE. A minority business enterprise.
         OFFER. A response to a solicitation.
         OFFEROR. A person that submits an offer.
         POLICY. The purchasing agency’s or purchasing agent’s written
statement of:
            1.   Purchasing procedure; or
            2.   Substantive purchasing purposes; that does not have the force
and effect of law.
         PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT. The construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
renovation of a public building, airport facility, or other structure that is
paid for out of a public fund or out of a special assessment. The term includes
the construction, alteration, or repair of a highway, street, alley, bridge,
sewer, drain, or other improvement that is paid for out of a public fund or out
of a special assessment. The term also includes any public work leased by
Warrick County under a lease containing an option to purchase.
         PURCHASE. To buy, procure, rent, lease, or otherwise acquire. The term
includes the following activities: description of requirements; solicitation or
selection of sources; preparation; and award of contracts.
         PURCHASING AGENCY. A governmental body that is authorized to enter
into contracts by this section, rules adopted under this section, or by another
law. This shall mean the Warrick County Board of Commissioners.
         PURCHASING AGENT. The Warrick County Purchasing Department.
         SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a person, not
involving the delivery of specific supplies, other than printed documents or
other items that are merely incidental to the required performance.
         SOLICITATION. The procedure by which Warrick County invites persons to
submit an offer to enter into a contract with Warrick County for the purchase
or sale of supplies by Warrick County, including invitation for bids, a request
for proposals and request for quotes.
         SPECIFICATIONS. A description of the physical characteristics,
functional characteristics, or nature of materials, and may include a
description of a requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing materials
for delivery.
         SUPPLIES. Shall include equipment, goods and materials.
         WBE. A woman business enterprise.
      (3)   This section is not intended to be a complete listing of authority
and procedure under I.C. 5-22 and I.C. 36-1-12. Any power or authority
delineated in I.C. 5-22 or I.C. 36-1-12 is hereby incorporated herein as a
discretionary power of the purchasing agency or purchasing agent.
   (C)   Competitive bids, quotes and price checks.
      (1)   Purchases less than $50,000 (I.C. 5-22-8-2).
         (a)   Purchases less than $50,000 require at least three informal
verbal or written quotes, including those written quotes received via email and
fax, to be submitted directly to the purchasing agent. Quotes may be opened at
the Warrick County Board of Commissioners' meeting or may be opened by the
purchasing agent in the discretion of the purchasing agent.
         (b)   In conjunction with the quote, the purchasing agency may require
a vendor to provide the following documentation: non-collusion affidavit; equal
employment opportunity statement; form of proposal; e-verification
documentation; and an acceptance and agreement of terms. The person obtaining
the quotes shall record the item quoted, date, vendor, price and name of the
person giving the quote (I.C. 5-22-7-9). A bid register may be used to record
such information. The information required above shall be attached to the
requisition. The purchasing agent shall keep a copy of the requisition and
attachments for no less than two years.
         (c)   The invitation to quote may provide for the recurring purchase
of goods, materials, equipment and other supplies governed by I.C. 5-22.
         (d)   The purchasing agency, in its discretion, may award a quote that
is not the lowest amount, taking into consideration what is advantageous to
Warrick County, by taking into consideration factors such as: price, quality of
service, vendor’s qualifications and reputation, and any other factors it
wishes to consider. The Warrick County Board of Commissioners will select the
quote it feels will best serve and be in the best interest of Warrick County.
         (e)   The purchasing agency may cancel an invitation to quote and may
reject all bids for any reason. If there are no responsive offerors, the
purchasing agent may purchase the items without further bidding under I.C. 5-
22-10-10.
      (2)   Purchases equal to or more than $50,000 and equal to less than
$150,000 (I.C. 5-22-8-3).
         (a)   Purchases ranging from $50,000 to $150,000 will be procured
through an informal quote method. Quotes shall be solicited from at least three
suppliers known to deal in the lines or classes of supplies to be purchased. In
conjunction with the quote, the purchasing agency may require a vendor to
provide the following documentation: non-collusion affidavit; equal employment
opportunity statement; form of proposal; e-verification documentation; and an
acceptance and agreement of terms. The person obtaining the quotes shall record
the item quoted, date, vendor, price and name of the person giving the quote
(I.C. 5-22-7-9). A bid register may be used to record such information. The
information required above shall be attached to the requisition. The purchasing
agent shall keep a copy of the requisition and attachments for no less than two
years.
         (b)   The purchasing agent shall mail an invitation to quote at least
seven days before the time fixed for receiving quotes (I.C. 5-22-8-3). The
lowest responsible and responsive offeror shall be awarded the contract for
supplies. The purchasing agent may reject all quotes. If there are no
responsive or responsible offerors, the purchasing agent may purchase the items
without further bidding under I.C. 5-22-10-10.
         (c)   The procedure provided for by this section shall apply to
routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing
structures, buildings, or real property if the cost of the public work is
estimated to be less than $150,000 (I.C. 36-1-12-4.9).
      (3)   Purchases more than $150,000 (I.C. 5-22-7).   
         (a)   Formal competitive bidding is required.
         (b)   Legal advertising is required. The notice shall be published two
times, at least one week apart, with the second publication made at least seven
days before the date the bids will be opened (I.C. 5-3-1).
         (c)   Bids are to be opened at the Warrick County Board of
Commissioners' meeting or at another authorized public forum.
   (D)   Miscellaneous provisions.
      (1)   State bid. Departments must refer to the State Bid List, when
applicable, on all items exceeding $1,000. Purchases do not have to be made
from the State Bid List, if better pricing can be obtained or if the state does
not offer the product needed.
      (2)   Supplies manufactured in the United States. Pursuant to I.C. 5-22-
15-21, supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified and
purchased unless the purchasing agent determines that any of the following
apply:
         (a)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonable available quantities;
         (b)   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States
exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured outside the United States;
         (c)   The quality of the supplies is substantially less than the
quality of comparably priced
         (d)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is
not in the public’s best interest; or
         (e)   The purchasing agent decides to cancel the solicitation for any
reason.
      (3)   Faxed or e-mailed quotes, price checks, and bids. Faxed or e-mailed
offers may be considered for price checks or informal quotes.
         (a)   Faxed or e-mailed documents must contain all the requested forms
and information set forth by the purchasing agent.
         (b)   The offeror assumes the risk of malfunctioning equipment, or
equipment which does not deliver the fax or e-mail for any reason.
         (c)   An offeror shall follow-up the faxed or e-mailed information by
mailing an original document by United States mail, postage prepaid, on the
same date that it is faxed or e-mailed.
      (4)   All purchasing contracts furnished by the seller shall be submitted
to the Warrick County Attorney for review prior to final approval by the
Warrick County Board of Commissioners.
      (5)   Purchasing sources.
         (a)   The following sources should be contacted before all other
sources for purchases of all supplies.
            1.   Purchases from the Department of Correction (I.C. 5-22-11). A
purchasing agent shall purchase from the Department of Correction supplies as
listed in the Department’s printed catalog unless the supplies cannot be
furnished in a timely manner (I.C. 5-22-11-1-3). Supplies and services
purchased under this chapter must meet the specifications and needs of the
Warrick County and be purchased at a fair market value (I.C. 5-22-11-2).
            2.   Purchases of rehabilitation center products (I.C. 5-22-12). A
purchasing agent shall comply with the provisions of I.C. 5-22-12 for purchases
of supplies from the rehabilitation center established under I.C. 5-22-12-1-3.
These provisions are the same as the above provisions cited for the Department
of Correction.
            3.   Purchases from qualified nonprofit agencies for persons with
severe disabilities (I.C. 5-22-13). These provisions are the same as the above
provisions cited for the Department of Correction.
            4.   Purchases from MBE and WBE vendors. It is the policy of
Warrick County to utilize and give equal opportunity to MBE/WBE vendors.
Discrimination against any MBE/WBE shall not be tolerated.
   (E)   Services (I.C. 5-22-6).
      (1)   The purchasing agent may contract for services to be provided to a
department head or office holder using any procedure deemed appropriate (I.C.
5-22-6-1). Competitive bidding is not required unless mandated by state or
federal law.
      (2)   Warrick County may advertise and/or solicit competitive quotes for
any service at the discretion of the office holder or purchasing agent. All
contracts for professional services costing $1,500 or more must be in written
form and reviewed by the Warrick County Attorney before being brought to the
Warrick County Board of Commissioners for approval. A Warrick County office
holder or department head shall not sign a professional service agreement
without the Warrick County Board of Commissioners' approval, unless otherwise
noted below.
      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-22-6, the purchasing agent may recommend that
the Warrick County Board of Commissioners award a service agreement using any
procedure the Board deems appropriate. The quotes will be reviewed and
evaluated by the Warrick County Board of Commissioners by taking into
consideration factors such as: price, quality of service, vendor’s
qualification and reputation, and any other factor(s) the Warrick County Board
of Commissioners wish to consider. The Warrick County Board of Commissioners
will select the quote it feels will best serve and be in the best interest of
Warrick County.
      (4)   Economic development projects pursued by the Warrick County
Department of Economic Development are exempt from this division (E), and are
not required to obtain the approval of the Warrick County Board of
Commissioners before signing a professional service agreement.
      (5)   Services for public works (i.e., routine operation, routine repair,
or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property)
shall be governed by those procedures provided by I.C. 5-22 if the cost of the
service is estimated to be less than $150,000 (I.C. 36-1-12-4.9).
   (F)   Lease of equipment. No lease for equipment shall be effective or
signed by any office holder or department head without prior approval of the
Warrick County Board of Commissioners.
   (G)   Specifications of supplies (I.C. 5-22-5).
      (1)   Specifications shall be required for every item over $25,000 to be
procured hereunder. Specifications for items less than $25,000 may be satisfied
by including on the requisition the make, model, serial number, name of the
product or a detailed description of the service.
      (2)   The purchasing agency shall maintain an indexed file of
specifications prepared by or under the authority of its purchasing agent (I.C.
5-22-5-4).
      (3)   The purchasing agent may proceed under I.C. 5-22-5-5 to a request
for specifications when the purchasing agent makes a written determination that
the development of specifications by Warrick County is not possible, and the
Warrick County Board of Commissioners approve the use of I.C. 5-22-5-5.
      (4)   All items to be procured shall be F.O.B. Boonville, Indiana, at the
location designated in the specifications. Prices must include delivery. No
additional monies will be paid for delivery.
      (5)   In addition to whether time of delivery is a consideration of the
award, all insurance requirements shall be stated in the specifications.
      (6)   Specifications must indicate whether the products are manufactured
in the United States.
      (7)   The specifications shall contain the minimum warranty period
required.
   (H)   Competitive bidding - solicitations (I.C. 5-22-7). Invitation for
bids, request for proposals, and request for quotes.
      (1)   A solicitation may provide that offers will be received and
contracts awarded separately for any combination of lines or classes of
supplies.
      (2)   A solicitation may provide that the purchasing agency will award a
contract for supplies for an unspecified or estimated number of items at a
fixed price per unit and that the contract may contain a formula or method for
the escalation of the unit price.
      (3)   Price. No offeror or bidder shall be allowed to alter or change
his/her quote or bid prior to award to the lowest responsible and responsive
bidder. After the award, the lowest responsible and responsive bidder may
negotiate terms and conditions, except the bid price, more favorable to Warrick
County (I.C. 5-22-7-11).
      (4)   Prohibited additions. The purchasing agent may not accept additions
to the contract that are prejudicial to Warrick County or fair competition
(I.C. 5-22-7-13).
      (5)   Approved equals. If the specifications so provide, a bidder or
quoter may submit a request for an approved equal before the deadline for
approved equal submittal as stated in the specifications.
      (6)   Discrepancies. If there are errors in the bid or quote, the written
words shall control over numbers. Errors may be corrected by the offeror as
long as the purchasing agent determines that such errors were unintentional, do
not affect fair competition, and are corrected to the advantage of Warrick
County. Unit prices shall prevail over extended prices.
      (7)   Confidentiality. Offerors may request that certain confidential
financial information or proprietary information be kept confidential. The
product bid and the price shall in all events be subject to the open record
law. If such confidentiality is brought into question in any court or agency,
the offeror shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless Warrick County in any
such proceeding, if requested by the Warrick County Attorney and the purchasing
agent.
      (8)   Withdrawal of offers. An offeror may withdraw his or her offer at
any time prior to the opening of the offer. After an offer is opened at the
date and time specified, the offer may be withdrawn only upon the consent of
the purchasing agent. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether
the offeror should be allowed to withdraw its offer:
         (a)   Financial hardship on the offeror if it is not withdrawn;
         (b)   Financial hardship on Warrick County if withdrawn;
         (c)   Availability of the product from another offeror; and
         (d)   What is the best interest of Warrick County.
      (9)   Bid documents. The specifications shall state the documents to be
submitted with the offer. The purchasing agent may not allow the offeror to
submit a bid bond or certified check after the offers are open. Other documents
may be supplemented or submitted if the omission is unintentional, does not
affect the price, does not substantially affect the fairness in the bidding
process, and is approved by the purchasing agent.
      (10)   Cancellation or rejection (I.C. 5-22-18-2). The purchasing agent
may cancel a solicitation or reject all offers, in whole or in part, if the
purchasing agent determines it is in the best interest(s) of Warrick County.
The reason for cancellation or rejection of all offers must be a part of the
contract file. Warrick County may temporarily discontinue services, stop work
or alter the scope of services required.
      (11)   Non-collusion form. The offeror must file an affirmation form
pursuant to I.C. 5-22-16-6.
      (12)   Offers opened after time stated in solicitation (I.C. 5-22-18-3).
Offers may be opened after the time stated in the solicitation if both of the
following apply:
         (a)   The purchasing agency makes a written determination that it is
in the best interest of Warrick County to delay the opening; and
         (b)   The day, time and place of the rescheduled opening are announced
at the date, time and place of the originally scheduled opening.
      (13)   Solicitation not required (non-profit agency) (I.C. 5-22-13-2). A
purchasing agent may purchase supplies and services without advertising or
calling for bids from a “qualified” non-profit agency for persons with severe
disabilities, unless the supplies cannot be furnished in a timely manner.
      (14)   Invitation for bids. (I.C. 5-22-7-2).
         (a)   An invitation for bids must include:
            1.   A purchase description describing the supplies or services to
be purchased. This includes specifications attached to, or made a part of, the
solicitation.
            2.   All contractual terms and conditions.
            3.   A statement of the evaluation criteria that will be used,
including any of the following: inspection; testing; quality; workmanship;
delivery; and suitability for a particular purpose.
            4.   Time, date and place for opening bids.
            5.   Whether or not a certified check, bond, or other evidence of
financial responsibility is required. A purchasing agent may provide that a
certified check, bond or other evidence of financial responsibility is required
to be submitted with the offer. If faxing is permitted, it shall be sufficient
if a copy of such check, bond or evidence of financial responsibility is
included in the fax and the original is placed in the United States mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the purchasing agent before the date offers are
to be opened. Checks, bonds and other evidence of financial responsibility
shall be required only when required by the invitation for bids at the
discretion of the purchasing agent.
            6.   A statement concerning the conditions under which a bid may be
canceled or rejected, in whole or in part, as specified in I.C. 5-22-8-2.
         (b)   Maintenance of bid information. (I.C. 5-22-7-9). 
            1.   The purchasing agency shall maintain the following
information:
               A.   The name of each bidder;
               B.   The amount of each bid; and
               C.    Other information required by state law.
            2.   All information is subject to public inspection after each
contract award (I.C. 5-22-7-9).
         (c)   Acceptance and evaluation of bids (I.C. 5-22-7-7).
            1.   Bids must be unconditionally accepted without alteration or
correction, except as provided in I.C. 5-22-7-11 through I.C. 5-22-7-13, and
evaluated based on the requirements provided in the invitation for bids (I.C.
5-22-7-7).
            2.   After bid opening, a purchasing agency may not permit changes
in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of
Warrick County or fair competition (I.C. 5-22-7-11).
            3.   If a bidder inserts contract terms or bids on items not
specified in the invitation for bids, the purchasing agent, pursuant to I.C. 5-
22-7-12, shall treat the additional material as a proposal for addition to the
contract and may do any of the following:
               A.    Declare the bidder non-responsive.
               B.    Permit the bidder to withdraw the proposed additions to
the contract in order to meet the requirements and criteria provided in the
invitation for bids.
               C.    Accept the proposed additions to the contract, subject to
I.C. 5-22-7-13.
               D.    Contract additions may not be accepted if they are
prejudicial to the interest of Warrick County or fair competition (I.C. 5-22-7-
3).
         (d)   A contract must be awarded with reasonable promptness by written
notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder (I.C. 5-22-7-8).
         (e)   Except as provided in rule or policy, a purchasing agency must
make a written decision to permit the correction or withdrawal of a bid or
cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes (I.C. 5-22-7-10).
      (15)   Request for proposals (I.C. 5-22-9).
         (a)   When a purchasing agent makes a written determination that the
use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous
to Warrick County, the purchasing agent may award a contract using the request-
for-proposals process under I.C. 5-22-9.
         (b)   The purchasing agency shall give public notice of the request
for proposals in the manner required by I.C. 5-3-1.
         (c)   A request for proposals must include the following:
            1.   The factors or criteria that will be used in evaluation. The
only factors that may be used in the evaluation of proposals are those
specified in the request for proposals (I.C. 5-22-9-10).
            2.   A statement concerning the relative importance of price and
the other evaluation factors.
            3.   A statement concerning whether the proposal must be
accompanied by a certified check or other evidence of financial responsibility.
            4.   A statement concerning whether discussions may be conducted
with responsible offerors, who submit proposals determined to be reasonably
susceptible of being selected for award (I.C. 5-22-9-6)
            5.   All other evaluation criteria.
         (d)   An award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal
is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the Warrick County,
taking into consideration price and the other evaluation factors set forth in
the request for proposals (I.C. 5-22-9-7).
         (e)   If provided in the request for proposals, award may be made to
more than one offeror whose proposals are determined in writing to be
advantageous to Warrick County, taking into consideration price and other
evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals (I.C. 5-22-9-7).
   (I)   Special purchases (I.C. 5-22-10).
      (1)   Special purchases must be made with competition as is practicable
under the circumstances. The Warrick County Attorney shall be consulted prior
to bringing a special purchase request to the Warrick County Board of
Commissioners. A purchasing agent may make a purchase without soliciting bids
or proposals as follows:
         (a)   Emergencies (I.C. 5-22-10-4). A purchasing agent may make a
special purchase when there exists, under emergency conditions, a threat to the
public health, welfare or safety.
         (b)   Substantial savings (I.C. 5-22-10-5). A purchasing agent may
make a special purchase when there exists a unique opportunity to obtain
supplies or services at a substantial savings.
         (c)   Auction (I.C. 5-22-10-6). A purchasing agent may make a special
purchase at an auction.
         (d)   Data processing contracts or license agreements (I.C. 5-22-10-
7). A purchasing agent may make a special purchase of data processing contracts
or licensing agreements for:
            1.   Software programs; or
            2.   Supplies or services, when only one source meets the using
agency's reasonable requirements.
         (e)   Compatibility of equipment, accessories or replacement parts
(I.C. 5-22-10-8). A purchasing agent may make a special purchase when:
            1.   The compatibility of equipment, accessories, or replacement
parts is a substantial consideration in the purchase; and
            2.   Only one source meets the using agency's reasonable
requirements.
         (f)   Other situations. The purchasing agent may make a special
purchase under the following:
            1.   Threatened impairment of functioning of a Warrick County
Department (I.C. 5-22-10-9).
            2.   Failure to receive a responsive offer through approved
purchasing methods (I.C. 5-22-10-10).
            3.   For the evaluation of supplies or a system containing
supplies. This would be to obtain functional information or comparative data
(I.C. 5-22-10-11).
            4.   When the market structure is based on price, but Warrick
County is able to receive a dollar or percentage discount of the established
price (I.C. 5-22-10-12).
            5.   Single or sole source supply (I.C. 5-22-10-13). A purchasing
agent must determine in writing that there is only one source for the supply.
            6.   Price equal to or less than federal supply services
established by the federal General Services Administration (I.C. 5-22-10-14).
            7.   Purchase is made from a person who has a contract with a
federal agency or state agency, and the person’s contract with the federal
agency or state agency requires the person to make the supplies available to
the state or political subdivisions (I.C. 5-22-10-15).
            8.   Transfer of supplies from federal government under I.C. 5-22-
10-16.
            9.   By accepting a gift (I.C. 5-22-10-17).
         (g)   Contract files. A purchasing agent shall maintain the contract
records for a special purchase in a separate file for a minimum of five years.
The file must include a written determination of the basis for the special
purchase and the selection of a particular contractor. These records are
subject to annual audit by the State Board of Accounts (I.C. 5-22-10-3).
   (J)   Contracts (I.C. 5-22-17).
      (1)   This section does not apply to a discounted contractual arrangement
for services or supplies funded through a designated leasing entity.
      (2)   A contract for supplies may be entered into for a period not to
exceed four years.
      (3)   The contract must specify that payment and performance obligations
are subject to the appropriation and availability of funds.
      (4)   Subject to limitations found in I.C. 5-22-17-4, a contract may be
renewed any number of times, for terms not longer than the original contract,
so long as the contract does not contain any provisions for escalation of the
price.
      (5)   Petroleum products. Pursuant to I.C. 5-22-17-10, a purchasing agent
may award a contract for petroleum product to the lowest responsible and
responsive offeror or all responsive and responsible offerors. Contracts
entered into under this section may allow for the escalation or de-escalation
of price.
      (6)   A cost plus a percentage of cost contracts are prohibited (I.C. 5-
22-17-1).
      (7)   A cost reimbursement contract is allowed if the purchasing agent
determines, in writing, that the contract is likely to be less costly than any
other contract type, or it is impracticable to obtain the supplies required
except under such a contract (I.C. 5-22-17-2).
      (8)   Late performance clauses are encouraged in all appropriate
situations so as to protect Warrick County’s interest. Notice of inclusion of
this contract provision must be stated in the solicitation (I.C. 5-22-17-6).
   (K)   Warrick County Department responsibilities.It is the responsibility of
each elected office holder and/or department head to ensure full compliance
with purchasing policies and procedures.
Each office holder or department head shall:
      (1)   Utilize the purchasing agent for all purchases of equipment, goods,
materials and services for Warrick County offices and departments;
      (2)   Plan purchasing needs on the basis of time and quantity to enhance
cost savings;
      (3)   Verify that sufficient funds are budgeted or make arrangements for
funding prior to initiating a purchase request; and
      (4)   Be available to participate in evaluating bids and request for
proposals when submitted by prospective bidders.
   (L)   Role of the Warrick County Purchasing Department. The Warrick County
Purchasing Department will facilitate efficient and legal purchasing practices
within Warrick County. The Warrick County Purchasing Department will ensure
that the purchasing policy and procedures of Warrick County are followed in the
procurement of equipment, goods, materials and services, and administers an
effective program that encourages free and open competition and bidding.
(CC Ord. 1998-6 and 1998-7, passed 6-22-98; BC Res. 2016-12, passed 11-28-16;
BC Ord. 2016-30, passed 12-12-16; BC Ord. 2017-26, passed 10-10-17; BC Ord.
2017-30, passed 11- 27-17; BC Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-11-24)
§ 31.09 EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK AMENDMENTS.
   The county shall charge any person who qualifies under § 4.14 of the
Employee Handbook to Benefits Continuation following termination, resignation,
death, reduction in the employees hours or a leave of absence, an employee’s
death or legal separation and a dependent child who no longer meets eligibility
requirements or any other qualifying event which permits such a person to
continue health coverage to pay in addition to the employer’s group rate an
administration fee of 2% of the group rate for the continued coverage.
(CC Res. 2001-08, passed 9-12-01)
§ 31.10 DISCLOSURE OF CONTRACTS WITH RELATIVES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ELECTED OFFICIAL. A County Commissioner or County Council member.
      RELATIVE. Any of the following: spouse, parent or stepparent, a child or
stepchild, brother, sister, stepbrother or stepsister, a niece or nephew, an
aunt or uncle, or a daughter-in-law or son-in-law. An adopted child of an
individual is treated as a natural child of the individual. The terms brother
and sister shall include a brother or sister by half blood (a common parent).
   (B)   Application to certain contracts.
      (1)   The county may enter into a contract or renew a contract for the
procurement of goods and services or a contract for public works with an
individual who is a relative of an elected official or a business entity that
is wholly or partially owned by a relative of an elected official only if
disclosure requirements under this section are satisfied.
      (2)   Contracts in existence at the time the term of office of the
elected official begins are not affected until those contracts are renewed.
   (C)   Disclosure of contracts with relatives.
      (1)   An elected official whose relative enters into a contract with the
county shall file a full disclosure of that contract.
      (2)   Disclosure statement must be in writing, describe the contract or
purchase to be made by the county, describe the relationship that the elected
official has to the individual or business entity that contracts or purchases,
and be affirmed under penalty of perjury.
      (3)   Disclosure statement must be submitted to the Board of County
Commissioners (County Council in Lake, St. Joseph and Marion Counties) and be
accepted by the Board (Council) in a public meeting prior to final action on
the contract or purchase.
      (4)   Disclosure statement must be filed not later than 15 days after
final action on the contract or purchase with the State Board of Accounts, and
the Warrick County Clerk of the Circuit Court.
   (D)   Actions by Board of Commissioners or appropriate agency. The Board of
County Commissioners or an appropriate agency of the county designated by the
Board of County Commissioners shall make a certified statement that the
contract amount or purchase price was the lowest amount or price bid or offered
or make a certified statement of the reasons why the vendor or contractor was
selected.
   (E)   Certification by elected officers of the county. Each elected officer
of the county shall annually certify in writing, subject to the penalties for
perjury, that the officer has not violated this section. An elected officer
shall submit the certification to the Board of County Commissioners not later
than December 31 of each year.
(BC Res. 2012-08, passed 6-11-12)
§ 31.11 NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and the enforcement of this section.
      DIRECT LINE OF SUPERVISION. An elected officer or employee who is in a
position to affect the terms and conditions of another individual’s employment,
including making decisions about work assignments, compensation, grievances,
advancement or performance evaluation. The term does not include the
responsibilities of the County Council or Board of County Commissioners to make
decisions regarding salary ordinances, budgets or personnel policies of the
county.
      EMPLOYED. An individual who is employed by the county on a full time,
part time, temporary, intermittent or hourly basis. The term does not include
an individual who holds only an elected office. The term includes an individual
who is a party to an employment contract with the county. The performance of
the duties of a precinct election officer (as defined in I.C. 3-5-2-40.1) shall
not be considered employment by the county.
      RELATIVE.
         (a)   Any of the following:
            1.   Spouse;
            2.   Parent or step parent;
            3.   A child or step child;
            4.   Brother, sister, step brother or step sister;
            5.   A niece or nephew;
            6.   An aunt or uncle; or
            7.   A daughter-in-law or son-in- law.
         (b)   An adopted child of an individual shall be treated as a natural
child of the individual. The terms BROTHER and SISTER shall include a brother
or sister by half blood (a common parent).
   (B)   Nepotism prohibited.
      (1)   Individuals who are relatives shall not be employed by the county
in a position that results in one relative being in the direct line of
supervision of the other relative.
      (2)   An individual shall not be promoted to a position if the new
position would cause their relative to be in the direct line of supervision of
that individual, unless that individual is otherwise exempt under I.C. 36-1-
20.2 et seq.
      (3)   This section does not abrogate or affect an employment contract
with the county that an individual is a party to and is in effect on the date
the individual’s relative begins serving a term of an elected office of the
county.
      (4)   This section does not apply to individuals who are employed by the
county on the date the individual’s relative begins serving a term of an
elected office in the county and the individual is in the direct line of
supervision of the newly elected official.
      (5)   This section does not apply to a spouse of the County Sheriff
employed by the county as prison matron for the county under I.C. 36-8-10-5.
      (6)   This section does not apply to an individual who served as County
Coroner, is currently ineligible to serve due to term limits under Article 6, §
2(b) of the State Constitution, has received certification under I.C. 36-2-14-
22.3, and whose successor in the office of County Coroner is a relative.
   (C)   Impact of section on those individuals employed by county on July 1,
2012. An individual who is employed by the county on July 1, 2012, is not
subject to this section unless the individual has a break in employment with
the county. The following are not considered a break in employment with the
county:
      (1)   The individual is absent from the workplace while on paid or unpaid
leave, including vacation, sick, or family medical leave, or worker’s
compensation.
      (2)   The individual’s employment with the unit is terminated followed by
immediate reemployment by the unit, without loss of payroll time.
   (D)   Certification by elected officers of the county. Each elected officer
of the county, exclusive of judges and the County Prosecutor, shall annually
certify in writing, subject to the penalties for perjury, that the officer has
not violated this section. An elected officer shall submit the certification to
the Board of County Commissioners not later than December 31 of each year.
(BC Res. 2012-07, passed 6-11-12; Am. BC Res. 2014-04, passed 2-10-14)
§ 31.12 CELL PHONE USAGE.
   Cell phones, service contracts and certain usage of said cell phones shall
be provided and paid for by the Commissioners for those county departments,
office holders and staff that the Commissioners may approve from time to time.
Basic equipment charges and cell phone services that are contracted for by the
Commissioners shall be paid by the Commissioners from their annual budget. Any
charges for equipment, services or other upgrades in addition to the contracted
for amount shall be the sole responsibility of the department or office holder
who elects such additional equipment or services.
(BC Res. 2014-10, passed 12-8-14)
§ 31.13 CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY AND MINIMUM THRESHOLD.
   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County, Indiana, hereby establishes a
conflicts of interest policy for all Warrick County officials and employees
wherein Warrick County officials and employees are bound by the duties of their
office or employment to avoid any and all conflicts of interest, but that the
dollar threshold of $200 is hereby established for any single event, meeting or
function, below which any financial interest or value of any gratuity is not
considered substantial and may be accepted.
(BC Ord. 2017-03, passed 2-27-17)
§ 31.14 USE OF COUNTY VEHICLES AND FRINGE BENEFIT POLICY.
   (A)   County vehicles in general. Warrick County owns various motor vehicles
and may from time to time in its discretion provide a motor vehicle to a county
employee to be utilized for county business. A Warrick County motor vehicle is
property of the county and an employee that is assigned to a county motor
vehicle is expected to follow all rules and regulations pertaining to the use
of that county owned motor vehicle including the duty to operate the motor
vehicle safely and according to all state and local laws, and to display
reasonable care and prudent behavior when operating and maintaining an assigned
county vehicle.
   (B)   Personal use of county vehicles; prohibitions. Personal use of a
Warrick County vehicle is defined as all use not for county business and
includes commuting to and from work on a daily basis even if the county
requires the employee to take the vehicle home. Under the Internal Revenue Code
and IRS rules and regulations, personal use of a county vehicle is a taxable
fringe benefit to the employee. It is the policy of Warrick County that
personal use of a county vehicle, other than commuting and other de minimis
personal use, is prohibited.
   (C)   Qualified non-personal use vehicles. All county vehicles which are
otherwise classified as qualified non-personal use vehicles, as that term is
defined in IRS Publication 15B and as designated by the County Commissioners,
are exempt from this section such that a county employee using such qualified
non-personal use vehicle may be eligible for a working condition benefit as
provided by law.
   (D)   Calculation of taxable fringe benefit to employee; commuting valuation
rule. Pursuant to IRC § 274 and Internal Revenue Service guidelines, as may be
amended from time to time, the commuting valuation rule may be utilized for
reporting of taxable value of employer provided take home vehicles. Warrick
County will add the personal value of a county provided vehicle to the taxable
wages of the employee and will so report that attributed income for tax
purposes for the daily round trip for the commutation of the employee from work
to home and from home to work on regularly-scheduled work days. Days not worked
including sick or vacation days, if reported on the employee’s salary schedule,
shall not have use imputed to them for those days off work.
(BC Ord. 2017-05, passed 3-13-17; Am. BC Ord. 2022-22, passed 9-12-22)
§ 31.15 PHOTO IDENTIFICATION POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   Each employee, regardless of department, office, or position, is
required to wear and/or carry on their person their official photo ID badge
during the employee's scheduled work hours. Employees are further encouraged to
wear their photo ID badges when present at official Warrick County functions,
such as Warrick County Commissioners meetings or Warrick County Council
meetings.
      (2)   Elected officials are also encouraged to participate in the
Personnel Photo Identification Badge Policy.
      (3)   However, an employee whose name and department or office are
displayed on their shirt is not required to display their photo ID badge, but
is nevertheless still required, during scheduled work hours, to carry their
photo ID badge on their person, such as in one's wallet or purse.
   (B)   An employee may request to have only their first name printed on the
front of his or her photo ID badge, so long as the employee's full name is
printed on the back of the photo ID badge. Such request can be made in advance
by the employee to the Sheriff’s Department Technician or the Emergency
Management Agency Office.
   (C)   Each employee is required to wear their photo ID badge on their upper
torso in a manner that makes the photo ID badge clearly visible to others. This
provision does not apply to an employee whose uniform or shirt clearly displays
the employee's name and department.
   (D)   Continued failure of an employee to wear and/or carry their photo ID
badge in accordance with this policy may result in disciplinary action against
the employee. Any disciplinary action taken against the employee under this
provision will be at the discretion of the employee's supervisor having
disciplinary authority.
   (E)   An employee is required to replace their lost, stolen, or damaged
photo ID badge as soon as is practicable. An employee whose photo ID badge is
lost, stolen, or damaged shall immediately notify the employee's supervisor.
The supervisor must then contact the Warrick County Sheriff’s Department or the
Emergency Management Agency Office to arrange for a replacement photo ID badge
to be issued to the employee. An employee required to replace their photo ID
badge shall be charged the following fee(s) for the replacement of the
employee's lost or damaged identification badge:
      (1)   There shall be no fee charged to an employee for the replacement of
employee's photo ID badge due to damage or wear and tear resulting from normal
use.
      (2)   Employee shall be charged $5 for the replacement of employee's lost
or stolen non-proximity badge.
      (3)   Employee shall be charged $15 for the replacement of employee's
lost or stolen proximity badge.
   (F)   An employee, or an employee's supervisor, may arrange for photos for
the employee's photo ID badge to be taken at, and the photo ID badge itself to
be issued from, either the Warrick County Sheriff’s Department or the Warrick
County Emergency Management Office. The county shall provide transportation to
the Sheriff’s Department or the EMA Office for any employee who requests such
transportation for the purpose of taking a photo for the employee's photo ID
badge.
(BC Res. 2018-07, passed 2-12-18)
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any elected official in elected offices or appointed superior in
appointed offices who violates §
31.01 shall, upon conviction thereof, have imposed a civil fine and be required
to pay the costs of the action. The fine for the first violation shall be $500.
The fine for the second or any subsequent violation shall be $2,500. Said
penalties shall not be suspended.
      (2)   Each day’s violation of §
31.01 shall constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   Jurisdiction for the enforcement of §
31.01 shall lie either with the circuit or superior courts.
      (4)   Actions to enforce the penalties of §
31.01 shall be brought in the name of the county and prosecuted by either the
County Prosecuting Attorney or the County Attorney as directed by the Board of
Commissioners.
(BC Ord. CO-1982-1, passed 10-15-82)
CHAPTER 32: SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT
Section
   
32.01   Police reserves
   
32.02   Vehicle inspection fees
   
32.03   Sheriff’s Sale Program and service fee
   
32.04   Sex and Violent Offender Administration Fund
   
32.05   Convicted inmate booking fee
   
32.06   Appointment of Sheriff’s deputies
§ 32.01 POLICE RESERVES.
   (A)   There is hereby established, pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3-20, the County
Sheriff’s Reserves, which shall be known as the Sheriff’s Reserve Unit.
   (B)   The maximum members of said reserve unit shall be 25.
   (C)   The Sheriff’s Department shall establish rules defining the authority
of said police reserves prior to the appointment of any members to said unit.
(BC Ord. CO-1982-2, passed 12-6-82; Am. BC Ord. 2011-21, passed 9-12-11)
§ 32.02 VEHICLE INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a fee for any vehicle inspection made by the
Sheriff’s Department, or any member thereof, pursuant to I.C. 9-29-4-2. Such
fee shall be payable by the person requesting such inspection, and it shall be
paid at the time the inspection is made. Upon payment of such fee, the person
making an inspection shall issue a receipt therefor.
   (B)   The amount of the fee established in division (A) above shall be $5.
In addition, in the event that arrangements are made for an inspection other
than at the Sheriff’s Department, and in the event that either the vehicle to
be inspected or the person requesting such inspection is unavailable at the
time and place agreed for the inspection, then the fee shall nonetheless be
payable whether or not the inspection is completed. An additional fee shall be
payable at any subsequent time at which the inspection is actually made.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed to require the County Sheriff or any
member of the County Sheriff’s Department to travel to any location out of the
county to make any such inspection.
   (D)   All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be payable to the
county; shall be delivered forthwith upon receipt to the office of the County
Auditor; and shall be deposited by the Auditor in the County Sheriff’s
Department Vehicle Inspection Fund to be expended therefrom for equipment for
the Sheriff’s Department or Sheriff’s Department personnel.
(BC Ord. 1988-10, passed 4-25-88)
§ 32.03 SHERIFF’S SALE PROGRAM AND SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   The Sheriff’s Sale Program is approved and established to provide the
procedure for the Sheriff to contract for those administrative, technical,
clerical and related services that are reasonable and appropriate for the
Sheriff to effectively prepare for, manage and implement foreclosure sales.
   (B)   The Commissioners hereby establish a fund to be titled the Sheriff’s
Sale Fund into which all collections of Foreclosure Costs Fees, as hereafter
defined, shall be deposited and from which the appropriate expenses of the
Sheriff’s Sale Program shall be appropriated and paid. In consideration of the
substantial amount of travel and vehicle expenses incurred by the Sheriff as
part of the administration of the program, appropriate expenses of the
Sheriff’s Sale Program shall include expenses related to vehicle purchase and
maintenance and fuel. The Sheriff’s Sale Fund shall be a non-reverting fund to
be used only for the purposes set forth herein and shall not revert to the
County General Fund at year end.
   (C)   The Sheriff is authorized to negotiate and execute a contract with a
provider to obtain such administrative, technical, clerical and related
services (the “Sheriff’s Sale Program Agreement”) in order for the Sheriff to
conduct the Sheriff’s Sale Program.
   (D)   The Sheriff’s Sale Program Agreement shall provide for the delivery of
such services by a contractor in compliance with all applicable statutory
provisions for the conduct of foreclosure sale proceedings and the Sheriff’s
Sale Program. The Sheriff’s Sale Program Agreement shall also provide for the
payment of an administrative fee pursuant to I.C. 32-29-7-3(c) and (h), not to
exceed $200 per parcel for each parcel scheduled in the Sheriffs Sale Program,
to the contractor for such services.
   (E)   The Sheriff is hereby authorized to charge a fee of $200 per parcel of
property in the Sheriff’s Sale Program and to deposit such foreclosure costs
fees collected by or on behalf of the Sheriff in the Sheriff’s Sale Fund.
   (F)   The foreclosure costs fee shall be payable at the time of filing the
praecipe under I.C. 32-29-7-3(h), which shall be a charge for the Sheriff’s
Sale in addition to other statutory costs and fees.
   (G)   The Sheriff’s Sale Program Agreement shall provide for a complete and
accurate accounting of all Sheriff’s Sale Program proceeds and compliance with
any reporting or record requirements as set forth by the Indiana State Board of
Accounts.
(BC Ord. 2005-17, passed 8-24-05; Am. BC Ord. 2012-29, passed 9-24-12)
§ 32.04 SEX AND VIOLENT OFFENDER ADMINISTRATION FUND.
   (A)   Established. Pursuant to I.C. 36-2-13-5.6, the County Board of
Commissioners hereby establishes the “Warrick County Sex and Violent Offender
Administration Fund.” The purpose of the fund is to defray the expense of
administering and/or enforcing compliance with the laws concerning the Indiana
Sex and Violent Offender Registry.
   (B)   Fees.
      (1)   Registration fee. The annual fee for sex or violent offenders
registering in the county shall be $50. Payment of the fee shall be made upon
the offender's initial registration in the county and subsequently on or before
each annual registration date.
      (2)   Change of address fee. A fee of $5 shall be charged and collected
each time a sex or violent offender registers an address change with the County
Sheriff’s Office.
   (C)   Payment of fees. All fees collected under this section shall be
collected by the County Sheriff’s Office when a sex or violent offender
registers and/or changes an address with the County Sheriff’s Office.
   (D)   Procedures. All fees collected under this section by the County
Sheriff’s Office shall be transferred to the County Auditor in a timely manner.
On a monthly basis, the County Auditor shall:
      (1)   Transfer and deposit 90% of any fees collected under this section
into the County Sex and Violent Administration Fund; and
      (2)   Transfer 10% of any fees collected under this section to the state
for deposit in the State Sex and Violent Offender Administration Fund under
I.C. 11-8-8-21.
(BC Ord. 2015-10, passed 4-13-15)
Cross-reference:
   Funds and fees, see
Ch. 37
§ 32.05 CONVICTED INMATE BOOKING FEE.
   (A)   A booking fee of $50 is hereby established for those persons lodged in
the Warrick County Jail who have been convicted in the Warrick County Circuit
or Superior Court for a crime for which the person is to be incarcerated or
held in the Warrick County Jail.
   (B)   The booking fee collected by the Warrick County Sheriff’s Office shall
be deposited into the county’s general revenue account under the Sheriff’s
booking fee line item to help pay for the medical expenses for inmates lodged
in the Warrick County Jail.
   (C)   Fees deposited into the county’s general revenue account under the
Sheriff’s booking fee line item shall be used by the Warrick County Sheriffs
Office to help cover medical expenses for inmates lodged in the Warrick County
Jail, including but not limited to, the purchase of supplies, equipment or for
training purposes as deemed necessary by the Warrick County Sheriff’s Office.
   (D)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage by the Warrick County Board of Commissioners and following publication
of the same in accordance with I.C. §§ 5-3-1 et seq.
(BC Ord. 2016-20, passed 10-10-16)
§ 32.06 APPOINTMENT OF SHERIFF'S DEPUTIES.
   (A)   That a public safety emergency exists pursuant to I.C. 36-8-10-6 due
to the exhaustion of the pool of qualified candidates for deputies of the
Warrick County Sheriffs Department where the Warrick County Sheriff is hereby
granted emergency powers to appoint qualified deputy candidates pursuant to
statute until the Warrick County Sheriff deems the emergency to end;
   (B)   The powers granted the Warrick County Sheriff is made to promote
public safety and conserve the peace; to repress, prevent, and detect crime;
and to apprehend criminals;
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County authorize the Warrick
County Sheriff to expend already budgeted funds from the Warrick County
Sheriffs Department current year budget for the deputy salaries for the
individuals so appointed by the Sheriff, and authorizes the Sheriff to
encourage the deputies so appointed to apply through the normal employment
process for probationary employment as soon as the Warrick County Sheriff
determines the emergency has ended; and
   (D)   The Warrick County Sheriff shall immediately report to the Board of
Commissioners when the emergency has ended at which time the powers granted in
this section shall terminate.
(BC Res. 2017-05, passed 1-23-17)
CHAPTER 33: OTHER DEPARTMENTS, COUNCILS AND COMMITTEES
Section
Department of Parks and Recreation
   
33.01   Establishment
   
33.02   Definitions
   
33.03   Composition of Board; appointment of members
   
33.04   Rules regarding appointments and terms of office
   
33.05   Compensation
   
33.06   Election of officers
   
33.07   Operation of the Board
   
33.08   Powers and duties of Board
   
33.09   Creation of Advisory Council
   
33.10   Appointment of Superintendent of Parks and Recreation
   
33.11   Appointment of assistants to the Superintendent
   
33.12   Acceptance, deposit and disbursements of gifts, donations and subsidies
Department of Redevelopment
   
33.25   Establishment; redevelopment district
Economic Development Advisory Council
   
33.35   Creation
   
33.36   Members
   
33.37   Officers
   
33.38   Funds
   
33.39   By-laws and guidelines
   
33.40   Purposes
   
33.41   Training grant program
Warrick County Court House Preservation Committee
   
33.50   Creation
   
33.51   Purpose
   
33.52   Members
Sheriff’s Merit Board
   
33.60   Membership of Merit Board
   
33.61   Restrictions on membership to Merit Board
   
33.62   Compensation for members of Merit Board
   
33.63   Positions held on Merit Board
   
33.64   Meeting requirements of Merit Board
   
33.65   Promotion of retiring sheriff
   
33.66   Disciplinary procedures
   
33.67   Exceptions to disciplinary proceedings
   
33.68   Appeal of Merit Board decision
   
33.69   Subpoena powers of Merit Board
   
33.70   Consideration of political affiliation prohibited
   
33.71   Classification of ranks of county police officers
   
33.72   Rules and regulations
   
33.73   Sheriff’s authority
Department of Stormwater Management
   
33.80   Establishment
   
33.81   Composition
   
33.82   Terms of office
   
33.83   Compensation
   
33.84   Utility district created
   
33.85   Funding
   
33.86   Fees established
   
33.87   Budget
Warrick County Tourism Commission
   
33.90   Establishment of Warrick County Tourism Commission
   
33.91   Nomination of Commission members
   
33.92   Commission membership
   
33.93   Terms of office of Commission members
   
33.94   Removal of Commission members for cause
   
33.95   Reimbursement of Commission members
   
33.96   Powers of Commission
   
33.97   Oath of Commission members
   
33.98   Annual organization meetings of Commission
   
33.99   Purposes of the Commission
   
33.100   Awarding of grants
   
33.101   Quarterly report to the Commissioners and budget
Warrick County Public Defender Board
   
33.110   Establishment of Warrick County Public Defender Board
   
33.111   Definitions
   
33.112   Board membership and appointment
   
33.113   Term of appointment
   
33.114   Meetings of the Board
   
33.115   Reimbursement for expenses
   
33.116   Powers and duties of the Board
   
33.117   Appointment and duties of Warrick County Public Defender
   
33.118   Private contracts
   
33.119   Public Defender Department established
   
33.120   Public Defender Fund
   
33.121   Council statutory powers
Cross-reference:
   Construction site and post-construction site stormwater control, see
Ch. 54
   Illicit discharge and connection, see
Ch. 53
   Sheriff’s Department, see §
32.01 et seq.
   Stormwater management, see
Ch. 52
   Stormwater utility rates, see
Ch. 55
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-3 (A), there is hereby established a Department of
Parks and Recreation, composed of the Board of Parks and Recreation, and such
other personnel as the Board shall determine.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. Board of Parks and Recreation.
   COUNCIL. Advisory Council.
   DEPARTMENT. Department of Parks and Recreation.
   HIS. Refers to both the male and the female possessory.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Parks and Recreation.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.03 COMPOSITION OF BOARD; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall be composed of five members
who have been selected on the basis of their interest in and knowledge of parks
and recreation.
   (B)   The Board shall be appointed in the following manner:
      (1)   The Circuit Court Judge of the county shall appoint two members,
each affiliated with a different political party.
      (2)   The County Commissioners shall appoint one member.
      (3)   The County Council shall appoint two members each affiliated with a
different political party.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.04 RULES REGARDING APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The rules regarding the appointment and terms of Parks and Recreation Board
members are as follows:
   (A)   In initially appointing members to the Board, the appointing
authorities should give special consideration to members of previous park and
recreation boards, in order to provide continuity of experience and programs.
   (B)   An appointing authority shall make initial appointments within 90 days
after the creation of the Board.
   (C)   Neither a municipal executive nor a member of a county fiscal body,
county executive, or municipal fiscal body may serve on a Board.
   (D)   The terms of the members initially appointed shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Circuit Court Judge's appointments are for one and three years
respectively.
      (2)   The County Commissioners' appointment is for a two-year term.
      (3)   The County Councils' appointments are for two- and four-year terms
respectively.
   (E)   All terms expire on the first Monday in January, but a member
continues in office until his successor is appointed.
   (F)   If an appointment for any term is not made by the first Monday in
April, the incumbent shall serve another term.
   (G)   As a term expires, each new appointment is for a four-year term.
   (H)   If a vacancy on the Board occurs, the appointing authority shall
appoint a person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.05 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Board of Parks and Recreation shall be compensated
consistent with I.C. 36-10-3-9.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.06 ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall elect its officers in the following
manner:
   (A)   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board shall elect a
President and a Vice-President.
   (B)   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board shall select a
Secretary either from within or outside its membership.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.07 OPERATION OF THE BOARD.
   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall conduct its business in the
following manner:
   (A)   All meetings of the Board are open to the public.
   (B)   The Board shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings. The
Board shall at least meet quarterly.
   (C)   The Vice-President shall act as President during the President's
absence or disability.
   (D)   A majority of the Board members constitutes a quorum. Action of the
Board is not official unless it is authorized by at least three members present
and acting.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.08 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.
   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall have the general power to perform
all acts necessary to acquire and develop sights and facilities to conduct such
programs as are generally understood to be park and recreation functions. The
Board's powers and duties shall include those listed in I.C. 36-10-3-10, 36-10-
3-11 and 36-10-3-12.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.09 CREATION OF ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   The Board of Parks and Recreation may create an Advisory Council in the
following manner:
   (A)   The Council should be composed of citizens interested in parks and
recreation.
   (B)   In selecting the Council's members, the Board shall give special
consideration to the groups in the community particularly interested in parks
and recreation.
   (C)   The Board, in its resolution creating the Council, shall specify the
terms of its members and the purposes for which it is created.
   (D)   The Council shall conduct its business in accordance with I.C. 36-10-
3-17 (C) and (D).
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.10 APPOINTMENT OF SUPERINTEN- DENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   The Board of Parks and Recreation may appoint a Superintendent of Parks and
Recreation in the following manner:
   (A)   The Board, in selecting a Superintendent, may not consider political
affiliation.
   (B)   The Superintendent must be qualified by training or experience in the
field of parks and recreation; or, have a certification or an advanced degree
in the field of parks and recreation.
   (C)   The Superintendent shall perform his powers and duties in accordance
with I.C. 36-10-3-14.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.11 APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANTS TO THE SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Board of Parks and Recreation may appoint assistants to the
Superintendent in the following manner:
   (A)   If the Board determines that the size of the Department's operation
requires assistants for the Superintendent, the Board, upon the recommendation
of the Superintendent, may appoint one or more assistants.
   (B)   The Board shall use the criteria used for selecting Superintendents,
when appointing assistants.
   (C)   Assistants are directly responsible to the Superintendent and shall
perform the duties specified by the Superintendent.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
§ 33.12 ACCEPTANCE, DEPOSIT AND DISBURSEMENTS OF GIFTS, DONATIONS AND
SUBSIDIES.
   The Board of Parks and Recreation may accept gifts, donations and subsidies
in the following manner:
   (A)   The gifts, donations and subsidies must be for park and recreational
purposes.
   (B)   A gift or transfer of property to the Board may not be made without
its approval.
   (C)   A gift or grant of money shall be deposited in a special non-reverting
fund to be available for expenditure by the Board for purposes specified by the
grantor.
   (D)   The Disbursing Officer of the Board may draw warrants against the fund
only upon vouchers signed by the President and Secretary of the Board.
(CC Ord. PB-1982-1, passed 11-18-82)
DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT
§ 33.25 ESTABLISHMENT; REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby establishes a Department of
Redevelopment of the county. The Department will be controlled by a board of
seven members known as the County Redevelopment Commission pursuant to I.C. 36-
7-14-3(a).
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14-3(b) all of the territory within the
boundaries of the county, except that territory within a municipality that has
a redevelopment commission, constitutes the taxing district to be known as the
redevelopment district of the county for the purpose of levying and collecting
special benefit taxes for purposes as provided in the Act. All of the taxable
property within this special taxing district will be benefited by the projects
carried out under the Act to the extent of the special taxes levied under the
Act.
(BC Ord. 1990-27, passed 12-3-90; Am. BC Ord. 2005-14, passed 8-17-05)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 33.35 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a County Economic Development Advisory Council to
continue forward after the expiration of Warrick County Commissioners
Resolution No. 1989-10 and Warrick County Council No. 1989-2.
(BC Res. 1990-16, passed 12-3-90; Am. CC Res. 1990-1, passed 12-6-90)
§ 33.36 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Economic Development Advisory Council shall consist of not more
than 12 voting members and one non-voting ex officio member.
   (B)   The Economic Development Advisory Council (EDAC) shall be composed of
voting members including the President of the Board of Commissioners, or his or
her designee; and ten civilian representatives selected as follows: The five
civilian members of the Warrick Redevelopment Commission, shall be appointed
solely by the Board of Commissioners. Five civilian members of the EDAC shall
be appointed solely by the County Council, and five civilian members of the
EDAC shall be appointed solely by the Board of Commissioners. The five
appointees of the Board of Commissioners, any or all, may be members of the
Redevelopment Commission at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners. The
attorney representing the county shall sit as a non- voting ex officio member.
The terms of the civilian members of the EDAC shall be for a period of two
years, commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31 two years
subsequent. The terms of the civilian members of the EDAC shall be staggered as
follows:
      (1)   The five civilian members appointed by the Board of Commissioners
shall commence on January 1, 2002, and terminate on December 31, 2003; and
      (2)   The five civilian members appointed by the County Council shall
commence on January 1, 2003, and terminate on December 31, 2004.
(BC Res. 1990-16, passed 12-3-90; Am. CC Res. 1990-1, passed 12-6-90; Am. CC
Res. 1998-3, passed 1-8-98; Am. BC Res. 1998-3, passed 1-12-98; Am. CC Res.
2002-01, passed 2-13-02; Am. BC Res. 2002-03, passed 2-13-02)
 
§ 33.37 OFFICERS.
   The Economic Development Council shall select from the civilian appointed
members such officers as said council shall deem, from time to time, necessary
to carry out the purposes of said council as hereinafter provided.
(BC Res. 1990-16, passed 12-3-90; Am. CC Res. 1990-1, passed 12-6-90)
§ 33.38 FUNDS.
   The Board of Commissioners and County Council shall establish and
appropriate, in their respective roles, sufficient funds necessary as said
Board of Commissioners and County Council deem appropriate for the Economic
Development Advisory Council to carry out the responsibility charged to it.
(BC Res. 1990-16, passed 12-3-90; Am. CC Res. 1990-1, passed 12-6-90)
§ 33.39 BY-LAWS AND GUIDELINES.
   The Economic Development Advisory Council may, as it deems necessary
establish such rules, by- laws and guidelines as it my deem necessary and
appropriate to carry out the responsibilities charged to it. The rules, by-laws
and guidelines shall be subject to approval of the Board of Commissioners and
the County Council.
(BC Res. 1990-16, passed 12-3-90; Am. CC Res. 1990-1, passed 12-6-90)
§ 33.40 PURPOSES.
   The Economic Development Advisory Council shall have as its primary purpose
of advising the Board of Commissioners and the County Council in their efforts
for improving the economic welfare of the county and shall have as specific
purposes the following:
   (A)   The providing of overall advice in conceiving, development and
implementing a program of diversified economic growth by recruiting prospective
businesses and industries to locate in the county.
   (B)   The providing of advice to the Board of Commissioners and County
Council in the promotion of retention of existing businesses and industries by
establishing and maintaining contact that insure candid discussions and open
communications to help in the early identification of problems and permit
timely action toward resolution of said problems.
   (C)   By monitoring programs on an annual basis utilizing compiled and other
statistical data and recommendations for the implementations of plans for
appropriate modifications.
   (D)   To assure a high visibility for the county economic development
actions and accomplishments through personal participation in local and area
community, social and professional activities that effect or can effect the
economic climate of the county.
   (E)   To work in conjunction with the county employees and specifically the
County Director for Economic Development to accomplish the aforementioned
general and specific objectives.
   (F)   To act as a screening entity to review applicants for the position of
County Director for Economic Development and to make recommendations as to the
three most qualified applicants for said position upon the request of the Board
of Commissioners and County Council.
   (G)   To work with and assist, when requested, the Economic Development
Authority in its endeavors.
(BC Res. 1990-16, passed 12-3-90; Am. CC Res. 1990-1, passed 12-6-90)
§ 33.41 TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The county hereby approves and enacts a County Grant Training Program
for the purpose of assisting with the recruitment of new industries and the
expansion of existing ones and to further the hiring of county residents.
   (B)   The Training Grant Program shall be developed and implemented by the
County Department of Economic Development within the parameters set forth.
(BC Ord. 2000-21, passed 9-13-00)
WARRICK COUNTY COURT HOUSE PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
§ 33.50 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a County Court House Preservation Committee
consisting of ten persons appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
(BC Res. 1991-2, passed 1-1-91, Am. Res. 1998-11, passed 8-24-98)
§ 33.51 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the County Court House Preservation Committee shall be to
investigate the present county court house and to make recommendations to the
Board of Commissioners regarding necessary improvements to the court house for
the purpose of preserving the historical significance of said building and to
provide adequate office space for county governmental offices.
(BC Res. 1991-2, passed 1-1-91)
§ 33.52 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The term of office for the members of the County Court House
Preservation Committee shall be one year from the date of their appointment and
until their successors are appointed and qualified.
   (B)   All members of the County Court House Preservation Committee shall be
residents of Warrick County, Indiana.
(BC Res. 1991-2, passed 1-1-91)
SHERIFF’S MERIT BOARD
§ 33.60 MEMBERSHIP OF MERIT BOARD.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of five members. Three members shall be
appointed by the Sheriff, and two members shall be elected by a majority vote
of the members of the county police force under procedures established by the
Sheriff’s Merit Board.
   (B)   Appointments are for terms of four years or for the remainder of an
unexpired term.
   (C)   All members serve during their respective terms and until their
successors have been appointed and qualified.
   (D)   A member may be removed for cause duly adjudicated by declaratory
judgment of the Circuit Court of the county.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.61 RESTRICTIONS ON MEMBERSHIP TO MERIT BOARD.
   (A)   No active county police officer may serve on the Board.
   (B)   Not more than two of the members appointed by the Sheriff nor more
than one of the members elected by the officers may belong to the same
political party.
   (C)   All members must reside in the county.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.62 COMPENSATION FOR MEMBERS OF MERIT BOARD.
   As compensation for service, each member of the Board is entitled to receive
from the county a minimum of $15 per day for each day, or fraction of a day,
that the member is engaged in transacting the business of the Board.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.63 POSITIONS HELD ON MERIT BOARD.
   As soon as practicable after the members of the Board have been appointed,
they shall meet upon the call of the Sheriff and organize by electing a
President and a Secretary from among their membership.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.64 MEETING REQUIREMENTS OF MERIT BOARD.
   (A)   The Board shall hold regular monthly meetings throughout the year as
is necessary to transact the business of the Sheriffs’ Office.
   (B)   Three members of the Board constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
   (C)   To comply with Indiana's Open Door Law, all meetings must be open to
the public at all times for the purpose of permitting members of the public to
observe and record them.
      (1)   A secret ballot vote may not be taken at meetings.
      (2)   However, a meeting conducted in compliance with I.C. 5-1.5-2-2.5
does not violate this section.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.65 PROMOTION OF RETIRING SHERIFF.
   The Merit Board may develop its own reasonable procedures and qualifications
to govern the promotion of a retiring Sheriff. The Merit Board is not required
to follow the competitive testing procedures under I.C. 36-8-10-10 if the Merit
Board has developed its own procedures.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.66 DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES.
   Charges against a county police officer must be made in writing and the
Merit Board must conduct a fair public hearing before the Sheriff may dismiss,
demote, or temporarily suspend a county police officer for cause.
   (A)   Written notice of the charges and hearing must be delivered by
certified mail to the officer to be disciplined at least 14 days before the
date set for the hearing.
   (B)   The officer may be represented by counsel.
   (C)   The Merit Board shall make specific findings of fact in writing to
support its decision.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.67 EXCEPTIONS TO DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   The Sheriff may temporarily suspend an officer with or without pay for
a period not exceeding 15 days, without a hearing before the Merit Board, after
preferring charges of misconduct in writing delivered to the officer. The
decision of the Sheriff is nonreviewable.
   (B)   An officer on probation may be dismissed by the Sheriff without a
right to a hearing.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.68 APPEAL OF MERIT BOARD DECISION.
   (A)   An appeal under §
33.66 must be taken by filing in court, within 30 days after the date the
decision is rendered, a verified complaint stating in a concise manner the
general nature of the charges against the officer, the decision of the Board,
and a demand for the relief asserted by the officer.
      (1)   A bond must also be filed that guarantees the appeal will be
prosecuted to a final determination and that the plaintiff will pay all costs
only if the court finds that the Board's decision should be affirmed. The bond
must be approved as bonds for costs are approved in other cases.
      (2)   The county must be named as the sole defendant and the plaintiff
shall have a summons issued as in other cases against the county.
      (3)   Neither the Merit Board nor the members of it may be made parties
defendant to the complaint, but all are bound by service upon the county and
the judgment rendered by the court.
   (B)   All appeals shall be tried by the court. The appeal shall be heard de
novo only upon any new issues related to the charges upon which the decision of
the Merit Board was made.
   (C)   Within ten days after the service of summons, the board shall file in
court a complete written transcript of all papers, entries, and other parts of
the record relating to the particular case.
   (D)   Inspection of these documents by the person affected, or by the
person's agent, must be permitted by the Merit Board before the appeal is
filed, if requested.
   (E)   The court shall review the record and decision of the board on appeal.
   (F)   The court shall make specific findings and state the conclusions of
law upon which its decision is made.
      (1)   If the court finds that the decision of the Merit Board appealed
from should in all things be affirmed, its judgment should so state.
      (2)   If the court finds that the decision of the Merit Board appealed
from should not be affirmed in all things, then the court shall make a general
finding, setting out sufficient facts to show the nature of the proceeding and
the court's decision on it.
      (3)   The court shall either:
         (a)   Reverse the decision of the Merit Board; or
         (b)   Order the decision of the Merit Board to be modified.
   (G)   The final judgment of the court may be appealed by either party. Upon
the final disposition of the appeal by the courts, the Clerk shall certify and
file a copy of the final judgment of the court to the Board, which shall
conform its decisions and records to the order and judgment of the court.
   (H)   If the decision is reversed or modified, then the Merit Board shall
pay to the party entitled to it any salary or wages withheld from the party
pending the appeal and to which the party is entitled under the judgment of the
court.
   (I)   Either party shall be allowed a change of venue from the court or a
change of judge in the same manner as such changes are allowed in civil cases.
   (J)   The rules of trial procedure govern in all matters of procedure upon
the appeal that are not otherwise provided for by this section.
   (K)   An appeal takes precedence over other pending litigation and shall be
tried and determined by the court as soon as practical.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.69 SUBPOENA POWERS OF MERIT BOARD.
   The Merit Board has subpoena powers enforceable by the circuit court for
hearings under §§
33.66 through 33.68.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.70 CONSIDERATION OF POLITICAL AFFILIATION PROHIBITED.
   A county police officer may not be dismissed, demoted, or temporarily
suspended because of political affiliation nor after the officer's probationary
period, except as provided in this section. An officer may:
   (A)   Be a candidate for elective office and serve in that office if
elected;
   (B)   Be appointed to an office and serve in that office if appointed; and
   (C)   Except when in uniform or on duty, solicit votes or campaign funds for
the officer or others.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.71 CLASSIFICATION OF RANKS FOR COUNTY POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Sheriff, with the approval of the Merit Board, shall establish a
classification of ranks, grades, and positions for county police officers in
the department. For each rank, grade, and position established, the Sheriff,
with the approval of the Merit Board, shall:
      (1)   Set reasonable standards of qualifica- tions; and
      (2)   Fix the prerequisites of:
         (a)   Training;
         (b)   Education; and
         (c)   Experience.
   (B)   The Sheriff, with the approval of the Merit Board, shall devise and
administer examinations designed to test applicants for the qualifications
required for the respective ranks, grades, or positions.
      (1)   After these examinations, the Sheriff and the Merit Board shall
jointly prepare a list naming only those applicants who, in the opinion of both
the Sheriff and the merit board, best meet the prescribed standards and
prerequisites.
      (2)   The Sheriff appoints county police officers but only from among the
persons whose names appear on this list.
      (3)   All county police officers appointed to the office under this
chapter are on probation for a period of one year from the date of appointment.
   (C)   However, the Sheriff does not need the Merit Board's approval to do
the following:
      (1)   Establish a temporary administrative rank or position within the
county police department; or
      (2)   Appoint a county police officer that has served as a county police
officer for at least five years to and remove a county police officer from a
temporary administrative rank or position. Any temporary administrative rank or
position established pursuant to this section shall not diminish or reduce the
number and classifications of the existing merit ranks within the county police
department.
         (a)   A county police officer appointed under this subsection must
have served as a county police officer in the county police department for at
least five years before the appointment.
         (b)   A county police officer retains the rank, grade, or position
awarded under division (B) while serving in a temporary administrative rank or
position.
         (c)   This division may not be construed to limit, modify, annul, or
otherwise affect a collective bargaining agreement.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.72 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Sheriff, with the approval of the Merit Board, shall establish written
rules and regulations governing the discipline of county police officers. Rules
and regulations established by a Sheriff under this subsection must conform to
the disciplinary procedures required by §
33.66 [I.C. 36-8-10-11] of this chapter.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
§ 33.73 SHERIFF’S AUTHORITY.
   The Sheriff shall have continuing authority to establish rules and
regulations of the Sheriff’s Office. The Sheriff shall also have continuing
authority over supervision and management of all personnel and operations of
the Sheriff’s Office.
(CC Ord. 2004-05, passed 9-2-04)
DEPARTMENT OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 33.80 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Indiana Code 8-1.5-5 et seq. concerning Stormwater Management Systems
is hereby adopted by the County Commissioners, so as to make the Act and any
and all amendments thereto effective and operative in the county.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5, a Department of Stormwater Management is
hereby created.
(BC Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-26-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-19, passed 5-29-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2012-27, passed 8-27-12)
§ 33.81 COMPOSITION.
   Pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5-4.5, the Board of Directors of the Department of
Stormwater Management shall be the following four members: the three members of
the County Executive and the County Surveyor.
(BC Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-26-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-19, passed 5-29-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2012-27, passed 8-27-12)
§ 33.82 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The term of office of a member of the Board who is appointed from the
membership of the County Executive is coextensive with the member's term of
office on the County Executive.
   (B)   The term of the Surveyor or the Surveyor's designee as a member of the
Board is coextensive with the Surveyor's term of office.
(BC Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-26-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-19, passed 5-29-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2012-27, passed 8-27-12)
§ 33.83 COMPENSATION.
   Pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5-4.5(d), a member of the Board of Directors is not
entitled to a salary or per diem for serving on the Board. However, a member
shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred by the member in the
performance of their official duties.
(BC Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-26-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-19, passed 5-29-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2012-27, passed 8-27-12)
§ 33.84 UTILITY DISTRICT CREATED.
   Pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5, there is hereby created a utility district which
shall include all of the territory within the corporate boundaries of the
county that is not located in a municipality.
(BC Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-26-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-19, passed 5-29-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2012-27, passed 8-27-12)
§ 33.85 FUNDING.
   Funding for the Department of Stormwater Management's activities may
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Stormwater user's fees.
   (B)   Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or arising from the
violation of the county's stormwater management ordinances.
   (C)   Soil and erosion control plan permit fees.
   (D)   Compliance inspection fees.
   (E)   Taxes levied pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5 or other relevant authority.
   (F)   Revenue bonds issued pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-5.
   (G)   Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local, and/or
private sources as provided by law or from grants, or revolving funds.
(BC Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-26-06; Am. SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07; Am. BC
Ord. 2012-19, passed 5-29-12; Am. BC Ord. 2012-27, passed 8-27-12)
§ 33.86 FEES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Stormwater user's fee established.
      (1)   There shall be imposed on each and every property in the county
outside of a municipality, except exempt property, a stormwater user's fee,
which shall be set from time to time by ordinance or resolution, and in the
manner and amount prescribed by this subchapter.
      (2)   Prior to establishing or amending user's fees, the county shall
advertise its intent to do so by publishing notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county pursuant to I.C. 5-3-1.
   (B)   Soil and erosion control plan permit fee.
      (1)   There shall be imposed on each and every property being developed
in the town, a soil and erosion control plan permit fee, which shall be set
from time to time by ordinance or resolution, and in the manner and amount
prescribed by this subchapter.
      (2)   Prior to establishing or amending the soil and erosion control plan
permit fee, the county shall advertise its intent to do so by publishing notice
in a newspaper of general circulation in the county pursuant to I.C. 5-3-1.
   (C)   Compliance inspection fee.
      (1)   There shall be imposed on each and every property in the county
outside of a municipality, a compliance inspection fee, for inspections
necessitated because of a violation of any provision of this subchapter, which
shall be set from time to time by ordinance or resolution, and in the manner
and amount prescribed by this chapter.
      (2)   Prior to establishing or amending the compliance inspection fee,
the county shall advertise its intent to do so by publishing notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 30 days in advance of
the meeting pursuant to I.C. 5-3-1.
(BC Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-26-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-19, passed 5-29-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2012-27, passed 8-27-12)
§ 33.87 BUDGET.
   (A)   The Stormwater Management Board shall prepare a budget for the
operation of the Department on an annual basis. The budget shall set forth the
estimated revenues and costs for operations and maintenance, extension and
replacement, debt and other revenue and costs provided by law. The budget shall
contain funds to maintain the Indiana Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4) – NPDES Permitting Program 327 IAC 15-13 and shall include but not
limited to:
      (1)   General administration;
      (2)   Public education and outreach;
      (3)   Public participation and involvement;
      (4)   Illicit discharge detection and elimination;
      (5)   Construction site runoff control;
      (6)   Post-construction site runoff control;
      (7)   Pollution prevention and good housekeeping; and
      (8)   Tracking and monitoring stormwater quantity into the sanitary storm
sewer system and into county legal drains.
   (B)   The budget shall be subject to approval by the County Council and any
issuance of bonds or other methods for making capital improvements shall be
approved by the Stormwater Management Board and the County Council as provided
by law.
(BC Ord. 2006-12, passed 7-26-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-19, passed 5-29-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2012-27, passed 8-27-12)
WARRICK COUNTY TOURISM COMMISSION
§ 33.90 ESTABLISHMENT OF WARRICK COUNTY TOURISM COMMISSION.
   There is hereby established a Warrick County Tourism Commission
(hereinafter, the “Commission”) to promote, assist and encourage the
development and growth of the convention, visitor, recreation and tourism
industries in Warrick County, Indiana.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.91 NOMINATION OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of nine members who shall be nominated as
follows:
      (1)   Four members shall be nominated by the Board of Commissioners of
Warrick County, with no more than three members affiliated with the same
political party;
      (2)   Three members shall be nominated by the Warrick County Council,
with no more than two nominations affiliated with the same political party;
      (3)   One member shall be nominated by the Mayor of the city, as provided
by I.C. § 6-9-18-5; and
      (4)   One member shall be nominated by the President of the Town Council
of the town; and
   (B)   All nominations to the Commission shall be submitted to the board of
Commissioners by January 1 of each year, and are subject to the approval of the
Board of Commissioners who shall appoint those nominated to serve after
verifying membership criteria and eligibility as provided below in §
33.92. The Board of Commissioners shall take all efforts to appoint Commission
members to insure the membership will best serve the tourism interest of
Warrick County.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.92 COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners shall appoint the members of the Commission
based upon the nominations submitted and applying the following guidelines no
later than January 15 of each year:
      (1)   At least five of the members must be engaged in convention,
visitor, recreation or tourism businesses or involved in promoting conventions,
visitors, recreation or tourism events within Warrick County, including
representatives of non-profits that regularly sponsor and promote events that
are likely to generate tourism to Warrick County.
      (2)   At least two of the members of the Commission must be engaged in
the business of renting or furnishing rooms, lodging, or accommodations as
described in I.C. § 6-9-18-3 within Warrick County.
      (3)   No more than one representative of the same business entity or
commercial enterprise shall be on the Commission at any time. This provision
does not apply to non-profit and charitable organizations. No more than five of
the members of the Commission may be affiliated with the same political party.
      (4)   No more than five of the members of the Commission may be
affiliated with the same political party.
      (5)   Each Commission member must reside in Warrick County.
      (6)   There shall be no limits on the number of Commission members who
are residents of any particular township of Warrick County.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners may reject a nomination to the Commission
if the nomination would prevent the Commission membership from complying with
the above rules. In that event, the Board of Commissioners may either request
the nominating body to nominate an alternative individual for consideration or
appoint an alternative member that will comply with the above rules..
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.93 TERMS OF OFFICE OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   The Board of Commissioners, upon appointing the original Commission members
shall assign an initial term of two years to five members, and an initial term
of one year to four members. Upon the initial terms expiring and thereafter,
the term of office for each member of the Commission shall be two years.
Members may serve on no more than four consecutive terms at a time. If a
vacancy occurs, the Board of Commissioners shall appoint a qualified person to
serve for the remainder of the term. If an appointment is not made by February
1 of any year or vacancy is not filled within 30 days, the Commission shall
appoint a member by majority vote subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.94 REMOVAL OF COMMISSION MEMBERS FOR CAUSE.
   A member of the Commission may be removed for cause by the Board of
Commissioners of Warrick County.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.95 REIMBURSEMENT OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   Commission members shall not receive a salary. However, Commission members
are entitled to reimbursement for necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their respective duties as may be determined by the Commission.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.96 POWERS OF COMMISSION.
   The powers of the Commission are those set out in I.C. § 6-9-18-6, which
include the authority:
   (A)   33.96.01. To accept and use gifts, grants, tax revenues and other
contributions from any public or private source, under terms and conditions
that the Commission considers necessary and desirable;
   (B)   33.96.01. To sue and be sued;
   (C)   33.96.02. To enter into contracts and agreements including:
      (1)   The hiring of legal counsel, financial accounting services,
marketing and promotion services, and/or other professional advisors; and
      (2)   The ability to contract with the Warrick County Chamber of Commerce
for the hiring of staff, including a part-time Executive Director of the
Commission;
   (D)   33.96.03. To make rules necessary for the conduct of its business and
the accomplishment of its purpose;
   (E)   33.96.04. To receive and approve, alter, or reject requests and
proposals for funding by qualified organizations described under subdivision
(6);
   (F)   33.96.05. To transfer money, after approval of a request or proposal
from a qualified organization, from time to time from the Warrick County
Convention, Visitors and Tourism Fund (Fund 7304–Innkeeper’s Tax Collection),
or from money transferred from that Fund to the Commissions’s treasurer, to any
Indiana not-for-profit corporation to promote and encourage conventions,
visitors, recreation or tourism events in the County; and
   (G)   33.96.06. To require financial or other reports from any party or
entity that receives funds from the Commission.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.97 OATH OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   Each Commission member, before entering his or her duties, shall take an
oath of office in the usual form, to be endorsed upon his certificate of
appointment and promptly filed with the Clerk of the Warrick County Circuit
Court.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.98 ANNUAL ORGANIZATION MEETINGS OF COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall meet within 90 days of January 1, 2018 for purposes of
organization and shall further meet after January 1 each year thereafter for
its annual meeting. The Commission shall elect one of its members president,
another vice president, another secretary, and another treasurer. The members
elected to those office shall perform the duties pertaining to the offices. The
first officers chosen shall serve from the date of their election until their
successors are elected and qualified. A majority of the Commission constitutes
a quorum, and the concurrence of a majority of the Commission is necessary to
authorize any action.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.99 PURPOSES OF THE COMMISSION.
   The purpose of the Commission shall be to promote, assist and encourage the
development and growth of the convention, visitor, recreation and tourism
industry in Warrick County, in accordance with I.C. § 6-9-18-5.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.100 AWARDING OF GRANTS.
   Each year, the Commission shall set aside a certain sum, determined by the
Commission, to be granted to not-for-profit organizations for the creation,
development, and/or publication of brochures, pamphlets, graphic artwork,
websites, and/or other materials that help not-for-profit organizations promote
their events and operations and thereby encourage visitors and tourists to
visit the county.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
§ 33.101 QUARTERLY REPORT TO THE COMMISSIONERS AND BUDGET.
   The Commission shall prepare and deliver a report, no less frequently than
quarterly, to the Board of Commissioners of Warrick County as to the status of
the development and growth of the convention, visitor, recreation, and tourism
industries in the county. The Commission shall also prepare an annual budget
proposal for review and approval by the County Council.
(BC Ord. 2017-33, passed 12-11-17)
WARRICK COUNTY  PUBLIC DEFENDER BOARD
§ 33.110 ESTABLISHMENT OF WARRICK COUNTY PUBLIC DEFENDER BOARD.
   The Warrick County Public Defender Board is hereby established for the
purpose of providing legal representation to indigent persons in criminal,
juvenile, probation violation, extradition, child support, civil commitments,
and other proceedings where the right to counsel has been established by law.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.111 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless otherwise designated:
   BOARD. The Warrick County Public Defender Board established pursuant to this
subchapter.
   INDIGENT PERSON. An individual who requests legal representation and is
determined by the court to be entitled to legal representation at public
expense.
   LEGAL REPRESENTATION. The services of an attorney provided to a person in a
matter originating in a state court in Warrick County involving:
      (1)   A person charged with a crime, as defined in I.C. 35-41-1-6;
      (2)   An act of delinquency, as defined in I.C. 31-37-1-2;
      (3)   A violation of a condition of probation established as a part of a
sentence in a juvenile or criminal matter;
      (4)   Detention of a person subject to extradition to another
jurisdiction;
      (5)   Proceedings to collect unpaid child support pursuant to I.C. 31-
2 et seq.;
      (6)   Civil commitment and contempt proceedings; or
      (7)   Other proceedings where the right to counsel at public expense has
been established by law.
      The term LEGAL REPRESENTATION includes services in connection with all
pretrial, trial, and appellate proceedings in which an indigent person has a
right to counsel.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.112 BOARD MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of three members, who shall be appointed as
follows:
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County shall appoint one
member;
      (2)   The judges who exercise felony or juvenile jurisdiction in Warrick
County shall appoint, by majority vote, one member; and
      (3)   The Indiana Public Defender Commission shall appoint one member who
must be a resident of the county or region managing the public defender’s
office.
   (B)   The members appointed to the Board must be persons who have
demonstrated an interest in high quality legal representation for indigent
persons. However, a member shall not be appointed to the Board if he or she is:
      (1)   A city, town, or county attorney;
      (2)   A law enforcement officer;
      (3)   A judge;
      (4)   A court employee;
      (5)   An attorney who provides representations to indigent persons in the
county or region managed by the Board;
      (6)   An employee of the Department of Child Services; or
      (7)   An employee of any individuals described in subdivisions (l)
through (6).
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County may terminate the Board
by giving at least 90 days written notice to the judges described in subsection
(A)(2) of this section.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.113 TERM OF APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The initial term of the Board member appointed by the Board of
Commissioners of Warrick County shall expire on September 1, 2022. The initial
term of the Board member appointed by the judges who exercise felony or
juvenile jurisdiction in Warrick County shall expire on September 1, 2024.
   (B)   Following the initial term of each Board member, as stated above, the
terms of subsequent appointments to the Board shall be for three years. A
member appointed to fill a vacancy on the Board shall serve on the Board for
the remainder of the vacated member’s term. If a successor has not been
appointed to the Board by the end of a member’s three year term, the member
shall continue to serve on the Board until the member’s successor is appointed
to the Board by the appropriate appointing authority.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.114 MEETINGS OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   The members of the Board shall, by a majority vote, elect one member
to serve as Chairperson to preside over meetings of the Board.
   (B)   Meetings of the Board shall be held no less frequently than quarterly
and may be held at other times during the year at the call of the Chairperson
or other two members.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.115 REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES.
   A member of the Board is entitled to reimbursement from Warrick County for
traveling expenses and other expenses actually incurred in connection with the
member’s duties to the same extent as is provided to a State employee for
traveling expenses and other expenses under the State travel policies and
procedures established by the Indiana Department of Administration and approved
by the budget agency.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.116 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Prepare and submit to the Indiana Public Defender Commission a
comprehensive plan in compliance with I.C. 33-40-7-5 and which must include at
least one of the following methods of providing legal defense services to
indigent persons:
   (1)   Establishing a Warrick County Public Defender’s Office;
      (2)   Contracting with an attorney, a group of attorneys, or a private
organization;
      (3)   Using an assigned counsel system of panel attorneys for case-by-
case appointments under I.C. 33-40-7-9;
   (B)   Recommend to the Warrick County Council an annual operating budget for
the Warrick County Public Defender’s Office.
   (C)   Appoint a Warrick County public defender.
   (D)   Submit an annual report to the Board of Commissioners of Warrick
County and the judges described in §
33.112(A)(2) regarding the operation of the Warrick County Public Defender’s
Office, including information relating to caseloads and expenditures.
   (E)   Recommend to the Warrick County Council and the Board of Commissioners
of Warrick County certain staff positions for the Warrick County Public
Defender’s Office.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.117 APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF WARRICK COUNTY PUBLIC DEFENDER.
   (A)   A Warrick County public defender appointed by the Board shall serve
for a term note less than four years and may be reappointed. A Warrick County
public defender may be removed from office only upon showing of good cause. An
attorney must be admitted to the practice of law in Indiana for at least two
years before the attorney is eligible for appointment as a Warrick County
public defender.
   (B)   A Warrick County public defender shall have the following duties:
      (l)   Maintain an office as approved by the Board;
      (2)   Hire and supervise staff necessary to perform the services of the
office.
      (3)   Keep and maintain records of all cases handled by the office and
report, no less frequently than annually, to the Board and the Indiana Public
Defender Commission concerning the operation of the office, costs, and
projected needs.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.118 PRIVATE CONTRACTS.
   A Warrick County public defender may contract with an attorney, a group of
attorneys, or a private organization to provide legal representation under this
subchapter. The Board shall establish the provisions of any such contract
entered into pursuant to this §
33.118, and the Warrick County Council shall appropriate an amount sufficient
to meet the obligations of such contract.
(BC Ord. 2019-24, passed 10-24-19)
§ 33.119 PUBLIC DEFENDER DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   The Council hereby establishes the Public Defender Department within the
County General Fund in order to provide legal services to indigent residents of
the county consistent with the Warren County Public Defender Board’s
comprehensive plan and the Indiana Public Defender Commission’s standards.
(CC Ord. 2020-05, passed 12-3-20)
§ 33.120 PUBLIC DEFENDER FUND.
   The Public Defender Fund is created within the General Fund for use by and
facilitation of the Public Defender Department.
(CC Ord. 2020-05, passed 12-3-20)
§ 33.121 COUNCIL STATUTORY POWERS.
   The Council shall retain all of its statutory powers relating to the fiscal
affairs of the Public Defender Department and use of the Public Defender Fund,
including the establishment of an operating budget, establishment of salaries,
wages, per diems, and other compensation, and appropriating of funds.
(CC Ord. 2020-05, passed 12-3-20)
CHAPTER 34: ELECTIONS AND VOTING
Section
   
34.01   Board of Voter Registration
   
34.02   Precinct establishment
   
34.03   Local Advisory Council
   
34.04   Meal allowance for precinct election officers
§ 34.01 BOARD OF VOTER REGISTRATION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a County Board of Voter Registration.
   (B)   The Board shall be constituted and the members appointed thereto in
accordance with the provisions of I.C. 3-7-12-1 et seq.
   (C)   The Board shall serve for terms as established by I.C. 3-7-12-10.
   (D)   The Board of Voter Registration shall have all of the powers and shall
perform all of its duties as prescribed by Indiana law for such boards.
(BC Ord. 1985-10, passed 4-1-85)
§ 34.02 PRECINCT ESTABLISHMENT.
   The precinct establishment order, adopted by BC Ord. 2001-18 in accordance
with I.C. 3-11-1.5-2, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
code the same as if set forth in full herein. Copies of the ordinance are on
file in the office of the County Clerk.
(BC Ord. 1995-13, passed 8-28-95; Am. BC Ord. 2001-18, passed 12-5-01)
§ 34.03 LOCAL ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   There is hereby established, in compliance with the Help America Vote Act
(HAVA),the Warrick County Local Advisory Council that includes at least two
representatives of the disabilities community or elderly voters to provide
assistance to the county in choosing polling places.
(BC Ord. 2005-18, passed 9-21-05)
§ 34.04 MEAL ALLOWANCE FOR PRECINCT ELECTION OFFICERS.
   Precinct election officers are entitled to receive the sum of $12 as a meal
allowance and shall receive said sum in addition to, and along with, their
compensation for their election day services.
(BC Ord. 2011-27, passed 10-24-11)
CHAPTER 35: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Purpose
   
35.02   Definitions
   
35.03   General scope and intent: liberal construction of powers
   
35.04   Limitations
Administration
   
35.15   County Emergency Management Advisory Council
   
35.16   Director of Emergency Management
    
35.17   Department of Emergency Management
   
35.18   Comprehensive emergency management plan
   
35.19   County Board of Commissioners: general administrative powers and duties
   
35.20   Budget and payment of certain expenses
County Emergency Management Program
   
35.30   Applicability
   
35.31   Principal executive officer: declaration of local disaster emergency
   
35.32   County Board of Commissioners: convention of special emergency meeting
   
35.33   Principal executive officer: special emergency powers and duties
   
35.34   County Board of Commissioners: special emergency powers and duties
   
35.35   Designation of travel advisory
   
35.36   Officers and employees of incorporated and unincorporated areas of the
county: general duties during emergency
   
35.37   Limitation of liability during disaster emergency or emergency
management tests
   
35.38   Compensation for property commandeered or used during disaster
emergency
   
35.39   Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan
Hazardous Materials Generally
   
35.50   Definitions and reporting requirements
Notification
   
35.60   Spill report
   
35.61   Notification to county emergency management agency
   
35.62   Investigation and cleanup
   
35.63   Reimbursement to county
Enforcement and Penalty
   
35.97   Violations
   
35.98   Enforcement
 
   
35.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Non-Discrimination, see
Ch. 11
   Adoption of Mass Fatalities Plan, see §
39.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish in Warrick County a Department
of Emergency Management, and to provide for the exercise of necessary powers
during disaster emergencies.
(BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter hereinafter the following words and terms have the
meanings indicated.
   ADVISORY COUNCIL. The Warrick County Emergency Management Advisory Council,
as established under this chapter pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-17.
   BOARD. The Board of County Commissioners, as elected pursuant to I.C. 36-2-
2.
   CHAIRMAN. The Chairman of the Warrick County Emergency Management Advisory
Council, as established under this chapter pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-17.
   COUNTY. Warrick County, Indiana.
   DEPARTMENT. The County Department of Emergency Management, as established
under this chapter pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-17.
   DIRECTOR. The County Emergency Management Director, as established and
appointed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with I.C. 10-14-3-17.
   DISASTER.  Has the meaning established in I.C. 10-14-3-1, which at the time
this chapter was adopted means:
      (1)   An occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural phenomenon or
human act.
      (2)   The term includes any of the following:
         (a)   Fire.
         (b)   Flood.
         (c)   Earthquake.
         (d)   Windstorm.
         (e)   Snowstorm.
         (f)   Ice storm.
         (g)   Tornado.
         (h)   Wave action.
         (i)   Oil spill.
         (j)   Other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage.
         (k)   Air contamination.
         (l)   Drought.
         (m)   Explosion.
         (n)   Technological emergency.
         (o)   Utility failure.
         (p)   Critical shortages of essential fuels or energy.
         (q)   Major transportation accident.
         (r)   Hazardous material or chemical incident.
         (s)   Radiological incident.
         (t)   Nuclear incident.
         (u)   Biological incident.
         (v)   Epidemic.
         (w)   Public health emergency.
         (x)   Animal disease event requiring emergency action.
         (y)   Blight.
         (z)   Infestation.
         (aa)   Riot.
         (bb)   Hostile military or paramilitary action.
         (cc)   Act of terrorism.
         (dd)   Any other public calamity requiring emergency action.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Has the meaning established in I.C. 10-14-3-2, which
at the  time this chapter was adopted means the preparation for, and the
coordination of, all emergency functions, other than functions for which
military forces or other federal agencies are primarily responsible, to
prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters. These
functions include the following:
      (1)    Firefighting services.
      (2)   Police services.
      (3)   Medical and health services.
      (4)   Rescue.
      (5)   Engineering.
      (6)   Warning services.
      (7)   Communications.
      (8)   Radiological, chemical, and other special weapons defense.
      (9)   Evacuation of persons from stricken areas.
      (10)   Emergency welfare services.
      (11)   Emergency transportation.
      (12)   Plant protection.
      (13)   Temporary restoration of public utility services.
      (14)   Other functions related to civilian protection.
      (15)   All other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation
for, and coordination of, the functions described in divisions (1) through
(14).
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEER. Any person who serves without compensation
in the Department of Emergency Management, being first duly given the loyalty
oath mandated by  I.C. 10-14-3-27 and rostered and appointed by the Director,
including persons and private agencies or governmental units offering services
to the county during emergency situations or mutual aid to other emergency
services that request assistance.
   PARTICIPATING EMERGENCY SERVICE. 
      (1)    Any county department or agency designated in the emergency
operations plan to participate in emergency management activities; and
      (2)   Any department or agency of the state, another county, a municipal
corporation, or a volunteer organization designated to participate in the
county's emergency management programs and activities pursuant to a cooperative
and mutual aid agreement entered into pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-17.
   PERSONNEL. County officers and employees and emergency management
volunteers, unless otherwise indicated.
   PLAN or EMERGENCY PLAN. The current local comprehensive emergency management
plan whose preparation and updating are mandated by I.C. 10-14-3-17(h).
   IDHS. The Indiana Department of Homeland Security established under I.C. 10-
19-2-1.
   PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER. As referred to in I.C. 10-14-3-29(a) for
purposes of declaring a local disaster emergency, and as referred to
hereinafter, means the Warrick County Board of Commissioners established under
I.C. 36-2-2.
      (1)   If a quorum of the County Board of Commissioners (two of the three
Commissioners as established under I.C. 36-2-4-3) is unavailable or is
incapacitated, then the following establishes the line of succession for the
principal executive officer:
         (a)    The regularly designated President of the Board of
Commissioners. If a quorum of the Board of Commissioners is unavailable or
incapacitated, then the regularly designated President of the Board of
Commissioners shall serve as the principal executive officer for the purposes
of this chapter until such time that a quorum of the Board of Commissioners is
no longer unavailable or incapacitated.
         (b)   The Vice President of the Board of Commissioners. If both a
quorum of the Board of Commissioners and the regularly designated President of
the Board of Commissioners are unavailable or are incapacitated, then the Vice
President of the Board of Commissioners shall serve as the principal executive
officer for the purposes of this chapter until such time that either the
regularly designated President or a quorum of the Board of Commissioners is no
longer unavailable or incapacitated.
         (c)   The remaining Commissioner of the Board of Commissioners. If a
quorum of the Board of Commissioners, the regularly designated President of the
Board of County Commissioners, and the Vice President of the Board of
Commissioners are all unavailable or are incapacitated, then the remaining
Commissioner of the Board of Commissioners shall serve as the principal
executive officer for the purposes of this chapter until such time that the
Vice President, the regularly designated President, or a quorum of the Board of
Commissioners is no longer unavailable or incapacitated.
         (d)   Director of Emergency Manage- ment. If all of the County
Commissioners are unavailable or incapacitated, then the Director of Emergency
Management shall serve as the principal executive officer for the purposes of
this chapter until such time that a County Commissioner is no longer
unavailable or incapacitated.
         (e)   Sheriff. If the all of the County Commissioners and the Director
of Emergency Management are unavailable or incapacitated, then the County
Sheriff shall serve as the principal executive officer for the purposes of this
chapter until such time that a County Commissioner or the Director of Emergency
Management is no longer unavailable or incapacitated.
         (f)   President of the County Council. If the Sheriff is unavailable
or incapacitated, then the President of the County Council shall serve as the
principal executive officer for the purposes of this chapter until such time
that a County Commissioner, the Director of Emergency Management, or the County
Sheriff is no longer unavailable or incapacitated.
         (g)   Coroner. If the President of the County Council is unavailable
or incapacitated, then the County Coroner shall serve as the principal
executive officer for the purposes of this chapter until such time that a
County Commissioner, the Director of Emergency Management, the Sheriff, or the
President of the County Council is no longer unavailable or incapacitated.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07; Am. BC
Ord. 2015-08, passed 3-23-15)
§ 35.03 GENERAL SCOPE AND INTENT: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION OF POWERS.
   The general intent of this chapter is to provide for all necessary and
indispensable powers and procedures reasonably needed to mitigate, prepare for,
respond to and recover from emergency conditions. To this end, all powers, both
ministerial and discretionary, as conferred herein shall be liberally construed
to supplement and augment, not to limit, any other powers or reasonable
exercise of discretion that may ordinarily pertain to county officers,
employees, departments and agencies.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.04 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to supersede or delimit any
statutory powers of the County Sheriff.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to supersede or delimit the powers
granted under I.C. 10-14-3-17 to any political subdivision, to adopt and
implement emergency plans and promulgate and enforce emergency management rules
and regulations in the advent of an actual emergency affecting such political
subdivision. However, pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-22, such regulations and
procedures as promulgated by the political subdivision may not be inconsistent
with the county emergency management program and emergency plan established in
accordance with this chapter.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 35.15 COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Establishment and membership. The County Emergency Management Advisory
Council is established by I.C. 10-14-3-17(c), and under this statute consist of
the following individuals or their designees.
      (1)    The President of the Board of County Commissioners or, if the
Board of County Commissioners does not have a president, a member of the Board
of County Commissioners appointed from its membership.
      (2)   The president of the county fiscal body.
      (3)   The mayor of each city located in the county.
      (4)   An individual representing the legislative bodies of all towns
located within the county.
      (5)   One commander of a local civil air patrol unit in the county or the
commander's designee.
      (6)   Representatives of such private and public agencies or
organizations that can be of assistance to emergency management as the
organizing group considers appropriate, or any may be added later by the County
Emergency Management Advisory Council.
   (B)   Power and duties. The powers and duties of the County Emergency
Management Advisory Council are established by the I.C. 10-14-3-17(d), and
under this statute consist of the following:
      (1)   Exercise general supervision and control over the emergency
management and disaster program of the county.
      (2)   Select, or cause to be selected, with the approval of the Board of
County Commissioners, a County Emergency Management Director.
         (a)   The statute establishing the powers and duties of the Advisory
Council does not describe the procedure to be used to terminate a County
Emergency Management Director.
         (b)   However, the statute does not require the Advisory Council to
select the Director and obtain the Board’s approval for this selection before a
Director can be appointed.
         (c)   Therefore, the Advisory Council may make a determination to
terminate a Director, but this determination is subject to the approval of the
Board before the termination is final.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.16 DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   General powers and duties.  Subject to the direction and control of
the Advisory Council, the Director shall be executive head of the Department,
and, pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-17(d)(2)(A), has direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the Department, including the
following specific powers and duties:
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-17(d)((2)(B), the Director is responsible
to the Chairman of the Advisory Council, and as such shall keep the Chairman
fully informed on emergency management activities, and shall provide such
reports to the Advisory Council if so directed by the Chairman of the Advisory
Council.
      (2)   The Director shall keep the Board fully informed on emergency
management activities.
      (3)   The Director shall submit to the Advisory Council and the County
Commissioners a yearly report on the county's comprehensive emergency
management, including mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery taken in
the previous year, and planned and recommended for the year to come.
      (4)   The Director shall ensure that all of the duties and
responsibilities of the emergency management agency are completed.
      (5)   The Director shall ensure that all county employees and rostered
volunteers with responsibilities as part of the comprehensive emergency
management plan receive training in functions that they are to perform under
the plan.
      (6)   The Director shall design and conduct exercises of the
comprehensive emergency management plan, as required by the Indiana Department
of Homeland Security.
      (7)   The Director shall ensure that the comprehensive emergency
management plan addresses all hazards and includes all cities, towns and other
population centers within the county.
      (8)    The Director shall submit to Indiana Department of Homeland
Security the assessment specified in IDHS's required format and within IDHS's
required time frame for submission.
      (9)   The Director shall provide to the Indiana Department of Homeland
Security Executive Director annual reports and documentation as mandated.
      (10)   The Director shall competently manage the Department's various
functions, including, among others, financial, personnel and logistic.
      (11)   The Director shall timely obey the directives of superior state
authorities.
      (12)   The Director shall ensure that the activities of the Department at
all times comport with I.C. 10-14-3 and other applicable statutes, rules and
county ordinances.
      (13)   The Director shall develop an emergency operating center (“EOC”)
as a site from which key officials can direct and control operations during a
disaster or emergency.
      (14)   The Director shall attain certification as a basic professional
emergency manager from the Indiana Department of Homeland Security within two
years of first assuming the position of Director; except that an individual
appointed as a Director prior to January 1, 2005, shall attain this
certification by no later than January 1, 2009. After the Director attains this
certification, the Director shall complete the continuing emergency management
education required by the Indiana Department of Homeland Security to maintain
this certification.
      (15)   The Director shall ensure that the Deputy Director attains
certification as a basic professional emergency manager from the Indiana
Department of Homeland Security within four years of first assuming the
position of Deputy Director. After the Deputy Director attains this
certification, the Director shall ensure that the Deputy Director completes the
continuing emergency management education required by the Indiana Department of
Homeland Security to maintain this certification.
      (16)   The Director shall attend, and shall ensure that the Deputy
Director and, all paid emergency management staff attend, emergency management
training courses as needed to stay up-to-date on the latest advances in
emergency management.
      (17)   The Director shall assume responsibility for public relations,
information and education regarding all phases of emergency management.
      (18)   The Director shall assure coordination within the county of all
activities for emergency management.
      (19)   The Director shall maintain liaison and coordinate with all other
affected agencies, public and private.
      (20)   The Director shall coordinate the recruitment and training for
volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the
county for emergency management purposes.
      (21)   The Director shall seek, negotiate and enter into (with the
approval or ratification of the County Commissioners and consistent with the
state emergency operations plan and program) mutual aid arrangements with other
public and private agencies for emergency management purposes, and taking all
steps in accordance with such arrangements to comply with or take advantage
thereof in the event of an actual emergency affecting the parties;
      (22)   The Director shall accept any offer of the federal government to
provide for the use of the county services, equipment, supplies, materials or
funds for emergency management purposes by way of gift, grant or loan, when the
Governor has approved such offer.
      (23)   The Director shall seek and may accept, from any person, firm or
corporation, any gratuitous offers to provide services, equipment, supplies,
materials, funds, licenses or privileges to use real estate or other premises,
to the county for emergency management purposes.
      (24)    The Director shall issue proper insignia and papers to emergency
management workers and other people directly concerned with emergency
management.
      (25)    Prior to accepting them as members of the Department, the
Director shall ensure that all volunteers meet the criteria set forth in this
chapter.
      (26)   As soon as an emergency or disaster declaration has been made, the
Director shall make rapid and accurate assessment of:
         (a)   Property damage;
         (b)   Personal injuries;
         (c)   Fatalities;
         (d)   Basic needs; and
         (e)   Special needs.
      (27)   In addition to the powers and duties expressly provided above, the
Director shall be construed to have all powers and duties of a local emergency
management director as provided under I.C. 10-14-3. In particular, but not by
limitation, the Director, through the Department, may perform, or cause to be
performed, with respect to the county, any function parallel or analogous to
those performed on a statewide basis by IDHS under I.C. 10-14-3.
      (28)   The Director shall coordinate the activities of emergency
management volunteers during emergency and non-emergency situations.
      (29)   The Director shall coordinate and develop the necessary agreements
with the state, other Indiana political subdivisions, political subdivisions in
adjoining states, and private businesses, to ensure that the county will have
access to the resources and personnel that may be needed during an emergency or
disaster.
      (30)   The Director shall write grant proposals and/or assist with the
writing of grant proposals to promote emergency management, public safety, and
homeland security objectives.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.17 DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Establishment and purpose. There is hereby established a Department of
Emergency Management within the executive branch of the county government for
the purpose of utilizing, to the fullest extent possible, the personnel and
facilities of existing county departments and agencies to prepare for and meet
any disaster as defined in this chapter. The Director of Emergency Management
shall be responsible for its organizations, administration and operation.
   (B)   Staffing. The Department shall consist of the following:
      (1)   The Director of Emergency Management.
      (2)   A Deputy Director appointed by the Director with approval of the
Advisory Council. The Deputy Director shall fulfill the duties of the Director
in the absence or incapacity of the Director to serve; and assist the Director
in the performance of the Director's duties.
      (3)   Emergency management volunteers, as deemed necessary and appointed
by the Director. In addition to the other requirements in this section, the
Director shall ensure that all volunteer personnel meet the following
qualifications before being on the roster as a member of the Department:
         (a)   Be at least 18 years of age or older;
         (b)   Not be convicted of a felony; and
         (c)   Have a completed application form on file with the Department.
      (4)   The employees, equipment and facilities of all county departments
and agencies suitable for, or adaptable to emergency management, and designated
by the emergency plan to participate in emergency management activity.
      (5)   Staff officers with responsibility for Commissioners and warning,
radiological, health and medical care, law enforcement, fire and search and
rescue, public works and public information, in accordance with the
comprehensive emergency management plan.
      (6)   Such assistants, clerical help, and other employees as deemed
necessary and appointed by the Director in accordance with the comprehensive
emergency management plan.
   (C)   Grounds for disqualification. Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-27(a), no
person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in any emergency
management organization established under this chapter who:
      (1)   Advocates a change by force or violence in the constitutional form
of the government of the United States, or the overthrow of any government in
the United States by force or violence; or
      (2)   Has been convicted of or is under indictment or information
charging any subversive act against the United States.
   (D)   Loyalty oath. Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-27(b), each individual who is
appointed to serve in an organization for emergency management shall, before
entering upon the individual's duties, take a loyalty oath, in writing, before
a person authorized to administer oaths in Indiana.
      (1)   The loyalty oath shall be substantially as follows:
         “I,                                    , do solemnly swear (or affirm)
that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Indiana against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this
obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and
that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to
enter. And I do further swear (of affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a
member of any political party or organization that advocates, the overthrow of
the government of the United States, or of this state, by force or violence;
and that during such time as I am a member of the County Department of
Emergency Management I will not advocate nor become a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States, or of this state, by force or violence.”
      (2)   In accordance with I.C. 10-14-3-27(c), the Executive Director of
the Indiana Department of Homeland Security and the County Emergency Management
Director may administer this loyalty oath, and may delegate the authority to
administer it to designated deputies and assistants approved by the Executive
Director of the Indiana Department of Homeland Security.
   (E)   Prohibited activities. Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-26, the Department
shall not:
      (1)   Participate in any form of political activity; or
      (2)   Be employed, directly or indirectly, for political purposes.
   (F)   Authority of the County Council.
      (1)   The County Council shall not have any power of approval over
particular candidates for any position, but the County Council shall have
general statutory powers to determine the number of offices, deputies, and
employees of county departments, classify positions, and adopt schedules of
compensation pursuant to I.C. 36-2-5-3(a).
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, with the
exception of the Director, a compensated position may not be established within
the Department of Emergency Management, nor shall any person be appointed to
such position, without authorization and sufficient funding from the County
Council.
   (G)   Duties. Subject to the direction and control of the Director, the
Department shall prepare and implement the comprehensive emergency management
plan, including the following specific duties:
      (1)   Prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials a clear and
complete written statement of the emergency responsibilities of all local
agencies and officials, and the disaster chain of command in accordance with
I.C. 10-14-3-17(i).
      (2)   Work closely with officers and employees of incorporated and
unincorporated areas of the county to develop a hazard mitigation program to
eliminate or reduce potential hazards.
      (3)   Write and implement the comprehensive emergency management plan,
which shall conform to the guidelines contained in the most current state and
federal guidance documents (the county cannot receive state and/or federal
matching funds unless this is done), and the requirements established in this
chapter. As part of the preparation of this plan, the Department shall:
         (a)   Identify and analyze the effects of hazards that threaten the
county.
         (b)   Inventory manpower and material resources from governmental and
private sector sources that would be available in a disaster or emergency.
         (c)   Establish a system to alert key officials in the event of a
disaster or emergency.
         (d)   Identify resource deficiencies and work with appropriate
officials on measures to correct them.
         (e)   Develop and maintain an emergency communications system, thus
assuring proper functioning of emergency communications throughout the county,
including all cities and towns.
         (f)   Take all actions necessary to ensure the continuity of
government procedures and systems in the event of a disaster.
         (g)   Establish and maintain a shelter and reception and care system
for both people and animals.
         (h)   Develop a training program for emergency response personnel,
ensuring that mitigation, training and exercising have been performed for all
such personnel.
         (i)   Coordinate with industry to develop and maintain industrial
emergency plans and capabilities in support of the comprehensive emergency
management plan.
      (4)   Update the comprehensive emergency management plan as needed to
keep it current, as required by I.C. 10-14-3-17(h).
      (5)   Develop a program to test and exercise the emergency plan.
   (H)   Budget and finance.
      (1)   The Advisory Council shall advise the Director in the preparation
of the budget.
      (2)   The County Council shall appropriate such funds as it may deem
necessary for the purpose of emergency management.
      (3)   All funds appropriated or otherwise available to the Department of
Emergency Management shall be administered by the Director.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.18 COMPREHENSIVE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Formulation; content and adoption.    
      (1)   A county comprehensive emergency management plan, referred to as
the interjurisdictional disaster emergency plan by I.C. 10-14-3-17(h), shall by
adopted by resolution of the County Board of Commissioners. In the preparation
of this plan as it pertains to county organization, it is the intent that the
services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and
agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible.
      (2)   The comprehensive emergency management plan shall include, at
minimum, the following:
         (a)   An administrative section that includes:
            1.   Authorities and directive.
            2.   Terms and definitions.
            3.   Acronyms/abbreviations.
            4.   Financial management.
         (b)   A hazards specific section that includes:
            1.   Unique hazards.
            2.   Special events.
         (c)   An operations section that includes:
            1.   Coordination and control emergency support function.
            2.   Communications and warning emergency support function.
            3.   Public information emergency support function.
            4.   Resource management emergency support function.
            5.   Information and planning emergency support function.
         (d)   An emergency services section that includes:
            1.   Military emergency support function.
            2.   Law enforcement emergency support function.
            3.   Firefighting emergency support function.
            4.   Transportation emergency support function.
            5.   Health and medical emergency support function.
            6.   Search and rescue emergency support function.
            7.   Public works/engineering emergency support function.
         (e)    A consequent effects section that includes:
            1.   Evacuation emergency support function.
            2.   Shelter/mass care emergency support function.
            3.   Damage assessment emergency support function.
            4.   Hazardous materials emergency support function.
            5.   Radiological protection emergency support function.
            6.   Energy emergency support function.
      (3)   In addition, all emergency services within the county shall:
         (a)   Develop standard operating procedures, standard operating guides
and checklists that are drafted subject to the requirements of the
comprehensive emergency management plan;
         (b)   Coordinate standard operating procedures, standard operating
guides and checklists with the Department of Emergency Management;
         (c)   Assure inclusion of the standard operating procedures, standard
operating guides and checklists within the comprehensive emergency management
plan;
         (d)   Perform the functions and duties assigned by the comprehensive
emergency management plan; and
         (e)   Maintain their portion of the comprehensive emergency management
plan in a current state of readiness at all times.
   (B)   Jurisdiction.
      (1)   Except as provided by §
35.04, the jurisdiction of the County Department of Emergency Management shall
be comprehensive and inclusive countywide, and effective in both the
incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county.
      (2)   The jurisdiction and applicability of the county comprehensive
emergency management plan, as adopted pursuant to §
35.18(A)., and the exercise of any powers of the principal executive officer of
the county and of the County Board of Commissioners under §§
35.30 et seq., shall be comprehensive and inclusive countywide and effective in
both the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county.
      (3)   All political subdivisions in the county shall:
         (a)   If they develop a plan for their political subdivisions:
            1.   Ensure that the plan is consistent with the requirements of
the county comprehensive emergency management plan;
            2.   Coordinate the development of the plan with the Department of
Emergency Management; and
            3.   Ensure inclusion of the plan within the county comprehensive
emergency management plan.
         (b)   Perform the functions and duties assigned by the county
comprehensive emergency management plan.
         (c)   Maintain their portion of the comprehensive emergency management
plan in a current state of readiness at all times.
   (C)   Tests.
      (1)   Tests of the comprehensive emergency management plan may be
conducted at any time, with or without prior notification to persons other than
the Director.
      (2)   All emergency tests conducted within the boundaries of the county
shall be coordinated with the Department.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.19 COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND
DUTIES.
   In time of normal county operations, the powers and duties of the County
Commissioners pertaining to emergency management shall be:
   (A)    Maintaining general supervision over the planning and administration
for the Department;
   (B)   Adopting the comprehensive emergency management plan;
   (C)   Coordinating emergency management activities consistent with the
comprehensive emergency management plan;
   (D)   Making assignments of county personnel to emergency management
activities consistent with the comprehensive emergency management plan;
   (E)   Making assignments of county personnel to emergency management duties
in order to meet situations not covered in the normal duties and powers of such
agencies consistent with the comprehensive emergency management plan;
   (F)   Taking all necessary action in coordination with the Department to
conduct tests of the comprehensive emergency management plan; and
   (G)   Educating themselves as to their responsibilities under the
comprehensive emergency management plan.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.20 BUDGET AND PAYMENT OF CERTAIN EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Advisory Council shall advise the Director in the preparation of
the budget.
   (B)   The County Council shall appropriate such funds as it may deem
necessary for the purpose of emergency management.
   (C)   All funds appropriated or otherwise available to the Emergency
Management Agency shall be administered by the Director.
(BC Ord. 2022-16, passed 6-27-22)
COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
§ 35.30 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter (§§
35.30 et seq.) shall apply whenever:
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-12, the Governor has declared a disaster
emergency affecting all or part of the county.
   (B)    Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-29(a) and §
35.31 hereof, the principal executive officer of the county is preparing to
declare, or has declared, a local disaster emergency affecting all or part of
the county.
   (C)   The County Board of Commissioners has implemented a test of the
county's comprehensive emergency management plan and procedures in accordance
with, and to the extent necessary or dispensable to, such test.
(Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.31 PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER: DECLARATION OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY.
   (A)   In the event of an actual or threatened disaster emergency affecting
the county, if feasible, the principal executive officer of the county shall
seek the advice and input of the Director as to the advisability of declaring a
local disaster emergency.
   (B)   If the County Board of Commissioners, acting as the principal
executive officer of the county, is the entity declaring the local disaster
emergency, then the statutory requirements contained in I.C. 36-2-2-8 and I.C.
5-14-1.5-5(d) regarding special and emergency meetings of the County Board of
Commissioners must be met.
   (C)   In the event of an actual or threatened disaster emergency affecting
the county, the principal executive officer of the county may declare a local
disaster emergency, pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-29(a). This declaration shall:
      (1)   Be in writing.
      (2)   State the nature of the disaster.
      (3)   State the conditions that have brought about the disaster.
      (4)   State the area or areas threatened.
      (5)   State the area or areas to which the local disaster emergency
declaration applies (this may include the entire county or only designated
parts thereof).
      (6)   State the effective period of the local disaster emergency
declaration. The disaster declaration shall not be continued or renewed for a
period in excess of seven days, except by or with the consent of the County
Board of Commissioners.
   (D)   The declaration of a local disaster emergency, as well as any
continuation or termination of such declaration, shall meet the following
requirements.
      (1)   The declaration shall be announced or disseminated to the general
public by the best means.
      (2)   News media that have requested notice of meetings must be given the
same notice that is given to the members of the County Board of Commissioners.
      (3)   The public must be notified of this meeting by posting a copy of
the notice at the principal office of the County Board of Commissioners, or if
no such office exists, at the building where the meeting is to be held.
      (4)   The County Board of Commissioners may not conduct any business at
this meeting that is unrelated to the disaster emergency declaration.
      (5)   All other such requirements that are applicable to a meeting that
is called to deal with an emergency.
   (E)   In addition, such a meeting may:
      (1)   Be held in any convenient and available space.
       (2)   Continue without adjournment for the duration of the disaster
emergency.
      (3)   Be recessed for reasonable periods of time as necessary and
permitted by the circumstances.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.32 COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: CONVENTION OF SPECIAL EMERGENCY MEETING.
   (A)   As allowed by I.C. 36-2-2-8 and I.C. 5-14-1.5-5(d), a special meeting
of the County Board of Commissioners shall be called as soon as possible after
the disaster emergency that affects the county has been declared, either by the
Governor or by the principal officer of the county, to perform their
legislative and administrative functions as the situation may demand.
   (B)   As required by I.C. 36-2-2-8(b) and I.C. 5-14-1.5-5(d), the following
conditions must be met for this meeting.
      (1)   The notice for the meeting must include a specific statement of the
purpose of the meeting.
      (2)   News media that have requested notice of meetings must be given the
same notice that is given to the members of the County Board of Commissioners.
      (3)   The public must be notified of this meeting by posting a copy of
the notice at the principal office of the County Board of Commissioners, or if
no such office exists, at the building where the meeting is to be held.
      (4)   The County Board of Commissioners may not conduct any business at
this meeting that is unrelated to the disaster emergency declaration.
      (5)   All other such requirements that are applicable to a meeting that
is called to deal with an emergency.
   (C)   In addition, such a meeting may:
      (1)   Be held in any convenient and available place.
      (2)   Continue without adjournment for the duration of the disaster
emergency.
      (3)   Be recessed for reasonable periods of time as necessary and
permitted by the circumstances.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.33 PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER: SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   In the event that a disaster emergency has been declared that affects
all or part of the county, and a quorum of the County Board of Commissioners
cannot be assembled for purposes of the meeting needed under §
35.32, the principal executive officer of the county shall have, on an interim
basis, all powers of the County Board of Commissioners, and may take all such
actions with respect to the disaster emergency declaration that the County
Board of Commissioners would have been authorized to take.
   (B)   When a quorum of the County Board of Commissioners is assembled, these
interim powers of the principal executive officer of the county shall cease.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.34 COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: SPECIAL EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   At the meeting convened under §
35.32, the County Board of Commissioners may exercise any of its normal
executive and legislative powers to the extent related to the emergency and
necessary to deal therewith.
   (B)   In addition to the powers enumerated in division (A) above, the Board
may also exercise any of the following special and extraordinary powers:
      (1)   Extending the period of a local disaster emergency declared by the
principal executive officer of the county, pursuant to §
35.31, to last more than seven days if necessary.
      (2)   Terminating the local disaster emergency.
      (3)   Assembling and utilizing emergency management resources, including:
         (a)   Personnel of the Department of Emergency Management;
         (b)   Participating emergency services; and
         (c)   Any other resources at the disposal of the Commissioners
hereunder for emergency management purposes.
      (4)   Ordering volunteer forces that have been activated pursuant to the
comprehensive emergency management plan to the aid of the county, state or
political subdivisions thereof as soon as practicable. These volunteer forces
shall be under the direction of the Department of Emergency Management.
      (5)   In order to control the local disaster emergency and provide for
public health, safety and welfare, to the extent permitted by I.C. 10-14-3-31
and subject to its provisions, commanding services and/or requisitioning the
use of:
         (a)   Equipment;
         (b)   Facilities;
         (c)   Supplies; or
         (d)   Other property.
      (6)   Ordering the evacuation of all or part of the population from
stricken areas of the county, and prescribing:
         (a)    Routes;
         (b)   Modes and transportation; and
         (c)   Evacuation destinations.
      (7)   Making provision for the availability and use of temporary
emergency housing, which housing need not necessarily comply with any minimum
housing standards, building or zoning regulations, and the like, which would
govern the use and location of premises for housing purposes during normal
times.
   (C)   Except in accordance with division (D) below, the County Board of
Commissioners shall not suspend any provisions of ordinances or procedures that
are mandated by statute.
   (D)   In the event of a disaster emergency that has been declared by the
Governor, the County Board of Commissioners, in accordance with I.C. 10-14-3-17
(j)(5), may waive any procedures or requirements of statute, or of county
ordinances reflecting statutory requirements and mandates, pertaining to the:
      (1)   Performance of public works;
      (2)   Entering into contract;
      (3)   Incurring of obligations;
      (4)   Employment of permanent and temporary workers;
      (5)   Utilization of volunteer works;
      (6)   Rental of equipment;
      (7)   Purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities;
and
      (8)   Appropriation and expenditure of public funds.
   (E)    The County Board of Commissioners may assign any special emergency
duties and functions to county:
      (1)   Offices;
      (2)   Departments; and
      (3)   Agencies.
   (F)   Any unexpended and unencumbered monies budgeted and appropriated but
not otherwise dedicated by law to different purposes may, within the scope of
each major budget and appropriation category (major object classification), be
utilized and expended for the purpose of carrying out such special emergency
duties and functions.
   (G)   Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-22, the County Board of Commissioners may
make, amend and rescind such orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary
for emergency management purposes, and to supplement the carrying out of the
provisions of this chapter. Such orders, rules and regulations:
      (1)   Cannot be inconsistent with any orders, rules or regulations
promulgated by the Governor or by any state agency exercising a power delegated
to it by the Governor;
      (2)   Cannot be inconsistent with the county's emergency management
program or Emergency Plan;
      (3)   Shall have full force or effect of law when filed in the office of
the County Clerk;
      (4)   Are enforceable by any local or state law enforcing authority in
accordance with I.C. 10-14-3-24.
   (H)   In accordance with the emergency plan, the County Board of
Commissioners may request the State of Indiana or the United States, or their
agencies and political subdivisions, to send aid (including financial
assistance) if the situation is beyond the control of the county’s regular and
emergency forces and resources.
   (I)   All actions taken by the County Board of Commissioners under this
section shall be:
      (1)   Adopted by ordinance or resolution pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-22;
      (2)   Consistent with, subordinate to, any actions, orders or regulations
made by the Governor or a state agency implementing the state comprehensive
emergency management plan.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.35 DESIGNATION OF TRAVEL ADVISORY.
   (A)   If the principal executive officer of a political subdivision issues a
local travel advisory as part of an emergency declaration under I.C. 10-14-3-
29, the principal executive officer shall designate the travel advisory as
falling into one of the following categories:
      (1)   ADVISORY, the lowest level of local travel advisory, means that
routine travel or activities may be restricted in areas because of a hazardous
situation, and individuals should use caution or avoid those areas.
      (2)   WATCH means that conditions are threatening to the safety of the
public. During a “watch” local travel advisory, only essential travel, such as
to and from work or in emergency situations, is recommended, and emergency
action plans should be implemented by businesses, schools, government agencies,
and other organizations.
      (3)   WARNING, the highest level of local travel advisory, means that
travel may be restricted to emergency management workers only.
         (a)   During a “warning” local travel advisory, individuals are
directed to:
            1.   Refrain from all travel;
            2.   Comply with necessary emergency measures;
            3.   Cooperate with public officials and disaster services forces
in executing emergency operations plans; and
            4.   Obey and comply with the lawful directions of properly
identified officers.
         (b)   Further and more specific restrictions, including parking
restrictions, may be included in a “warning” local travel advisory.
   (B)   If the emergency management agency director or the principal executive
officer of a political subdivision determines that conditions within the
political subdivision have created the need for travel advisory restrictions
without a local disaster emergency declaration under I.C. 10-14-3-29, the
emergency management agency director or the principal executive officer may
issue an “advisory” or a “watch” level travel advisory.
   (C)   A “warning” level travel advisory may be issued only after a local
disaster emergency is declared under I.C. 10-14-3-29.
(BC Ord. 2015-08, passed 3-23-15)
§ 35.36 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF INCORPORATED AND UNINCORPORATED AREAS OF THE
COUNTY: GENERAL DUTIES DURING EMERGENCY.
   During a declared disaster emergency, all officers and employees of
incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county shall:
   (A)   Cooperate with and give active support to the County Board of
Commissioners and the County Emergency Management Director.
   (B)   Comply with all orders, rules and regulations issued pursuant to this
chapter by the County Board of Commissioners or the County Emergency Management
Director.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.37 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY DURING DISASTER EMERGENCY OR EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT TESTS.
   During an emergency management test or declared disaster emergency, the
county, the county's assigned personnel, participating emergency services, and
rostered emergency management volunteers shall be immune from liability to the
full extent provided by I.C. 10-14-3 and any other applicable law.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.38 COMPENSATION FOR PROPERTY COMMANDEERED OR USED DURING DISASTER
EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 10-14-3-31, compensation for property shall be paid
only if the property was commandeered or otherwise used in coping with a
disaster emergency, and its use or destruction was ordered by the Governor or a
member of the disaster emergency forces of Indiana.
   (B)   Any person claiming compensation for the use, damage, loss or
destruction of such property shall make a claim for it. This claim shall be
filed and adjudicated as provided in I.C. 32-24.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.39 MULTI-HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
   The County of Warrick does hereby adopt the Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan for
Warrick County.
(BC Res. 2009-3, passed 1-26-09)
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS GENERALLY
§ 35.50 DEFINITIONS AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The definitions set forth in 327 I.A.C. 2-6.1-4 are adopted and
incorporated herein as the definitions to be used in this Chapter 35 and any
subsequent subchapters where applicable and except to the extent that other
terms and conditions of this and subsequent subchapters may dictate otherwise.
   (B)   The reporting requirements set forth in 327 l.A.C. 2-6.1-1, et seq.,
are adopted and incorporated into this and subsequent subchapters except to the
extent that other terms and conditions of this and subsequent subchapters may
dictate otherwise.
(BC Ord. 2022-16, passed 6-27-22)
NOTIFICATION
§ 35.60 SPILL REPORT.
   Any person required to submit a spill report to the Office of Environmental
Response of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management pursuant to 327
l.A.C. 2-6.1-7 shall immediately thereafter communicate an identical spill
report to the County Sheriff's Office.
(BC Ord. 2022-16, passed 6-27-22)
§ 35.61 NOTIFICATION TO COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   Upon notification of a spill report, the County Sheriff's Office shall
notify the Department. The Department shall investigate the spill report and
shall determine the appropriate response.
(BC Ord. 2022-16, passed 6-27-22)
§ 35.62 INVESTIGATION AND CLEANUP.
   The staff of the Department shall be granted and allowed immediate access to
any premises upon which a spill has occurred. The Department shall determine
whether timely and appropriate actions have been initiated to contain and clean
up the spill. If such actions and activities have not been initiated, the
Department shall assume responsibility for the containment and cleanup
activities. The Department shall be immediately allowed access to any premises
upon which the Director, in its sole and absolute discretion, has determined
there to be a need for cleanup activity.
(BC Ord. 2022-16, passed 6-27-22)
§ 35.63 REIMBURSEMENT TO COUNTY.
   The costs and expenses associated with the involvement of the Department in
the containment and cleanup of any spill shall be reimbursed to the county by
the owner, operator, or controller of the facility, premises, or vehicle from
which such spill occurred. Any person who owns, operates, controls, or
maintains any facility, premises, or vehicle involved in a spill shall submit
to the Department any and all reports, information, laboratory tests, or other
data deemed necessary and appropriate by the Department in order to evaluate
the containment and cleanup activities and to carry out the purposes and intent
of this subchapter.
(BC Ord. 2022-16, passed 6-27-22)
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
§ 35.97 VIOLATIONS.
    Whenever this chapter applies it shall be unlawful and a penal ordinance
violation for any person to:
   (A)   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay the County Board of Commissioners,
the Director of Emergency Management, participating emergency services,
authorized emergency management volunteers or other authorities from
implementing, carrying out and enforcing the emergency plan;
   (B)    Fail to observe, abide by, and comply with any emergency management
duties, orders, regulations and procedures as made applicable to such person by
the appropriate authorities; or
   (C)   Falsely wear or carry identification as a member of the County
Department of Emergency Management, or to otherwise falsely identify or purport
to be a county emergency management authority.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.98 ENFORCEMENT.  
   Any regular or reserve police officer of Indiana or any of its political
subdivisions is hereby empowered to issue and serve a civil citation against
any person found to be committing an offense described above in §
35.97.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who commits an offense as described above in §
35.97 shall be liable to a fine of $2,500. However, such fine to be subject to
the discretion of the court of jurisdiction.
   (B)   Violation of any of the provisions, terms, or conditions of §
35.50, or §§
35.60 through
35.63, shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
(BC Ord. 1995-6, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2007-06, passed 6-20-07; Am. BC
Ord. 2022-16, passed 6-27-22)
CHAPTER 36: TAXATION
Section
County Option Income Tax
   
36.01   Imposition of tax; tax rate
Economic Development Income Tax
   
36.10   Imposition of tax
   
36.11   Tax rate
   
36.12   Adoption of capital improvement plan
Hotel and Motel Taxes
   
36.20   Innkeepers' tax and establishing a Convention, Visitor, and Tourism
Promotion Fund
Tax Phase-In Program
   
36.30   Application process
   
36.31   General standards and requirements
   
36.32   Tax deduction – real estate
   
36.33   Tax deduction – manufacturing equipment
   
36.34   Tax deduction – new research and development equipment
   
36.35   Subsequent statements of benefits
   
36.36   Compliance with statement of benefits
Cross-reference:
   Vehicle taxes, see §§
71.01,
71.02
COUNTY OPTION INCOME TAX
§ 36.01 IMPOSITION OF TAX; TAX RATE.
   (A)   The County Income Council imposes the County Option Income Tax on the
county taxpayers. The County Option Income Tax is imposed at a rate of 0.2% on
the resident county taxpayers of the county and at a rate of 0.05% on all other
county taxpayers. This tax takes effect on July 1 of 1986.
   (B)   The tax rate for subsequent years is as follows:
 
                      Resident County Taxpayers Other County Taxpayers
7-1-87 to 6-30-88     0.3%                      0.075%
7-1-88 to 6-30-89     0.4%                      0.1%
7-1-89 to 6-30-90     0.5%                      0.125%
7-1-90 to 6-30-91 and 0.6%                      0.15%
subsequent years
 
(CC Ord. 1986-1, passed 3-24-86)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCOME TAX
§ 36.10 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The County Council imposes the County Economic Development Income Tax on the
county taxpayers.
(CC Ord. 1989-2, passed 3-23-89)
§ 36.11 TAX RATE.
   The County Economic Development Income Tax is imposed at a rate of 0.5% on
the county taxpayers.
(CC Ord. 1989-2, passed 3-23-89; Am. CC Ord. 2000-1, passed 3-3-00)
§ 36.12 ADOPTION OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
   The capital improvement plan adopted March 13, 1995 is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this code the same as if set forth in full herein.
(BC Ord. passed 3-13-95; Am. BC Ord. 1995-14, passed 9-11-95; Am. BC Ord. 2002-
01, passed 1-16-02; Am. BC Ord. 2002-11, passed 11-20-02; Am. BC Ord. 2004-14,
passed 11-10-04; Am. BC Ord. 2005-19, passed 10-12-05; Am. BC Ord. 2008-01,
passed 2-13-08; Am. BC Ord. 2008-09, passed 10-22-08; Am. CC Ord. 2018-21,
passed 8-27-18; Am. BC Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-24-19; Am. BC Ord. 2019-03,
passed 1-28-19; Am. BC Amended Ord. 2019-03, passed 2-11-19; Am. BC Ord. 2021-
16, passed 4-12-21; Am. CC Ord. 2022-12, passed 5-9-22; Am. CC Ord. 2022-21,
passed 9-12-22)
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAXES
§ 36.20 INNKEEPERS' TAX AND ESTABLISHING A CONVENTION, VISITOR, AND TOURISM
PROMOTION FUND.
   (A)   An Innkeepers’ tax is hereby levied on every person, as defined by
I.C. 6-2.5-1-3, engaged in the business of renting or furnishing, for periods
of less than 30 days, any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations in any of
the following located in Warrick County (“Innkeepers’ Tax”):
      (1)   Hotel;
      (2)   Motel;
      (3)   Boat motel;
      (4)   Inn;
      (5)   College or university memorial union;
      (6)   College or university residence hall or dormitory; or
      (7)   Tourist cabin.
   (B)   The Innkeepers’ Tax does not apply to gross income received in a
transaction in which:
      (1)   A student rents lodgings in a college or university residence hall
while that student participates in a course of study for which the student
receives college credit from a college or university located in the county; or
      (2)   A person rents a room, lodging, or accommodations for a period of
30 days or more.
   (C)   The Innkeepers’ Tax shall be levied at the rate of 5% on the gross
retail income derived from lodging income only and is in addition to the state
gross retail tax imposed under I.C. 6-2.5.
   (D)   The Innkeepers’ Tax shall be imposed, paid to, and collected by the
Indiana Department of Revenue in accordance with I.C. 6-9-18-3.
   (E)   All of the provisions of I.C. 6-2.5 relating to rights, duties,
liabilities, procedures, penalties, definitions, exemptions, and administration
are applicable to the imposition and administration of the Innkeepers’ Tax,
except to the extent those provisions are in conflict or inconsistent with the
specific provisions of I.C. 6-9-18 or the requirements of the Warrick County
Treasurer.
   (F)   The Warrick County Treasurer is directed to establish the Warrick
County Convention, Visitor, and Tourism Fund (Fund 7304 - Innkeepers’ Tax
Collections) in which all amounts received under this section shall be
deposited.
   (G)   Money in the Warrick County Convention, Visitor, and Tourism Fund
shall be used to promote and encourage conventions, visitors, and tourism
within Warrick County. Such expenditures include, but are not limited to,
expenditures for advertising, promotional activities, trade shows, special
events, and recreation.
   (H)   Any person, corporation, or other entity described in division (A) of
this section shall begin collection of the Innkeepers’ Tax on April 1, 2018.
(CC Ord. 1999-1, passed 11-4-99; Am. CC Ord. 2017-01, passed 6-1-17; Am. CC
Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-22-18)
TAX PHASE-IN PROGRAM
§ 36.30 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   A person seeking declaration of an area as an economic revitalization area
shall file a statement of benefits (for redevelopment or rehabilitation of
property, new manufacturing equipment and/or new research and development
equipment) and an application with the Department of Economic Development on
the form or forms which may be prescribed by the Department of Economic
Development, County Council and/or the State Board of Tax Commissioners. The
application must be filed with the Department of Economic Development
(Department), prior to commencement of the project or the ordering of any
equipment. COMMENCEMENT OF THE PROJECT shall mean prior to the issuance of a
building permit for real estate improvements. ORDERING EQUIPMENT shall mean
issuance of the purchase order for equipment or other commitment to purchase or
obtain the equipment by the applicant.
   (A)   Submission requirements. The application shall be submitted in a
quantity as may be specified by the Department. For projects seeking tax phase-
in for real estate improvements, a site plan shall also be submitted, which
shows all buildings, parking areas, driveways, etc.
   (B)   Resolution requirements. The Department shall prepare the preliminary
and confirming resolutions for each tax phase-in project. The resolutions shall
include the information required by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1 et seq., including the
legal description or other suitable description of the property being
designated as an economic revitalization area; the length of time during which
the economic revitalization area designation shall be in effect (generally to
include two complete tax years and ending on March 1); whether the designation
is for real estate improvements, new manufacturing equipment or new research
and development equipment; and the length of deduction.
   (C)   Staff review. The Department shall review each application for
completeness and accuracy, gather and provide additional information needed by
the County Council to make an appropriate decision, analyze the application and
supplemental material and comment generally on the acceptability of the request
for economic revitalization area declaration. The Department shall assess the
impact of phase-in on the feasibility of the project. The Department shall
score the application based on the applicable tax phase-in scoring established
and attached as Exhibit A to Board of County Commissioners Resolution 2006-07.
This score will be used only as a guide by County Council to determine a
maximum allowable phase-in term. The Department and the County Council shall
review the scoring system at least annually.
   (D)   Recommendation of Economic Development Advisory Council. Before an
application and resolution is submitted to the County Council, the Department
shall present application and scoring to the Economic Development Advisory
Council for its review and recommendation.
   (E)   It is highly recommended that a representative for the project and/or
legal counsel be present and prepared to speak about the proposed project at
each County Council and Economic Development Advisory Council meetings where
the request for tax phase-in for the project is on the agenda.
(CC Res. 2006-07, passed 5-4-06)
§ 36.31 GENERAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Declaration of an economic revitalization area will be considered for
projects in the following categories:
      (1)   Manufacturing;
      (2)   Warehousing and distribution;
      (3)   New research and/or high technology facilities;
      (4)   Renovation of vacant manufacturing facilities;
      (5)   Office buildings;
      (6)   Recreational and commercial (retail) facilities as defined in I.C.
6-1.1-12.1-3(e) that are located in an economic development target area which
have been designated by the Economic Development Commission and the County
Council pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-7;
      (7)   New manufacturing equipment; and
      (8)   New research and development equipment.
   (B)   An application for declaration as an economic revitalization area
shall meet one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   The property, or area, is undesirable for, or impossible of, normal
development and occupancy because of a lack of development, cessation of
growth, deterioration of improvements or character of occupancy, age,
obsolescence, substandard buildings or other factors which have impaired values
or prevent a normal development or use of property.
      (2)   A property or area which includes a facility or a group of
facilities that are technologically, economically, or energy obsolete and where
the obsolescence may lead to a decline in employment and tax revenues.
   (C)   An application shall also address at least one of the following
development objectives:
      (1)   Generate the use of vacant or underutilized land;
      (2)   Rehabilitate or replace obsolete, deteriorated, vacant or
underutilized buildings;
      (3)   Retain or expand job opportunities; or
      (4)   Preserve historically or architecturally significant properties.
   (D)   Exclusions. Certain areas of the county have been, or may in the
future be, designated as "tax allocation areas" pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14-39,
through the adoption of redevelopment plans with tax increment financing
provisions. Areas within a tax allocation area shall not be considered for
declaration as an economic revitalization area unless said tax phase-in is
approved by a resolution of the County Redevelopment Commission. At the time of
the adoption of this resolution, the following areas of the county were
designated as tax allocation areas.
      (1)   Epworth Road Economic Development Area; and
      (2)   State Route 62 Economic Development Area.
(CC Res. 2006-07, passed 5-4-06)
§ 36.32 TAX DEDUCTION – REAL ESTATE.
   (A)   Application. Pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-5, the owner of property
which has been declared to be an economic revitalization area and who desires
to obtain the tax deduction provided by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-3 for "property" must
file a certified deduction application, on forms prescribed by the State Board
of Tax Commissioners, with the County Auditor before May 10 (except as
otherwise provided in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-5(b) or (e)) of the year in which the
addition to the assessed value is made.
   (B)   Length of deduction.
      (1)   For projects for which the statement of benefits was approved July
1, 2000, or after except as provided in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-3(a), for redevelopment
or rehabilitation is eligible for a deduction from the increase in assessed
value for a period of one to ten years.
      (2)   For projects for which the statement of benefits was approved
before July 1, 2000, for redevelopment or rehabilitation is eligible for a
deduction from the increase in assessed value for periods of three, six, or ten
years.
(CC Res. 2006-07, passed 5-4-06)
§ 36.33 TAX DEDUCTION – MANUFACTURING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Application. Pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-5.5, the owner of property
which has been declared to be an economic revitalization area and who desires
to obtain the tax deduction provided by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5 for "new
manufacturing equipment" must file a certified deduction application, on forms
prescribed by the State Board of Tax Commissioners with the County Auditor and
with the State Board of Tax Commissioners. A deduction application must be
filed in the year in which the new manufacturing equipment is installed and in
each of the following years for which abatement is sought.
   (B)   Length of deduction. For projects for which the statement of benefits
was approved July 1, 2000, or after except as provided in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5
(g), an owner of new manufacturing equipment is eligible for a deduction from
the assessed value of that equipment for a period of one to ten years.
(CC Res. 2006-07, passed 5-4-06)
§ 36.34 TAX DEDUCTION – NEW RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Application. Pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-5.5, the owner of property
which has been declared to be an economic revitalization area and who desires
to obtain the tax deduction provided by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5 for "new research
and development equipment" must file a certified deduction application, on
forms prescribed by the State Board of Tax Commissioners with the County
Auditor and with the State Board of Tax Commissioners. A deduction application
must be filed in the year in which the new research and development equipment
is installed and in each of the following years for which phase-in is sought.
   (B)   Length of deduction. For projects for which the statement of benefits
was approved July 1, 2000, or after except as provided in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5
(g), an owner of new research and development equipment is eligible for a
deduction from the assessed value of that equipment for a period of one to ten
years.
(CC Res. 2006-07, passed 5-4-06)
§ 36.35 SUBSEQUENT STATEMENTS OF BENEFITS.
   In the event that a business decides to initiate an additional investment
which was not included in its tax phase-in application and is of the same type
of investment (real estate improvements, new manufacturing equipment or
research and development equipment) for which the economic revitalization area
was designated and said designation is still in effect, the business shall
submit a new statement of benefits form to the Department before initiating (as
discussed in §
36.30) the additional investment. The Department shall prepare a resolution for
County Council action to approve the subsequent statement of benefits.
(CC Res. 2006-07, passed 5-4-06)
§ 36.36 COMPLIANCE WITH STATEMENT OF BENEFITS.
   (A)   Required submission. Projects for which the statement of benefits was
approved after June 30, 1991 are required by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-5.1 and 5.6 to
submit information showing the extent to which there have been reasonable
efforts to substantially comply with the statement of benefits. Within 45 days
from receipt of the information concerning compliance with a statement of
benefits, the County Council may determine whether the property owner seeking
tax phase-in has made reasonable efforts to substantially comply with the
statement of benefits previously approved by the County Council.
   (B)   Compliance review. Upon receipt of Form CF-1 concerning compliance
with a statement of benefits, the Department shall prepare a compliance review
sheet comparing projected investment in real estate, new manufacturing
equipment and/or new research and development equipment and job retention and/
or creation on the statement of benefits with actual investment and employment
information supplied concerning compliance with the statement of benefits. If
it does not appear that the taxpayer made reasonable efforts to substantially
comply with the statement of benefits, the Department shall contact the
taxpayer to obtain additional information as to the reasons that the taxpayer
did not substantially comply with statement of benefits, whether the taxpayer
made reasonable efforts to substantially comply, and whether any failure to
comply was caused by factors beyond the control of the taxpayer. The Department
shall transmit the compliance review sheet to the County Council President.
   (C)   County Council review. The County Council is responsible for reviewing
the compliance review sheets; making determinations as to whether a taxpayer
has made reasonable efforts to substantially comply with its statement of
benefits; and holding hearings for those taxpayers who do not appear to have
made reasonable efforts to substantially comply with their statement of
benefits. If the County Council determines that the taxpayer has not made
reasonable efforts to substantially comply with the statement of benefits, it
shall establish a date for a compliance hearing. It is highly recommended that
a representative for the taxpayer and/or legal counsel be present and prepared
to speak about the compliance at each County Council meeting or hearing where
taxpayer's compliance is on the agenda.
   (D)   Hearing notice. For those projects for which the County Council has
established a compliance hearing date, the Department shall prepare a written
notice which shall be sent to the taxpayer by Certified Mail, return receipt
requested, and if the project includes new manufacturing equipment or research
and development equipment, to the State Board of Tax Commissioners. Said notice
shall include the information required by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-5.9.
   (E)   Resolution to terminate deduction. For those projects for which a
compliance hearing is scheduled, the Department shall prepare and file a
resolution to terminate deduction.
   (F)   Compliance hearing. On the scheduled hearing date the County Council
shall conduct a compliance hearing to determine whether the property owner has
made reasonable efforts to substantially comply with the statement of benefits
and whether any failure to comply was caused by factors beyond the control of
the taxpayer.
   (G)   County Council determination.
      (1)   If the County Council determines that the taxpayer did not make
reasonable efforts to substantially comply with the statement of benefits and
that such failure to comply was not caused by factors beyond the control of the
taxpayer, the County Council shall terminate the deduction.
      (2)   If the County Council determines that the taxpayer did make
reasonable efforts to substantially comply with the statement of benefits or
that failure to comply was caused by factors beyond control of the taxpayer,
the County Council shall make a "Do Pass" not to terminate the deduction.
   (H)   County Council action. If the resolution to terminate the deduction is
adopted by the County Council, the Department shall transmit copies of the
resolution to the taxpayer, the County Auditor and, if the deduction was for
new manufacturing equipment, to the State Board of Tax Commissioners.
(CC Res. 2006-07, passed 5-4-06)
CHAPTER 37: FUNDS AND FEES
Section
Funds
   
37.01   Bridge Fund
   
37.02   County Corrections Fund
   
37.03   County Drug Free Community Fund
   
37.04   Sheriff's Department Enforcement Aid Fund
   
37.05   Solid Waste Disposal Fund
   
37.06   Building Construction, Rehabilitation, and Maintenance Fund
   
37.07   Parks and Recreation Non-Reverting Capital Fund
   
37.08   Parks and Recreation Non-Reverting Operating Fund
   
37.09   Sales Disclosure Fund
   
37.10   Commissioners Meeting Room Fund
   
37.11   Rainy Day Fund
   
37.12   Recorder’s Enhanced Access Fund
   
37.13   Animal Control Charitable Fund
   
37.14   Welfare Bequest Fund
   
37.15   County Congressional Township School Fund
   
37.16   Infraction Deferral and Pretrial Diversion Programs Fund
   
37.17   Highway Donation Fund
   
37.18   CASA Donation Fund
   
37.19   School Resource Officer Donation Fund
   
37.20   Warrick County Sheriff Community Service Fund
   
37.21   Cash Change Fund and Petty Cash Fun
   
37.22   Warrick Trails Donation Fund
   
37.23   Animal Care and Keeping Fund
   
37.24   Pandemic Relief Fund
   
37.25   Weights and Measures Fund
   
37.26   ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund
   
37.27   Road Usage Agreement Fund
   
37.28   LIT-Public Safety Jail Savings Fund
Miscellaneous Fees
   
37.35   Supplemental document recording fee
   
37.36   Service charge for insufficient funds checks
   
37.37   Real property endorsement fees
   
37.38   Vital records fees
   
37.39   Fees for accident reports
   
37.40   Fees for electronic map data
   
37.41   Additional felony and misdemeanor fees
   
37.42   Recorder’s Office fees
   
37.43   Bulk form access to County Recorder documents
   
37.44   Fee for costs of operation in issuing bonds
Cross-reference:
   Drug and Alcohol User Fee Fund, see §
37.41
   Public Defender Fund, see §
33.120
   Sex and Violent Offender Administration Fund, see §
32.04
   Stormwater Revenue Fund, see §
55.08
FUNDS
§ 37.01 BRIDGE FUND.
   (A)   There is established a cumulative Bridge Fund to provide funds for the
cost of construction, maintenance and repair of bridges, approaches and grade
separations. Additionally, said funds may be utilized for making county wide
bridge inspection and safety ratings of all bridges in the county not on the
state highway system.
   (B)   There is levied an additional tax of $.10 on each $100 of taxable real
and personal property within the county to provide monies for the fund, the tax
to be levied in 1993, payable in 1994, and annually thereafter for the next
succeeding four consecutive years or until reduced or rescinded as provided by
I.C. 8-16-3.
(BC Res. 1993-8, passed 6-28-93)
§ 37.02 COUNTY CORRECTIONS FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners, as the county legislative body, hereby
elects to receive deposits from the Department of Corrections in accordance
with Indiana Code.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners hereby elects to receive such deposits at
Level 3 funding.
   (C)   There is hereby created a County Corrections Fund to be administered
by the Common Council. The funds shall consist of deposits received from the
Department of Corrections in accordance with I.C. 11-12-6.
   (D)   The County Corrections Fund may be used only for funding the operation
of county jail, jail programs, or other local correctional facilities. Any
money remaining in a County Corrections Fund at the end of the year does not
revert to any other fund, but remains in the County Corrections Fund.
(BC Ord. 1997-2, passed 1-27-97; Am. BC Ord. 2000-1, passed 1-10-00)
§ 37.03 COUNTY DRUG FREE COMMUNITY FUND.
   (A)   The office of the Prosecuting Attorney for the Second Judicial
District, commonly known as the County Prosecutor's office qualifies hereunder
as an agency.
   (B)   The County Prosecutor's office is hereby designated as the agency to
which funds shall be allocated from the County Drug Free Community Fund on the
following basis:
      (1)   Twenty-five percent to provide pre- vention, and education services
in the county.
      (2)   Twenty-five percent to provide criminal justice services in the
county.
      (3)   Twenty-five percent being the uncommitted funds, to be used for
purposes accepted under the act.
   (C)   The designated Prosecuting Attorney's Office for the Second Judicial
District, shall make application to the county Fiscal Body, being the County
Council for the appropriation of the funds, that from time to time, are needed
to carry out the designation herein.
   (D)   The designation in the ordinance herein specifically excludes
designation of any agency to receive the 25% of the money in the funds to
provide treatment.
(BC Ord. 1990-22, passed 7-23-90)
§ 37.04 SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT ENFORCEMENT AID FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created within the county a Sheriff's Department
Enforcement Aid Fund.
      (1)   The fund shall consist of deposit in the form of cash assets
obtained pursuant to forfeiture proceedings and other law enforcement related
seizures recovered by the Sheriff's Department which are not required to be
deposited into the County General Fund. No criminal defendant shall be given a
reduced sentence as a result of the forfeiture of any assets.
      (2)   The fund shall also consist of any monies that may be appropriated
from time to time by the County Council to be utilized by the Sheriff's
Department, in its enforcement of the laws of the state.
      (3)   The fund shall also consist of any orders of restitution of “buy
money” as might be expended by the Sheriff's Department in the enforcement of
the narcotics and controlled substances laws of the state.
   (B)   Monies in the Sheriff's Department Enforcement Aid Fund shall be
subject to appropriation in accordance with I.C. 36-2-5-2.
   (C)   It is the stated intent of the Board of Commissioners in creating this
fund, that the Sheriff's Department shall have the right to utilize the funds
contained within the Sheriff's Department Enforcement Aid Fund in the pursuit
of all lawful law enforcement activities including but necessarily limited to
the payment of money to informants; the utilization of funds to purchase
controlled substances as a part of a law enforcement investigation; the payment
of legitimate expenses incurred in confidential controlled substance
investigation and similar type expenditures, and the purchase of enforcement
and/or office equipment, or related expenses that will aid in the investigative
process as deemed necessary by the Sheriff.
   (D)   Before utilization of funds in the confidential investigation purpose,
the Sheriff's Department shall establish a standard operating procedure and
policy for the accounting for said funds.
   (E)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and compliance with I.C. 36-2-4-8.
(BC Ord. 1992-3, passed 1-27-92; Am. BC Ord. 2004-17, passed 12-15-04)
§ 37.05 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Solid Waste Disposal Non-Reverting Capital
Fund.
   (B)   The capital for such fund shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Deposits by the Board of Com- missionary of the revenues of its
facility that remain after the payment of expenses, in an amount determined the
Common Council upon the recommendation of the Board of Commissioners; and
      (2)   Appropriations of money derived from user fees in an amount
determined by the fiscal body.
   (C)   After an appropriation by the Common Council, the Board of
Commissioners may use the capital in said fund for the following:
      (1)   Acquisition of property and other rights;
      (2)   Installation, construction, equipping, expanding, modifying, or
remodeling new or existing facilities; or
      (3)   Engineering, legal, surveying, estimating, appraising, planning,
designing, and other expenses necessary to determine the feasibility of
implementing solid waste disposal methods.
(BC Res. 1986-5, passed 6-13-86; Am. CC Ord. 1986-5, passed 7-10-86)
§ 37.06 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, REHABILITATION, AND MAINTENANCE FUND.
   (A)   Immediately upon the reimbursement of the enhanced emergency telephone
system funds into the County General Fund, an amount equivalent to said
reimbursed funds shall be appropriated by the County Council into the budget
item identified as the County Non-reverting Building Fund, and contained in the
Commissioners' budget. Upon approval of said appropriation, the entire said
amount shall immediately be transferred to a separate fund herein described and
entitled Warrick County Building Construction, Rehabilitation and Maintenance
Fund.
   (B)   Said funds shall without further appropriation be used solely for
construction, rehabilitation, and/or maintenance of any and all county
buildings as so designated and approved by the County Commissioners.
   (C)   Said funds shall be non-reverting, and shall remain from year to year
in the County Building Construction, Rehabilitation and Maintenance Fund.
(BC Ord. 1998-13 passed, 10-13-98)
§ 37.07 PARKS AND RECREATION NON- REVERTING CAPITAL FUND.
   (A)   Now therefore be it ordained by the County Council that there is
hereby established a special non-reverting capital fund within the County for
the Department of Parks and Recreation. Said fund shall be funded by the
proceeds from the sale of any real property owned by the County in the name of
the Department of Parks and Recreation. Further, said fund shall be utilized
exclusively for park purposes from which expenditures may be made by
appropriation by the County Council. (BC Ord. 1998-5, passed 11-5-98)
§ 37.08 PARKS AND RECREATION NON- REVERTING OPERATING FUND.
   (A)   Now therefore be it ordained by the County Council that there is
hereby established a special non-reverting operating fund within the county for
the Department of Parks and Recreation which said fund shall be utilized
exclusively for park purposes from which expenditures may be made by
appropriation by the Park Board. Funding for the non-reverting operating fund
shall be from the proceeds of the sale of real property by the Park Board or
from appropriations by the County Council. The balance of said fund shall not
exceed the sum of $100,000. Any appropriation for an expenditure in excess of
$10,000 shall require the approval of the County Council in addition to the
Park Board.
(BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 11-5-98)
§ 37.09 SALES DISCLOSURE FUND.
   (A)   Effective from and after its passage and execution by the members of
the County Council, this section shall establish a sales disclosure fund in
accordance with I.C. 6-1.1-5.5-4.5.
   (B)   The County Auditor shall deposit the monies received under I.C. 6-1.1-
5.5-4 into this fund.
   (C)   The disbursement of money from this fund shall be in accordance with
and for the purposes identified in I.C. 6-1.1-5.5-4.5.
(CC Ord. 2002-01, passed 10-3-02)
§ 37.10 COMMISSIONERS MEETING ROOM FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a special non- reverting operating fund
within the county for the Commissioners meeting room which said fund shall be
utilized exclusively for purposes of renovating and maintaining the
Commissioners’ meeting room in the County Courthouse and from which
expenditures may be made by an appropriation by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Funding for the non-reverting operating fund shall be from donations
from persons, including, but not limited to individuals, partnerships,
corporations and the like, which are specifically designated for the purpose of
renovating and/or maintaining the Commissioners’ meeting room.
(BC Ord. 2002-5, passed 4-17-02)
§ 37.11 RAINY DAY FUND.
   (A)   Funding of the Rainy Day Fund. A Warrick County “Rainy Day Fund” has
been established to receive transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised
by a general or special tax levy on taxable property within the county whenever
the purpose of such tax levy has been fulfilled and an unused and unencumbered
balance remains, including those funds allowable under I.C. § 36-1-8-5, I.C. §
6-3.6-9-15, or any other funding source specified in a resolution that is
adopted by the County Council under I.C. § 36-1-8-5.1 and not otherwise
prohibited by law.
   (B)   Purposes of the fund. The funds, on deposit in the Rainy Day Fund, may
be used for the operation of Warrick County and its various departments,
including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, costs of services, supplies,
equipment, capital improvements, repairs and similar expenditures.
   (C)   Appropriations. The Warrick County Council may authorize the
expenditure of funds from the Rainy Day Fund, by appropriations made in the
same manner as other funds are appropriated that receive tax moneys, upon
making a finding that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with the
intent of the Rainy Day Fund.
(CC Ord. 2003-02, passed 11-6-03; Am. CC Ord. 2004-01, passed 2-5-04; Am. CC
Ord. 2016-01, passed 10-6-16)
§ 37.12 RECORDER’S ENHANCED ACCESS FUND.
   (A)   Established. Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8.3, the County Council hereby
establishes the County Office of the Recorder’s Enhanced Access Fund (“Enhanced
Access Fund”).
   (B)   Funding. The Enhanced Access Fund shall consist of fees charged by the
Recorder for providing enhanced access to a public record in accordance with
I.C. 5-14-3-8(h) and (i), and shall be subject to the appropriation by the
County Council.
   (C)   Use of funds. In accordance with Indiana Code 5-14-3-8.3(b) all funds
collected in the Enhanced Access Fund shall be specifically dedicated to the
following purposes:
      (1)   The replacement, improvement and expansion of capital expenditures;
and
      (2)   The reimbursement of operating expenses incurred in providing
enhanced access to public information.
(CC Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-1-08)
§ 37.13 ANIMAL CONTROL CHARITABLE FUND.
   (A)   Creation of County Animal Control Charitable Fund. County Animal
Control is hereby authorized to create a new charitable fund (“Charitable
Fund”), whereby monetary charitable donations made payable to “Warrick County
Animal Control” shall be placed in the Charitable Fund. The purpose of this
Charitable Fund is to provide residents of the county with the ability to make
donations to the County Animal Control Department, to support and maintain its
services which it provides to the residents of the county.
   (B)   Duration. The Charitable Fund shall be perpetual until terminated by
another subsequent ordinance enacted by the Board of County Commissioners. In
the event the Charitable Fund is terminated for any reason, then all proceeds
from the terminated fund shall be distributed to the County Humane Society.
(BC Ord. 2014-10, passed 3-24-14)
§ 37.14 WELFARE BEQUEST FUND.
   (A)   The Welfare Bequest Fund is hereby established for Warrick County, an
unrestricted fund with the Warrick County Community Foundation, to be funded
with the unclaimed deposits with People’s Bank and Trust of Boonville.
   (B)   The Fund shall be used to grant monies to benefit the general health,
well-being and needs of county residents as deemed appropriate by the Warrick
County Community Foundation.
   (C)   The President of the Board of Commissioners shall enter into a fund
agreement with the Foundation for the establishment of the Fund.
   (D)   The County Treasurer and County Auditor are hereby authorized to take
all steps necessary to transfer the monies and take any other necessary and
reasonable steps to complete the intent and purposes of this section.
(BC Res. 2015-06, passed 3-9-16)
§ 37.15 COUNTY CONGRESSIONAL TOWNSHIP SCHOOL FUND.
   (A)   The Council finds that the fund, in its entirety, shall be surrendered
to State of Indiana;
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. § 20-42-2-4.5, by adoption of this Resolution, the
Board of Warrick County Commissioners, the Warrick County Auditor, and the
Warrick County Treasurer shall take all steps necessary to surrender the
custody of the fund to the treasurer of the State of Indiana;
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. § 20-42-2-4.5(b), within ten days after the passage
of this section by the Council, the Warrick County shall prepare and file with
the Board of Warrick County Commissioners a report (the "Report") showing the
following:
      (1)   The total amount of the fund that has been entrusted to and is held
in trust by Warrick County;
      (2)   The total amount of the fund that is loaned as provided by law;
      (3)   The total amount of the fund, if any, loaned to Warrick County and
which loans are unpaid;
      (4)   The total amount of the fund held in cash in the possession and
custody of Warrick County and that is not loaned; and
      (5)   A separate schedule of past due loans showing the unpaid balance of
principal and the amount of delinquent interest due and unpaid on each
delinquent loan.
   (D)   (1)   Pursuant to I.C. § 20-42-2-4.5(c), the Board of Warrick County
Commissioners shall examine the Report, and, if found correct, the Board of
Warrick County Commissioners shall order:
         (a)   That the report be entered on its records; and
         (b)   The Warrick County Auditor to draw the Warrick County Auditor's
warrant, payable to the treasurer of the State of Indiana, for the amount of
the fund that is not loaned and is held in cash in the custody and possession
of Warrick County as shown by the report.
      (2)   The Warrick County Auditor shall forward the warrants to the
auditor of the State of Indiana together with a certified copy of the report.
The Warrick County Auditor shall also forward with the payment a certified copy
of this section electing to surrender the custody of the fund, in its entirety.
   (E)   Pursuant to I.C. § 20-42-2-4.5(d), after passage by the Council of
this section, no part of the fund may be loaned by Warrick County or by any
official of Warrick County. Except as provided in I.C. § 20-42-2-4.5(d), all
outstanding loans of the fund, if any, not part of the amount retained by
Warrick County at the time of the passage of this section shall be collected
when due. Any loan that comes due and payable after the passage of this section
may be renewed for one additional five year period, on the application of the
person owing the loan as provided by law. However, a loan that is more than one
year delinquent in payment of principal or interest at the time of the passage
of this resolution of the Council may not be renewed.
   (F)   Pursuant to I.C. § 20-42-2-4.5(e), on May 1 or November 1 immediately
after the passage of this resolution and each May 1 and November 1 thereafter,
all the money collected and on hand that belongs to the fund that is to be
surrendered shall be paid to the treasurer of the state. If at the time for a
semiannual payment the amount collected and paid to the treasurer of the state
when added to the amounts previously paid to the treasurer of the state is less
than the result determined by multiplying 2.5% of the amount in this section by
the number of semiannual payments that have occurred after the passage of this
section, the Warrick County Auditor shall draw the Warrick County Auditor’s
warrant on the general fund of Warrick County for an amount sufficient to pay
to the treasurer of the state the difference between the amount paid and the
amount equal to the result of multiplying 2.5% of the amount designated in this
section by the number of semi-annual payments that have occurred after the
passage of this section. The maximum time to surrender money that Warrick
County designates in this section is for a period not to exceed 20 years.
(CC Res. 2016-03, passed 10-6-16)
§ 37.16 INFRACTION DEFERRAL AND PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAMS FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a special fund to be designated as the
“Infraction Deferral and Pretrial Diversion Programs Fund,” in the Office of
the Warrick County Prosecutor. This fund shall be a continuing, non-reverting
fund, with all balances remaining therein at the end of each year. Such
balances shall not lapse into the Warrick County's general fund, or ever be
directly or indirectly diverted in any manner to uses other than those stated
in this section.
   (B)   All service fees and charges which are collected in the administration
of the Warrick County Prosecutor's infraction deferral and pretrial diversion
programs shall be deposited in the Infraction Deferral and Pretrial Diversion
Programs Fund.
   (C)   The Infraction Deferral and Pretrial Diversion Programs Fund shall be
administered by the Warrick County Prosecutor, and all funds deposited therein
shall be appropriated and used solely for the use and benefit of the Warrick
County Prosecutor's Office and the Warrick County Prosecutor not inconsistent
with this section.
   (D)   The funds derived from the Warrick County Prosecutor's infraction
deferral program and the Warrick County Prosecutor's pretrial diversion program
and deposited into the Infraction Deferral and Pretrial Diversion Programs Fund
may only be disbursed to I.C. § 33-39-8-5 and for one or more of the following
purposes:
      (1)   Personnel expenses related to the operation of the program.
      (2)   Special training for:
         (a)   A prosecuting attorney;
         (b)   A deputy prosecuting attorney;
         (c)   Support staff for a prosecuting attorney or deputy prosecuting
attorney; or
         (d)   a law enforcement offer.
      (3)   Employment of a deputy prosecutor or prosecutorial support staff.
      (4)   Victim assistance.
      (5)   Electronic legal research.
      (6)   Office equipment, including computers, computer software,
communication devices, office machinery, furnishings and office supplies.
      (7)   Expenses of a criminal investigation and prosecution.
      (8)   An activity or program operated by the prosecuting attorney that is
intended to reduce or prevent criminal activity, including:
         (a)   Substance abuse;
         (b)   Child abuse;
         (c)   Domestic violence;
         (d)   Operating while intoxicated; and
         (e)   Juvenile delinquency.
      (9)   The provision of evidence based mental health and addiction,
intellectual disability, developmental disability, autism and co-occurring
autism and mental illness forensic treatment services to reduce the risk of
recidivism in a program administered or coordinated by a provider certified or
licensed by the division of mental health and addiction or the division of
disability and rehabilitative services with expertise in providing evidence
based forensic treatment services.
      (10)   Any other purpose that benefits the office of the prosecuting
attorney or law enforcement and that is agreed upon by Warrick County's fiscal
body and the prosecuting attorney.
   (E)   The funds collected by the Warrick County Prosecutor's Office through
its deferral and pretrial diversion programs may be used only in accordance
with guidelines adopted by the prosecuting attorneys counsel under I.C. § 33-
39-8-5.
(BC Ord. 2017-11, passed 4-24-17; Am. CC Ord. 2017-03, passed 10-5-17)
§ 37.17 HIGHWAY DONATION FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby establishes a non-reverting
operating fund to be named the Warrick County Highway Donation Fund. Monetary
donations made payable to the “Warrick County Highway Donation Fund” shall be
deposited into said fund and the application of funds donated to the Highway
Donation Fund shall be according to the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners.
   (B)   The Highway Donation Fund shall be perpetual until terminated by
enactment of a subsequent ordinance or amendment. In the event the Highway
Donation Fund is terminated for any reason, the disposition of the fund
balance, if any, shall be determined in the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2018-05, passed 2-12-18; Am. BC Ord. 2018-14, passed 6-11-18)
§ 37.18 CASA DONATION FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby establishes the Warrick County CASA
Donation Fund for the specific purpose of providing citizens and organizations
the ability to support and maintain the Warrick County CASA Program. Monetary
donations made payable to the “Warrick County CASA Donation Fund” shall be
placed in the CASA Donation Fund. The application of funds donated to the CASA
Donation Fund shall be for administrative costs associated with operating the
CASA Program, including, without limitation, payment of employee and staff
salaries.
   (B)   The CASA Donation Fund shall be perpetual until terminated by the
terms of this section or by enactment of a subsequent ordinance or amendment.
In the event the CASA Donation Fund is terminated for any reason, the
disposition of the fund balance, if any, shall be determined by the Board of
Commissioners.
(Ord. 2018-20, passed 8-27-18)
§ 37.19 SCHOOL RESOURCE OFFICER DONATION FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby establishes the School Resource
Officer Donation Fund for the specific purpose of providing citizens and
organizations the ability to support and maintain the School Resource Officer
Program. Monetary donations made payable to the “Warrick County School Resource
Officer Donation Fund” shall be placed in the School Resource Officer Donation
Fund. The application of funds donated to the School Resource Officer Donation
Fund shall be for costs incurred by Warrick County, that are associated with
operating the School Resource Officer Program, including, without limitation,
payment of overtime, salaries, benefits, equipment, and other related expenses
for School Resource Officers, including those Sheriff’s Department Deputies
assigned as School Resource Officers, during the time in which they are
assigned and working as School Resource Officers for the purposes of providing
safety and security in county schools.
   (B)   The School Resource Officer Donation Fund shall be perpetual until
terminated by the terms of this section or by enactment of a subsequent
ordinance or amendment. In the event the School Resource Officer Donation Fund
is terminated for any reason, the disposition of the fund balance, if any,
shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2018-23, passed 9-10-18)
§ 37.20 WARRICK COUNTY SHERIFF COMMUNITY SERVICE FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County hereby establishes the
Warrick County Sheriff Community Service Fund No. 4910 for the purpose of
providing citizens and organizations the ability to support and maintain the
Warrick County Sheriffs Department. Monetary donations made payable to the
"Warrick County Sheriff Community Service Fund" shall be placed in the Warrick
County Sheriff Community Service Fund. The application of funds donated to the
Warrick County Sheriff Community Service Fund shall be according to the
discretion of the Sheriff of Warrick County.
   (B)   The Warrick County Sheriff Community Service Fund shall be non-
reverting and perpetual until terminated by the terms of this Ordinance or by
enactment of a subsequent ordinance or amendment. In the event the Warrick
County Sheriff Community Service Fund is terminated for any reason, the
disposition of the fund balance, if any, shall be determined by the Board of
Commissioners of Warrick County.
(BC Ord. 2019-05, passed 3-25-19)
§37.21 CASH CHANGE FUND AND PETTY CASH FUN.
   (A)   The Council hereby establishes a cash change and petty cash fund for
the Warrick County Sheriff’s Department ("Sheriff’s Department") in the
following amounts:
 
Department             Fund Type        Custodian              Amount
Warrick County Sheriff Cash Change Fund Warrick County Sheriff $50
Warrick County Sheriff Petty Cash Fund  Warrick County Sheriff $450
 
   (B)   The amounts for the Sheriff’s Department Cash Change Fund established
under this section shall be paid by warrant drawn on the appropriate fund in
favor of the Warrick County Sheriff and shall be returned to the appropriate
fund when the fund is no longer needed.
   (C)   The custodian of the Sheriff’s Department Cash Change Fund shall be
the Warrick County Sheriff or designee, who shall use the fund to make change
when collecting cash revenues. The Warrick County Sheriff or designee shall
account for the fund in the same manner as other funds.
   (D)   The amount for the Sheriff’s Department Petty Cash Fund established
under this section shall be paid by warrant drawn on the appropriate fund in
favor of the Warrick County Sheriff and shall be returned to the appropriate
fund when the fund is no longer needed.
   (E)   The custodian of the Sheriff’s Department Petty Cash Fund shall be the
Warrick County Sheriff or designee, who shall use the fund to pay small or
emergency items of operating expense. A receipt shall be provided for each
expenditure made from the fund.
(CC Ord. 2019-04, passed 9-5-19)
§ 37.22 WARRICK TRAILS DONATION FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County, Indiana, hereby
establishes the Warrick Trails Donation Fund for the purpose of providing
citizens and organizations the ability to support and maintain the Warrick
Trails system. Monetary donations made payable to the “Warrick Trails Donation
Fund” shall be placed in the Warrick Trails Donation Fund. The application of
funds donated to the Warrick Trails Donation Fund shall be according to the
discretion of the Board of Commissioners of Warrick County.
   (B)   The Warrick Trails Donation Fund shall be perpetual until terminated
by the terms of this Ordinance or by enactment of a subsequent ordinance or
amendment. In the event the Warrick Trails Donation Fund is terminated for any
reason, the disposition of the fund balance, if any, shall be determined by the
Board of Commissioners of Warrick County.
(CC Ord. 2019-29, passed 11-25-19)
§ 37.23 ANIMAL CARE AND KEEPING FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County hereby establishes the
Animal Care and Keeping Fund for the purpose of receipting any bond payments
posted by an owner of an animal impounded pursuant to I.C. 35-46-3-6. The
application of bond monies posted and receipted into the Animal Care and
Keeping Fund shall be to fund the care and keeping of such animal(s) by Warrick
County Animal Control, in accordance with I.C. 35-46-3-6.
   (B)   The Animal Care and Keeping Fund shall be perpetual until terminated
by the terms of this section or by enactment of a subsequent ordinance or
amendment. In the event the Animal Care and Keeping Fund is terminated for any
reason, the disposition of the Fund balance, if any, shall be determined by the
Board of Commissioners of Warrick County.
(BC Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-10-20)
§ 37.24 PANDEMIC RELIEF FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County hereby establishes the
Pandemic Relief Fund for the purpose of providing financial assistance to non-
profit organizations in Warrick County in order to respond to, and mitigate
against the effects of, COVID-19.
   (B)   An amount of $250,000 shall be placed in the Pandemic Relief Fund from
Fund No. 1000.31116.000.0068. The application of monies in the Pandemic Relief
Fund shall be according to the discretion of the Board of Commissioners of
Warrick County.
   (C)   The Pandemic Relief Fund shall remain in effect until June 1, 2021, or
until such time as the public health emergency, as declared by the Governor of
the State of Indiana on March 6, 2020, expires or is otherwise rescinded,
whichever occurs first. Following such termination of the Pandemic Relief Fund,
the remaining fund balance, if any, shall revert to Fund No.
1000.31116.000.0068.
   (D)   Such financial assistance to non-profit organizations from the
Pandemic Relief Fund shall be in the form of grant awards to each approved non-
profit organization, in amounts to be determined by the Board of Commissioners
of Warrick County. Warrick County shall enter into a grant agreement with each
non-profit organization that is provided financial assistance from the Pandemic
Relief Fund, which shall specify that said non-profit organization's use of
such monies may be audited by Warrick County. The Board of Commissioners of
Warrick may, from time to time, adopt other rules and procedures regarding the
administration and/or provision of any financial assistance to non-profit
organizations from the Pandemic Relief Fund.
(BC Ord. 2021-13, passed 2-8-21)
§ 37.25 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County hereby establishes the
Weights and Measures Fund for the purpose of collecting penalties, fines, and
damages recovered from violations of
Chapter 112 of the Warrick County, IN Code of Ordinances. The application of
monies deposited into the Weights and Measures Fund shall be for capital
purchases for the Warrick County Weights and Measures Department, subject to
appropriation of funds by the Warrick County Council, as well as to cover the
costs of administering and enforcing
Chapter 112 of the Warrick County, IN Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   The Weights and Measures Fund shall be perpetual until terminated by
the terms of this section or by enactment of a subsequent ordinance or
amendment. In the event the Weights and Measures Fund is terminated for any
reason, the disposition of the fund balance, if any, shall be determined by the
Board of Commissioners of Warrick County.
(BC Ord. 2021-15, passed 3-8-21)
§ 37.26 ARP CORONAVIRUS LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County hereby establishes the
ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund No. 8950 (the "Fund") for the
purposes of receipting all ARP Funds allocated and distributed to the county
under the ARP Act.
   (B)   The ARP Funds shall be used and applied in accordance with the
purposes set forth in Section 603(c) of the Social Security Act, as added by
Section 9001 of the ARP Act, as more particularly described as follows:
      (1)   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to COVID-19
or its negative economic impacts, including assistance to households, small
businesses, and nonprofits, or to aid impacted industries such as tourism,
travel, and hospitality;
      (2)   To respond to workers performing essential work during the COVID-19
public health emergency by providing premium pay to eligible workers of Warrick
County that are performing such essential work, or by providing grants to
eligible employers that have eligible workers who perform essential work;
      (3)   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of Warrick County due to the COVID-19 public health
emergency relative to revenues collected in the most recent full fiscal year of
Warrick County prior to the emergency; or
      (4)   To make necessary investments in water, sewer, or broadband
infrastructure.
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners and the Warrick County Council shall
establish the plan, as may be amended from time to time, along with conditions
and rules, which shall set forth the specific uses and applications of the ARP
funds, and such plan, as may be amended and updated, is hereby incorporated
into this section by reference.
   (D)   The ARP funds shall be appropriated by the Warrick County Council to
the Fund before any use.
   (E)   Any and all expenditures of the ARP Funds shall be approved by the
Board of Commissioners of Warrick County, with any and all claims to be paid
from the Fund in accordance with routine claim processes, as outlined in I.C.
5-11-10-1.6, accompanied by sufficient supporting documentation as required
under the plan.
   (F)   The Fund shall remain in effect until December 31, 2024, unless
otherwise rescinded pursuant to enactment of a subsequent ordinance or
amendment. Following such termination of the Fund, the remaining fund balance,
if any, shall be paid to the United States Treasury Department, if required.
   (G)   The Warrick County Auditor shall maintain accurate and complete
financial records concerning any expenditure of monies deposited and paid from
the Fund.
   (H)   The ARP funds shall not be used for any type of deposit into any
pension fund.
   (I)   This section may be amended at any time by the Board of Commissioners
of Warrick County so long as such amendment complies with Section 603(c) of the
Social Security Act, as added by Section 9001 of the ARP Act.
(BC Ord. 2021-17, passed 4-12-21)
§ 37.27 ROAD USAGE AGREEMENT FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County hereby establishes the
Road Usage Agreement Fund for the purpose of collecting fees paid to Warrick
County as part of any road usage agreement executed by Warrick County pursuant
to §
70.08 of the Warrick County, IN Code of Ordinances. The application of monies
deposited into the Road Usage Agreement Fund shall be for the support and
maintenance of all Warrick County highways, in the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners.
   (B)   The Road Usage Agreement Fund shall be non-reverting and perpetual
until terminated by the terms of this section or by enactment of a subsequent
ordinance or amendment. In the event the Road Usage Agreement Fund is
terminated for any reason, the disposition of the fund balance, if any, shall
be determined by the Board of Commissioners of Warrick County.
(BC Ord. 2021-34, passed 9-13-21)
§ 37.28 LIT-PUBLIC SAFETY JAIL SAVINGS FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby establishes the LIT-Public Safety
Jail Savings Fund for the purpose of receiving funds transferred to the fund
from time to time by the County Council. The application of monies deposited
into the LIT-Public Safety Jail Savings Fund shall be for those costs and
expenses related to the planning, design, acquisition of land, and construction
of a new jail facility in the county, in the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners.
   (B)   The LIT-Public Safety Jail Savings Fund shall be non-reverting and
perpetual until terminated by the terms of this section or by enactment of a
subsequent ordinance or amendment. In the event the LIT-Public Safety Jail
Savings Fund is terminated for any reason, the disposition of the fund balance,
if any, shall be determined by the County Board of Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2022-15, passed 5-23-22)
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
§ 37.35 SUPPLEMENTAL DOCUMENT RECORDING FEE.
   (A)   A supplemental fee for recording a document in the amount of $3 per
document shall be charged by the County Recorder's Office which shall be paid
at the time of recording.
   (B)   The supplemental recording fee is in addition to all other recording
fees required by law for services rendered by the County Recorder's Office.
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-2-7-10(c) the supplemental recording fee shall be
placed in the Recorder's Records Perpetuation Fund, along with the fees
collected per I.C. 36-2-7-10(b)(5), 36-2-7-10(b)(6), and 36-2-7-10(b)(9), to be
used by the County Recorder without appropriation, for the preservation of
records and the improvement of recordkeeping systems and equipment.
   (D)   The County Recorder shall post the fee set forth in this section in a
prominent place within the Recorder's Office where the fee schedule is readily
accessible to the public.
(BC Ord. 1995-18, passed 9-11-95)
§ 37.36 SERVICE CHARGE FOR INSUFFICIENT FUNDS CHECKS.
   (A)   For all checks payable to the county or one of its offices returned
for insufficient funds the county shall charge an insufficient fund check
charge in an amount not to exceed the greater of $20 or 5% of the amount of any
insufficient fund check, but in no event shall said service charge exceed the
sum of $250 for any one check.
   (B)   All insufficient fund check charges received by the county or one of
its officers shall be deposited in the General Fund of the county.
(BC Ord. 1992-21, passed 8-3-92)
§ 37.37 REAL PROPERTY ENDORSEMENT FEES.
   (A)    The Warrick County Auditor is hereby authorized to collect a fee of
$10 for each deed, or legal description of each parcel contained in the deed,
for which the Auditor makes a real property endorsement.
   (B)   The fee herein authorized shall be in addition to any other fee
provided by law.
   (C)   The Warrick County Auditor shall place all revenues received in
accordance with this §
37.37 in a dedicated fund for use of maintaining the county plat books, in
traditional or electronic format.
(BC Ord. 1989-15, passed 8-7-89; Am. BC Ord. 2006-19, passed 12-20-06; Am. BC
2019-15, passed 6-10-19)
§ 37.38 VITAL RECORDS FEES.
   (A)   Birth record fees. A fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances shall be required for each
certified copy of a birth record. All funds hereunder shall be collected by the
Health Officer and shall become a part of the Warrick County Health Fund.
   (B)   Death record fees. A fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances shall be required for each
certified copy of a death record. Upon collection of the fee by the Health
Officer, the appropriate Coroners Continuing Education Fee pursuant to I.C. 16-
37-1-9(b), and as amended from time to time, shall first be transferred to the
County Auditor within 30 days of collection, and the balance of the funds
collected by the Health Officer shall become a part of the Warrick County
Health Fund.
   (C)   Affidavit filing fees. 
      (1)   A fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances shall be required for filing
each of the following:
         (a)   An affidavit requesting an amendment to a birth certificate;
         (b)   An affidavit of correction by notification; and
         (c)   An affidavit of a home birth.
      (2)   All funds shall be collected by the Health Officer and shall become
a part of the Warrick County Health Fund.
   (D)   Paternity affidavit fees.
      (1)   A fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances shall be required for each
certified copy of a requested paternity affidavit that does not involve its
completion or execution by the Warrick County Department of Health.
      (2)   For each paternity affidavit completed or executed at the
Department of Health, a fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances shall be required. The fee
described in this division is separate and independent from the fee established
in division (D)(1) above.
      (3)   All funds assessed hereunder shall be collected by the Health
Officer and shall become a part of the Warrick County Health Fund.
   (E)   Computer-generated reports. A fee as described in the county ordinance
regulating county copying fee shall be required for information pages printed
on the computer for genealogy purposes. All funds hereunder shall be collected
by the Health Officer and shall become a part of the Warrick County Health
Fund.
(BC Ord. 1991-14, passed 7-22-91; Am. BC Ord. 1997-13, passed 9-8-97; Am. BC
Ord. 2005-04, passed 4-20-05; Am. BC Ord. 2010-09, passed 7-26-10; Am. BC Ord.
2013-19, passed 7-22-13; Am. BC Ord. 2018-04, passed 2-26-18; Am. BC Ord. 2023-
08, passed 4-24-23; Am. BC Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
§ 37.39 FEES FOR ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   The office of the County Sheriff is authorized to institute a charge of $5
for each request for a copy of an accident report pursuant to I.C. 9-29-11-1.
(CC Ord. 2006-1, passed 4-13-06)
§ 37.40 FEES FOR ELECTRONIC MAP DATA.
   (A)   Title and definitions.  
      (1)   This section and any parts herein shall be known as the Warrick
County Electronic Map Ordinance.
      (2)   In accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-2, PERSON as used in this section is
defined as an individual, a corporation, a limited liability company, a
partnership, an unincorporated association, or a governmental entity, and
ELECTRONIC MAP DATA as used in this section is defined as copyrighted data
created and provided by a public agency from an electronic geographic
information system.
   (B)   Fee schedule.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8(j) the county may charge a fee, uniform
to all persons, for providing electronic map data that is based upon a
reasonable percentage of the county's direct cost of maintaining, upgrading and
enhancing the electronic map and for the direct cost of supplying the
electronic map in the form requested by the person(s).
      (2)   In the case where disclosable and nondisclosable electronic map
data are combined, I.C. 5-14-3-6 provides that the county may charge a
reasonable fee for the county's direct cost of computer programming to separate
disclosable from nondisclosable electronic map data.
      (3)   It is hereby established by the County Commissioners and County
Council that the initial fee schedule for the transmission of electronic map
data is as set forth in an attached fee schedule that is incorporated by
reference herein.
      (4)   If the county contracts with a third party contractor to handle the
transmission of county electronic map data, the third party contractor shall
receive two-thirds, and the county one-third of the fees charged the person for
electronic map data. This fee schedule shall be reviewed on an annual basis and
may be changed on an annual basis to reflect the change in the cost in
providing the electronic map data.
   (C)   Exceptions to fee schedule.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8(k) any public agency, as defined by I.C.
5-14-3-2, located within the county or within adjacent counties that agrees to
share with the county any electronic map information that that public agency
might have, if any, that is of the same type as is being shared by the county,
the county will agree to automatically approve a data sharing application with
that public agency and waive that portion of the electronic map fee that would
otherwise be retained by the county.
      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8(k) the county's retained portion of the
electronic map fee shall be waived at the county's discretion if the use of the
electronic map data will be used for a noncommercial purpose, including the
following: public agencies that do not agree to share with county the same type
of electronic map data being provided by the county, nonprofit activities,
journalism, and/or academic research.
   (D)   Third party contractor.
      (1)   In accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-3.6, electronic map information may
be provided to person(s) through the county's own computer gateway, or by
agreement through a computer gateway of a third party contractor. Indiana Code
5-14-3-3.6(e) provides that a contract entered into under this section may
require the payment of a reasonable fee to either the third party contractor,
the county, or both.
      (2)   In accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-4, neither the county nor the third
party contractor shall disclose electronic map data that is specifically
excepted from disclosure requirements.
   (E)   Payment. Where the county is using its own computer gateway for the
provision to person(s) of electronic map data, payment shall be made by the
person(s) at the time of delivery. Where the county has entered into an
agreement with a third party contractor to provide electronic map data through
the third party contractor's computer gateway, the third party contractor shall
handle the billing and invoicing of the fees charged and shall agree to send by
U.S. mail that portion of the fee due the county to the county's Electronic Map
Generation Fund within ten business days of the receipt of payment of fees to
the third party contractor by the person(s) making the purchase.
   (F)   Compliance with state statutes. Nothing herein shall compel any office
or their contracted third party contractor to charge a fee for copies if the
fee imposed by this section is contrary to state law. In the event the fees in
this section are contrary to any charges established by state statute, the
state statute shall apply.
   (G)   Use restrictions and notice.
      (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 5-14-3-3(e), no person, other
than those authorized in writing by the Board of Commissioners, may use the
electronic map data provided by the county for commercial purposes, including
to sell, advertise, or solicit the purchase of merchandise, goods, or services,
or sell, loan, give away, or otherwise deliver the information obtained by
request to any other person for these purposes. This includes the repackaging
or assimilation of electronic map data for a commercial purpose in paper or
electronic media.
      (2)   A person who uses information in a manner contrary to this section
or a rule or ordinance adopted under I.C. 5-14-3-3 may be prohibited by the
county from obtaining any electronic map data.
      (3)   The following notice regarding data ownership, restrictions, and
qualifications shall be provided to every person that receives a copy of the
county's electronic map data.
   “Warrick County electronic map data is the property of Warrick County,
Indiana. All electronic map data supplied by Warrick County has been derived
from public records that are constantly undergoing change and is not warranted
for content or accuracy. The County does not guarantee the positional or
thematic accuracy of the data. The cartographic digital file server is not a
legal representation of any of the features depicted, and the County disclaims
any assumption of the legal status they represent. Any implied warranties,
including warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose,
shall be and/or expressly excluded. The data represents an actual reproduction
of data contained in the County's computer files. This data may be incomplete
or inaccurate, and is subject to modifications and changes. Therefore, the
County cannot be held liable for errors or omissions in the data. The
recipient's uses and reliance upon such data is at the recipient's risk. By
using this data, the recipient agrees to protect, hold harmless and indemnify
Warrick County and its employees and officers. This indemnity covers reasonable
attorney's fees and all court costs associated with the defense of Warrick
County arising out of this disclaimer. The recipient may copy this data into
computer memory or onto computer storage devices and prepare derivative works
from it for the recipient's own use.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Indiana Code 5-14-3-3(e), no person, other
than those authorized in writing by the Board of Commissioners may use the
electronic map data provided by the County for commercial purposes, including
to sell, advertise, or solicit the purchase of merchandise, goods, or services,
or sell, loan, give away, or otherwise deliver the information obtained by
request to any other person for these purposes. A person who uses information
in a manner contrary to a rule or ordinance adopted under Indiana Code 5-14-3-3
(e) may be prohibited by the Board of Commissioners from obtaining any
electronic map data.
   Please refer to Warrick County Ordinance 200  -       for any other
restrictions on the use of electronic map data or penalties for the misuse
electronic map data.”
      (4)   A copy of the language contained in this section shall be
conspicuously posted in all offices where electronic map data is sold in the
county, and shall be provided to any person(s) (as defined by I.C. 5-14-3-2)
who desires to purchase electronic map data from the county.
   (H)   Use violation penalty.
      (1)   Any person(s) who violates the terms and conditions of this section
by failing to pay for purchased electronic map data shall be liable for total
fee charged for the electronic map data plus attorney's fees and the cost of
collection.
      (2)   Any person(s) who violates the restrictions on the use of
electronic map data as set forth in division (G) of this section shall be
guilty of an infraction and may be fined by the county up to $2,500, and each
violation shall be deemed a separate offence. Also, in the event that there is
an improper use of electronic map data as set forth in division (G) of this
section or in violation of state or federal law, the county may prohibit the
person(s) (as defined by I.C. 5-14-3-2) from obtaining any electronic map data
and seek injunctive relief from any misuse of electronic map data by the person
(s) who originally purchased the electronic map data or any other person(s) who
has received a copy of the electronic map data.
   (I)   Electronic Map Generation Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-8.5, the
County Council hereby establishes the Electronic Map Generation Fund. The
Electronic Map Generation Fund shall consist of fees charged for providing
electronic map data to person(s) in accordance with I.C. 5-14-3-8(j) and be
subject tothe appropriation by the County Council. In accordance with I.C. 5-
14-3-8.5(b), all funds collected in the Electronic Map Generation Fund shall be
specifically dedicated to the following purposes:
      (1)   The maintenance, upgrading, and enhancement of the electronic map.
      (2)   The reimbursement of expenses incurred by a public agency in
supplying an electronic map in the form requested by the person(s).
   (J)   Dispute resolution. Any person who has a dispute, or seeks relief from
the terms of this section may seek resolution of that dispute or relief from
the Board of Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2006-18, passed 1-4-07; CC Ord. 2007-1, passed 1-4-07)
§ 37.41 ADDITIONAL FELONY AND MISDEMEANOR FEES.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners, pursuant to the Indiana Home Rule Act and
other authority, now establishes a local fee of $10, which shall be added as a
part of the costs in all felony and misdemeanor cases in which a defendant is
found guilty of one or more offenses EXCEPT in those cases in which a defendant
has been found guilty of one or more offenses under I.C. 35-48-4 (Controlled
Substances), I.C. 16-42-19 (Legend Drug Act), I.C. 9-30-5 (OVWI), I.C. 9-30-6-
8.7 (violation of Ignition Interlock), and I.C. 7.1-5 (Alcoholic Beverages).
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners, pursuant to the Indiana Home Rule Act and
other authority, now establishes a local fee of $50, which shall be added as a
part of the costs in all felony and misdemeanor cases in which a defendant is
found guilty of one or more offenses under I.C. 35-48-4 (Controlled
Substances), I.C. 16-42-19 (Legend Drug Act), I.C. 9-30-5 (OVWI), I.C. 9-30-6-
8.7 (violation of Ignition Interlock), and I.C. 7.1-5 (Alcoholic Beverages).
   (C)   The Clerk of the Warrick Circuit and Superior Courts shall assess and
collect the $10 fee and the $50 fee, in addition to other local and statutory
fees, and shall deposit the fee in the Drug and Alcohol User Fee Fund (which at
present, is Fund 379 in the County Auditor's Office).
(BC Ord. 2011-18, passed 7-25-11)
Editor’s note:
   BC Ord. 2012-30, passed 9-19-12, suspends § 37.21 pending final
determination of the validity of the same.
§ 37.42 RECORDER’S OFFICE FEES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, DOCUMENT or DOCUMENTS shall include,
but not be limited to, any deed, ordinance, resolution, certificate of sale,
easement vacations, grants of rights-of-way and easements under condemnation
proceedings, street acceptances and vacations, sidewalk acknowledgments,
surveyor’s affidavits, address affidavits, hold harmless acknowledgments, and
any other recordable instrument required to be recorded in the Office of the
County Recorder from time to time by the county and any of its departments.
   (B)   The Office of the County Recorder shall exempt official offices of the
county, including the Area Plan Commission, Redevelopment Commission, Board of
Commissioners, County Council and any other department or office, from the
payment of any fee for recording documents required by law, regulation, rule,
or otherwise to be recorded.
   (C)   County offices and departments shall submit any documents for
recording in full compliance with all recording requirements as may be
expressed in the Indiana Code or corresponding regulations.
(BC Ord. 2014-23, passed 8-11-14)
§ 37.43 BULK FORM ACCESS TO COUNTY RECORDER DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   Definitions. The definitions set forth in I.C. 36-2-7-10.1 are hereby
incorporated and include, without limitation, the following:
      BULK FORM COPY or BULK FORM COPIES. An aggregate of:
         (a)   Copies of all recorded documents received by the County Recorder
for recording in a calendar day, week month, or user;
         (b)   The indices for finding, retrieving, and viewing all recorded
documents received by the County Recorder for recording in a calendar day,
week, month, or year; or
         (c)   Both clauses (a) and (b).
      BULK FORM USER. An individual, corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, or unincorporated association that receives bulk form copies
under a contract with the County Recorder.
      COPY or COPIES. A reproduction, including an image of a recorded document
or indices created by:
         (a)   Duplicating electronically stored data onto a disk, tape, drum,
or any other medium of electronic data storage; or
         (b)   Reproducing on microfilm.
      INDICES. All of the indexing information used by the County Recorder for
finding, retrieving, and viewing a recorded document.
      RECORDED DOCUMENT. A writing, paper, document, plat, map, survey, or
anything else received at any time for recording or filing in the public
records maintained by the County Recorder of hte County Recorder’s designee.
   (B)   County Recorder designee. The County Recorder may use the services of
a third-party designee to provide bulk form copies to build form users under
this section.
   (C)   Manner and form of bulk form copies. The County Recorder or the County
Recorder’s designee may provide bulk form copies to a bulk form user on a disk,
tape, drum, or any other medium of electronic data storage or microfilm or by
electronically transmitting the copies using an electronic transfer process or
any combination thereof. The decision as to the manner of providing copies
under this division shall be at the discretion fo the County Recorder.
   (D)   Watermark on bulk form copies. The County Recorder or the County
Recorder’s designee shall watermark all bulk form copies with the following
statement:
Image Property of Warrick County, IN
For license only - not for resale
per I.C. 36-2-7-10.1(c).
Official copies may be obtained at the Warrick County Recorder’s Office.
   (E)   Written request of bulk form copies. A bulk form user must submit a
written request identifying the requested copies with a reasonable
particularity in order to receive bulk form copies from the County Recorder or
the County Recorder’s designee.
   (F)   Contract for bulk form copies. 
      (1)   A bulk form user must enter into a contract with the County
Recorder prior to receiving bulk form copies that is in compliance with the
requirements of this section I.C. 36-2-7-10.1 and must require that the bulk
form user agree not to:
         (a)   Except as provided in I.C. 36-2-7-10.1(h), provide, transfer, or
allow the transfer of any copy of a recorded document obtained by the bulk form
suer under this section to a third party;
         (b)   Engage in unauthorized access to recorded documents; and
         (c)   Engage in the unauthorized alteration of recorded documents.
      (2)   If a bulk form user violates its contract entered into with the
County Recorder under this section, the County Recorder or the County
Recorder’s designee may terminate such contract and refuse subsequent bulk form
copy requests under the conditions set forth in I.C. 36-2-7-10.1(j).
   (G)   Prohibited actions of bulk form user. Except as permitted under I.C.
36-2-7-10.1(h), a bulk form user is prohibited form selling, offering for sale,
advertising for sale, soliciting a purchase of loaning, giving away, allowing
subscription service to, or otherwise transferring providing, or allowing the
transfer of bulk form copies for commercial purposes to a third party, whether
the copies are in bulk form or individual copies or images.
   (H)   Bulk form copy fee. The fee for producing bulk form copies shall be
$0.20 per page for a bulk form copy of a recorded document, including the
instrument’s book and page, if applicable, and $0.20 per recorded document for
a copy of the indices used by the County Recorder for finding, retrieving, and
viewing a recorded document. Any revenue generated under this section shall be
deposited in the County Recorder’s Perpetuation Fund, used by the County
Recorder in accordance with I.C. 36-2-7-10(f), and otherwise in compliance with
the requirements of I.C. 36-2-7-10.1(f).
   (I)   Civil fine for violation of this section. In addition to any
contractual remedies the County Recorder or the County Recorder’s designee may
have a bulk form user who violates this section shall also be subject to a
civil fine of not more than $2,500 per violation.
(BC Ord. 2017-34, passed 12-11-17; BC Ord. 2018-18, passed 7-23-18)
§37.44 FEE FOR COSTS OF OPERATION IN ISSUING BONDS.
   (A)   The Warrick County Economic Development Commission shall charge a fee
to be paid to the Commission to cover its costs of operation in the issuing of
bonds by Warrick County under I.C.36-7-12-25. Said fee amount shall be payable
to the Commission solely from revenues and receipts derived from the financing
agreement or from payments made under a guaranty agreement by developers,
users, or related persons.
   (B)   A fee charged by the Warrick County Economic Development Commission
under this §
37.44 shall not exceed 1% of the total amount of the issuance of the respective
bond. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the fee charged by the Commission shall
not exceed $10,000 per issue for a single-project issue, or $10,000 per project
in the case of program financing under I.C. 36-7-12-18.5.
   (C)   Any funds collected pursuant to this §
37.44  shall be used to compensate and reimburse the Commission for expenses
associated with the issuance of bonds under I.C. 36-7-12 et seq., including,
without limitation, payment of per diem fees payable to the Commission, costs
of operation, and other expenses or economic development projects, according to
the discretion of the Board of Commissioners of Warrick County.
   (D)   Nothing in this §
37.44 shall be construed as to authorize the Warrick County Economic
Development Commission to charge a fee to be paid to the Commission to cover
its costs of operation in the issuing of bonds which represent a general
obligation of Warrick County or are payable in any manner from revenues raised
by taxation.
(BC Ord. 2019-20, passed 9-9-19)
CHAPTER 38: COUNTY CORRECTIONAL FACILITY
Section
   
38.01   Public employment of county inmates
   
38.02   Copayment requirements for certain medical services rendered to inmates
Cross-reference:
   County Corrections Fund, see §
37.02
§ 38.01 PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OF COUNTY INMATES.
   (A)   The Sheriff is directed to establish and maintain a program of public
employment of county inmates pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 11-12-5-1 et
seq.
   (B)   The Sheriff shall have the discretion and authority to administer said
program of public employment of county jail inmates consistent with the above
stated statute, as the Sheriff in his or her discretion deems appropriate.
(BC Ord. 1987-9, passed 6-1-87)
§ 38.02 COPAYMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN MEDICAL SERVICES RENDERED TO
INMATES.
   (A)   This section does not apply to a person confined at the county
correctional facility who:
      (1)   Has a policy of health insurance from a private company which
policy covers, and provides payment for, medical care, dental care, eye care or
other health related services;
      (2)   Is entitled to payment for health services by any state or federal
program; or
      (3)   Is committed to the United States Bureau of Prisons.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) below, any person confined in
the county correctional facility who is subject to this section shall make a
copayment in the amount set out herein for each provision of any of the
following medical services:
         (a)   Medical care;
         (b)   Dental care;
         (c)   Eye care; or
         (d)   Any other health related service.
      (2)   Copayments shall be deducted from the person's commissary or trust
account.
   (C)   (1)   Persons confined who are subject to this section shall not be
required to make the copayment set out in division (B) if:
         (a)   The person does not have funds in the person's commissary or
trust account with which to make the payment at the time service is provided;
         (b)   The person does not have funds in the person's commissary or
trust account, with which to make the payment, within 30 days after the service
is provided;
         (c)   The service provided is an emergency service;
         (d)   The service provided is as a result of an injury received while
an inmate at the facility; or
         (e)   The service is provided at the direction of the Sheriff or jail
administrator or medical staff.
      (2)   If services are provided to a person who, within 30 days after the
service is rendered, has a balance in such person's commissary or trust
account, then such copayment fee shall be deducted from the commissary or trust
account.
   (D)   The copayments required by division (B) are:
      (1)   Doctor visit   $15
      (2)   Dentist visit   $15
      (3)   Optometrist visit   $15
      (4)   Prescription Handling fee   $3
      (5)   Other health care services   $5
   (E)   There is herewith created the Medical Care for Inmates Fund. Such fund
shall be the fund into which all copayments required by this section shall be
deposited. Such fund shall only be used for payment of inmate health related
services provided by the county at the county's cost. The creation of this fund
shall not be deemed to prevent payment of health related services for inmates
in the county correctional facility by the county General Fund.
(BC Ord. 1994-16, passed 7-11-94; Am. BC Ord. 1999-35, passed 9-27-99; Am. BC
Ord. 2004-03, passed 2-18-04)
CHAPTER 39: COUNTY POLICY
Section
General Provisions
   
39.01   County motto
   
39.02   Mass fatalities plan
   
39.03   No smoking areas
   
39.04   Excessive force policy
   
39.05   Auditor payment of bills and claim voucher process
   
39.06   Authorizing bank card, credit card and debit card transactions
   
39.07   Security of county facilities
   
39.08   Public records requests
   
39.09   Restricted access policy
   
39.10   Internal control standards
   
39.11   Title VI Implementation Plan
   
39.12   Grant proposal and approval policy
   
39.13   Second Amendment sanctuary county
Judicial Center and Courthouse Square
   
39.15   Certain activities prohibited
   
39.16   Deadly weapons prohibited
 
   
39.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Leasing of real property, see
Ch. 152
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 39.01 COUNTY MOTTO.
   (A)   Text of county motto. It is hereby established that the official motto
of the county is “In God We Trust.”
   (B)   Display of county motto.
      (1)   The text “In God We Trust” shall be prominently displayed on the
wall behind the Commissioners in the Board of Commissioners’ Meeting Room.
      (2)   The text “In God We Trust” is hereby encouraged to be publicly and
prominently displayed in all county buildings.
(BC Ord. 2014-31, passed 12-22-14)
§ 39.02 MASS FATALITIES PLAN.
   The County Mass Fatalities Plan, adopted by BC Res. 1996-8, passed 10-28-96,
is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code the same as if set
forth in full herein.
(BC Res. 1996-8, passed 10-28-96)
§ 39.03 NO SMOKING AREAS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this
section, shall be construed as defined below.
      ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any product containing or delivering nicotine
or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a
person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the
product. The term ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes, without limitation, any
such device, whether manufactured, distributed, or sold, as an e-cigarette, e-
cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or
descriptor.
      SMOKING. The inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying of any lighted or
heated cigarette, cigar, pipe, electronic smoking device, or any other lighted
or heated tobacco product or plant product intended for inhalation, including
hookah and marijuana, in any manner or in any form.
   (B)   To protect the health and safety of Warrick County employees, patrons,
visitors, and the general public, pursuant to I.C. 7.1-5-12 et seq., smoking
shall be prohibited in, and within 30 feet of any entrance to and exit from,
any and all facilities owned, leased, operated, or occupied by the Board of
Commissioners of Warrick County or any other Warrick County department, agency,
or office. Smoking shall also be prohibited on all stairways, ramps, and
sidewalks owned by Warrick County which provide access to the foregoing
facilities.
   (C)   The Warrick County public official in charge of each facility
described in division (B) above
   (B) shall post at each entrance “County Ordinance Prohibits Smoking Within
30 Feet of this Entrance.”
   (D)   an employee who violates this §
39.02 shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination
of employment.
   (E)   Pursuant to I.C. 7.1-5-12-8, a person who smokes in an area where
smoking is prohibited by this § 39.02 commits prohibited smoking, a Class B
infraction. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person who smokes in an area where
smoking is prohibited by this § 39.02 commits prohibited smoking, a Class A
infraction if the person has been adjudged to have committed at least three
prior unrelated infractions under this section or I.C. 16-41-37-4 (before its
repeal).
   (F)   The enforcement of this § 39.02 shall be the responsibility of the
Warrick County elected officials, department heads, Board of Commissioners,
County Administrator, and the Warrick County Sheriff and his or her deputies.
(BC Res. 1987-6, passed 9-18-87; Am. BC Ord. 1997-18, passed 12-1-97; Am. BC
Ord. 2006-04, passed 4-12-06; Am. BC Ord. 2013-18, passed 6-24-13; Am. BC Ord.
2020-01, passed 1-27-20) Penalty, see §
39.99
§ 39.04 EXCESSIVE FORCE POLICY.
   It is the policy of the county that no law enforcement agencies within the
county may use excessive force against any individuals engaged in non-violent
civil rights demonstrations, in accordance with Section 519 of Pub. L. 101-144
(the HUD Appropriation Act).
(BC Res. 1992-1, passed 1-6-92)
§ 39.05 AUDITOR PAYMENT OF BILLS AND CLAIM VOUCHER PROCESS.
   (A)   Payment of just debts of the county prior to due date. The Warrick
County Auditor is directed to make payment of those expenses listed in division
(D) below prior to its due date when qualified claims have been filed with the
County Auditor in a correct and timely manner, as provided under this section.
   (B)   Claim voucher process.
      (1)   Claim vouchers for all claims, including for credit card charges,
must be submitted to the Warrick County Auditor's Office as soon as reasonably
possible after the expense giving rise to the claim is incurred, and as soon as
the necessary and relevant information is available in order for said claim to
be properly submitted to the Auditor's Office.
      (2)   Claim vouchers for credit card charges are considered qualified,
correct, and timely if the claim voucher:
         (a)   Is executed on County Form 17;
         (b)   Is submitted with an itemized written receipt attached;
         (c)   Contains a charge for a lawful expense of Warrick County, as
determined by the Indiana Code;
         (d)   Is properly signed and authenticated as true and correct by the
person submitting the claim;
         (e)   Is submitted to the Warrick County Auditor's Office within a
reasonable time after purchase (preferably 48 hours) or within a reasonable
time upon return to work if incurred outside of Warrick County(preferably
within 48 hours of return); and
         (f)   Is submitted to the Warrick County Auditor's Office no later
than ten business days before the payment on the credit card is due.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision under this section to the
contrary, payroll claim vouchers, along with any and all substantiating and
supporting documentation required under this section, may be electronically
submitted to the Warrick County Auditor's Office for processing and payment.
      (4)   Those Warrick County offices or departments that are not physically
located in the Warrick County Judicial Center may electronically submit claims
to an email address selected by the Warrick County Auditor so as to submit such
claims within 48 hours of being incurred in accordance with this division (B).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all such offices and departments not physically
located in the Warrick County Judicial Center shall physically deliver the
original claims, receipts, or other necessary supporting documents to the
Warrick County Auditor's Office no later than 12:00 p.m. noon on Friday of each
week.
      (5)   If an individual fails to submit a claim voucher in accordance with
this division (B), then that person shall have a continuing obligation to
correct any information necessary for the claim voucher to come into compliance
with this division. The Warrick County Auditor shall take action to reasonably
expedite communication with the office holder or department head to obtain the
corrected claim voucher in a timely manner.
      (6)   If a dispute arises as to whether a claim voucher was qualified,
correct, or timely submitted to the Warrick County Auditor's Office, the
Warrick County Board of Commissioners shall in its discretion determine whether
said claim voucher was qualified and submitted in a correct and timely manner.
      (7)   This section is adopted by virtue of I.C. 36-2-6-4.5, which
specifically provides that a county executive may adopt an ordinance allowing
money to be disbursed for lawful county purposes under this section and further
provides that, notwithstanding I.C. 5-11-10 et seq., with the prior written
approval of the Board having jurisdiction over the allowance of claims, the
County Auditor may make claim payments in advance of Board allowance for
certain kinds of expenses including, without limitation, those expenses listed
in division (D), below; provided that such expenses are supported by a fully
itemized invoice or bill and certification by the County Auditor and further
provided that the county executive or County Board having jurisdiction over the
allowance of the claim shall review and allow the claim at its next regular or
special meeting following the pre-approved payment of the expense; and that
such payment of expenses under this section must be published in the manner
provided under I.C. 36-2-6-3.
   (C)   Review and presentation of claims by Auditor.
      (1)   No later than 4:00 p.m. on the Wednesday immediately preceding the
Board of Commissioners' next regularly scheduled meeting, the Auditor shall
submit to the Board of Commissioners a voucher list itemizing and describing
any and all claims to be reviewed by the Board of Commissioners at said
meeting.
      (2)   The voucher list referenced in division (C)(1), above, shall
include any and all claims that have been submitted to the Auditor's Office by
12:00 p.m. noon, six business days prior to the Board of Commissioners' next
regularly scheduled meeting.
      (3)   The Auditor shall include on the voucher list referenced in
division (C)(1), above, all claims submitted to the Auditor's Office by the
deadline referenced in division (C)(2), including claims certified and non-
certified by the Auditor, in addition to payroll claims as well as those claims
which the Auditor is unable to determine to be certified or non-certified.
      (4)   The Auditor shall deliver original copies of any and all claims as
described on the voucher list referenced in division (C)(1) to the Board of
Commissioners by 12:00 p.m. noon on the Friday immediately preceding the Board
of Commissioners' next regularly scheduled meeting. Following the conclusion of
said regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Commissioners, the Board of
Commissioners shall return the possession of all original claims to the
Auditor.
   (D)   Claims to be paid by Auditor.
      (1)   The Warrick County Auditor is directed to make claim payments in
advance of Warrick County Board of Commissioners allowance for the following
kinds of expenses:
         (a)   Property or services purchased or leased from the United States
government, its agencies or its political subdivision;
         (b)   Insurance premiums;
         (c)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
         (d)   General grant programs where advance funding is not prohibited
and the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover the amount
advanced;
         (e)   Grant of state funds authorized by statute;
         (f)   Maintenance or service agreements;
         (g)   Lease or rental payments;
         (h)   Bond and coupon payments;
         (i)   Payroll;
         (j)   State or federal taxes;
         (k)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency circumstances;
         (l)   Expenses described in an ordinance;
         (m)   Contract payments;
         (n)   Qualified, correct, and timely credit card claims if the due
date for the credit card is prior to the time the Board of Commissioners can
approve same;
         (o)   Payments to contractors which enable said contractors to
purchase materials needed for a public works project of the county, in
accordance with I.C. 5-11-10-1.6(d)(3); and
         (p)   Payments for goods and services prior to delivery of said goods
or completion of said services, subject to the Warrick County Council's
authorization for making such advance payments, in accordance with I.C. 5-11-
10-1.6(d)(4).
      (2)   Each payment of expense must be supported by a fully itemized
invoice or bill as described above in division (B), above, and certification by
the Warrick County Auditor.
      (3)   The Warrick County Board of Commissioners having jurisdiction over
the allowance of the claim shall review and allow the claim at its next regular
or special meeting following the pre-approved payment of the expense.
      (4)   Payments made under this division (D) may be made via an online
portal where applicable and as appropriate.
      (5)   A payment of expenses under this section must be published in the
manner provided under I.C. 36-2-6-3.
(BC Ord. 2002-07, passed 8-7-02; Am. BC Ord. 2002-08, passed 8-7-02; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-24, passed 9-25-17; Am. BC Ord. 2021-18, passed 4-12-21; Am. BC Ord.
2021-28, passed 8-9-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-22, passed 10-9-23)
§ 39.06 AUTHORIZING BANK CARD, CREDIT CARD AND DEBIT CARD TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   The Sheriff of Warrick County.
      (1)   The Sheriff of Warrick County is authorized to accept a credit card
or debit card for any required payment to the Sheriff of Warrick County; and
      (2)   The Sheriff of Warrick County is authorized and directed to charge
and collect fees for the use of credit card or debit cards.
   (B)   The Warrick County Area Planning Commission (“APC”).
      (1)   The APC is authorized to accept bank and credit cards for any
payment to the APC; and
      (2)   The APC is authorized and directed to charge and collect:
         (a)   A sum equal to the amount of the charge from the person who uses
the bank card or credit card;
         (b)   An official fee that may not exceed the transaction charge or
discount fee charged to the APC by any bank or credit card vendor; and
         (c)   A convenience fee of $3 for any payment to the APC by bank card
or credit card.
   (C)   The Warrick County Highway Department.
      (1)   The Highway Department is authorized to accept bank and credit card
payments made via PayGOV.US, for any payment to the Highway Department; and
      (2)   The Highway Department is authorized and directed to charge and
collect:
         (a)   A sum equal to the amount of the charge from the person who uses
the bank card or credit card;
         (b)   An official fee that may not exceed the transaction charge or
discount fee charged to the Highway Department by PayGOV.US; and
         (c)   A convenience fee of $3 for any payment to the Highway
Department by bank card or credit card through PayGOV.US.
(CC Ord. 2009-02, passed 5-7-09; Am. CC Ord. 2009-02, passed 6-4-09; Am. CC
Res. 2024-04, passed 3-7-24; Am. Res. 2024-15, passed 10-3-24)
§ 39.07 SECURITY OF COUNTY FACILITIES.
   It is the policy of the county that all locks, entry and exit access,
surveillance cameras or policies, and any or all other security measures in all
county owned buildings or facilities, including building fixtures or other
appurtenances within said buildings or facilities (“security measures”) shall
be subject to the exclusive authority of the Board of Commissioners. Subject to
any exemptions granted by the Board of Commissioners from time to time, any
alterations, modifications, or changes to security measures must first receive
the approval of the Board of Commissioners by forwarding a request to the
County Administrator, who shall thereupon present said request for official
action by the Board of Commissioners as soon as reasonably practical. In the
case of an emergency, the security measure may be enacted with written
consensus of a majority of the Board of Commissioners, but said security
measure shall be submitted for formal action by the Board of Commissioners at
its next regularly scheduled meeting. The County Administrator may establish
administrative rules and procedures for the implementation of this section.
(BC Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-9-15)
§ 39.08 PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS.
   (A)   Form and content of public records request.
      (1)   All requests for inspection or copying of public records must be:
         (a)   In writing; and
         (b)   Identify with reasonable particularity the record(s) being
requested.
      (2)   No request complying with the Indiana Access to Public Records Act
may be denied for failure to state the purpose of the request.
   (B)   Public records request. Any person making a request that complies with
the requirements of division (A) above may inspect and copy the public records
during the regular business hours of the county. If the county maintains the
requested record in an electronic storage data system, and the county is able
to retrieve those records through reasonable efforts, then the county shall
provide a copy of all disclosable data via disk or any other method of
electronic retrieval.
   (C)   Use of information for commercial purpose.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the above, if any office holder, department or
division of the county believes the request is for any kind of commercial
purpose, then all such persons making requests for public records must first
verify in writing that they will not use the information for commercial
purposes, including a statement that the requesting party shall not sell,
advertise or solicit the purchase of merchandise, goods or services, or sell,
loan, give away or otherwise deliver the information obtained by the request to
any other person for these purposes. The verification shall be in the form
prescribed herein, and the office holder, department or division of the county
is under no obligation to comply with the request for records until this
verification has been received.
      (2)   Use of information in connection with the preparation or
publication of news, for nonprofit activities, or for academic research shall
not be considered as use for commercial purposes and does not require written
verification.
   (D)   Violations. A person who uses information in a manner contrary to this
section or the verification provided for herein shall be prohibited from
obtaining a copy of the requested data or any additional or future data
requests from the county.
   (E)   Reasonable effort to provide public records. The county shall make
reasonable efforts to provide public records contained within an electronically
stored data system to any person complying with the requirements of this
section. For purposes of this section, REASONABLE EFFORTS shall be determined
in the discretion of the office holder, department or division of the county in
which the records are kept.
   (F)   Form of verification. The verification provided for in division (C)
above shall be in the following form.
   VERIFICATION OF NO COMMERCIAL PURPOSE
   To:      ______________________________________      (Requesting Party)
         ______________________________________      (Address)
         ______________________________________
   From:   ______________________________________      (County Office)
         ______________________________________      (Name)
         ______________________________________      (Title)
This office acknowledges receipt of your request pursuant to the Indiana Access
to Public Records Act, I.C. 5-14-3 et seq., for certain records to be provided
in an electronic format. We have determined your request may be for commercial
purposes. Before responding to your request, please date and sign the form
below and submit to the office listed above.
I, __________________________________, representing
___________________________________, the requesting party, do hereby swear and
affirm that the information requested and to be provided to me shall not be
sold, advertised, or solicited for purposes of purchasing merchandise, goods or
services by any party, nor will the information be sold, loaned, given away or
otherwise delivered in any manner to any other person for these purposes. I
furthermore acknowledge that any breach of this verification may result in the
requesting party being prohibited from any additional or future records
requests from Warrick County under Indiana law.
Signed:   ______________________________________
Printed:   ______________________________________
Dated:   ______________________________________
(BC Ord. 2014-11, passed 4-14-14)
§ 39.09 RESTRICTED ACCESS POLICY.
   The following policy is hereby implemented with respect to requests by
covered individuals to restrict disclosure pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8.5.
   (A)   A request under I.C. 36-1-8.5 must be made in writing. The written
request must include the following:
      (1)   The individual’s full name;
      (2)   The individual’s full address(es);
      (3)   A statement that the individual is either a judge, law enforcement
officer, or domestic violence victim as defined under I.C. 36-1-8.5; and
      (4)   A statement that the individual is requesting pursuant to I.C. 36-
1-8.5 that public access to the individual’s home address(es) be restricted.
   (B)   Only written requests by judges, law enforcement officers, and victims
of domestic violence as are defined in I.C. 36-1-8.5 shall be approved for
restricted disclosure. The individual must provide verification that the
individual is covered under I.C. 36-1-8.5 if requested by the County
Administrator.
   (C)   The County Administrator shall prescribe a form to be filled out and
signed by any requesting party, identifying those public access restrictions
available and being requested. Any county office or department receiving an
individual’s request for public access restrictions shall refer them to the
County Administrator. All requests must be processed through the County
Administrator’s office.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a written request, the County Administrator shall take
all reasonably necessary steps to ensure the following steps are completed and
the access is restricted as required under I.C. 36-1-8.5:
      (1)   The County Administrator shall take all reasonable steps necessary
to restrict access on the county’s GIS mapping website;
      (2)   The County Administrator shall contact the Treasurer’s office, who
shall take all reasonable steps necessary to restrict access on the Treasurer’
      (3)   The County Administrator shall contact the Assessor’s office, who
shall take all reasonable steps necessary to restrict access on the Assessor’s
“Public Property Data Base Web Site” as required by I.C. 36-1-8.5;
      (4)   The County Administrator shall contact the Recorder’s office, who
shall take all reasonable steps necessary to restrict access on the Recorder’s
“Public Property Data Base Web Site” as required by I.C. 36-1-8.5, including
but not limited to the “Free Name Search”; and
      (5)   The County Administrator shall take any and all other reasonable
and additional steps necessary to comply with the statute.
   (E)   This policy does not apply to searches performed on county-owned and
operated public workstations located in county offices and departments that are
directly connected to the applicable server and not searching via the internet.
   (F)   In the event the County Recorder, County Treasurer, County Auditor, or
County Assessor has a reasonable belief that a covered person is no longer
living at an address that receives restricted access, then in that event the
County Administrator shall notify the covered person of its reasonable belief.
The notification shall be made by telephone call, email, and regular mail. In
the event the covered person fails to respond within 30 days of the County
Administrator’s notification, then the property listed in the covered person’s
request shall be removed from the restricted disclosures.
   (G)   All covered persons whose home address is restricted from disclosure
shall notify the County Auditor of a change of home address, termination from
employment, or any change of circumstances that may disqualify them from being
a covered person under I.C. 36-1-8.5-2.
(BC Res. 2015-04, passed 1-12-15; Am. BC Res. 2016-06, passed 6-3-16)
§ 39.10 INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The acceptable minimum level of internal control standards and
procedures for internal control systems as established by I.C. 5-11-1-27(e),
and as may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and shall be in
full force and effect from and after its passage. The standards shall include
control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and
communication, and monitoring to promote county accountability and
transparency. All departments and officers shall establish and enforce
procedures in compliance with the Indiana State Board of Accounts internal
control standards.
   (B)   All personnel, as defined by I.C. 5-11-1-27, shall participate in the
required training as developed by the Indiana State Board of Accounts.
(BC Ord. 2016-08, passed 5-9-16)
§ 39.11 TITLE VI IMPLEMENTATION PLAN.
   The county adopts the Title VI Implementation Plan, as attached to County
Commissioners Res. 2018-17, and the plan shall be reviewed annually by the
county to assess policies and procedures and update annual goals as deemed
necessary and appropriate.
(CC Res. 2018-17, passed 9-24-18)
§ 39.12 GRANT PROPOSAL AND APPROVAL POLICY.
   In addition to all requirements of applicable federal and state law and
agencies, all department heads and office holders must abide by the following
procedures and requirements to apply for any federal, state, and local grant
("grant policy"), which includes, but is not limited to, advanced or reimbursed
goods, services, or donations grants (collectively, "grant request").
   (A)   The department head or office holder, or designee ("department head/
office holder"), must prepare a proposal for each grant request that includes
all essential details, including budget, timeline, and the responsible party
(collectively, "proposal").
   (B)   The department head/office holder must provide the proposal to the
County Board of Commissioners ("Commissioners") with a request to be added on
the agenda for a Commissioners’ regular meeting, which the department head/
office holder must attend, in person, and present the proposal to the
Commissioners.
   (C)   If the Commissioners approve the grant request, the department head/
office holder must prepare and complete the related application, including all
required information and documentation (collectively, "grant application"), and
take all steps to submit the grant application to the proper grantor agency
("grantor agency"). If a signature is required, the department head/office
holder must be obtained through the Commissioners. Within seven days of the
submission to the grantor agency, the department head/office holder must
provide a complete copy of the grant application to: (a) the Commissioners, (b)
the County Auditor ("Auditor"), and (c) the Grants Development/ Compliance
Director.
   (D)   If a grant application is approved by the grantor agency ("approved
grant"), the department head/office holder must submit the agreement for the
approved grant ("grant agreement") to the Commissioners for approval and
signature. Unless otherwise stated by law, only the Commissioners have the
authority to approve and enter into any grant agreement. After the grant
agreement is fully executed, the department head/office holder must provide a
copy of the award letter, grant agreement, and any other relevant information
to: (a) the Commissioners, (b) the Auditor, and (c) the Grants Development/
Compliance Director.
   (E)   Within three days of the Commissioners' approval of the grant
agreement:
      (1)   The department head/office holder must contact the Auditor and the
Grants Development/ Compliance Director to schedule an in-person meeting to set
up the appropriate fund and file for the approved grant. Prior to that meeting,
the department head/office holder must complete the grant summary form (Form
A). The department head/office holder must bring the completed Form A to the
meeting. The Auditor shall establish a separate fund number for the approved
grant and assign each account number. Approved grant funds may not be comingled
with any other funds, including any other grant; and
      (2)   The department head/office holder must contact the County Council
("Council") Administrator to (i) advertise any appropriation(s), and (ii)
request that it(they) be added to the agenda for a County Council public
meeting.
   (F)   The department head/office holder must attend, in person, the
Council's scheduled public meeting and present the proposal, along with each
requested appropriation to the Council.
   (G)   The department head/office holder is responsible for ensuring
compliance with all procedures for use of any approved grant funds, including:
      (1)   Abiding by all terms of any grant agreement, including any
performance period (i.e., the grant agreement start and end dates for all
activities performed under the approved grant). Unless otherwise permitted by
the grant agreement, no disbursements or receipts shall be made before the
start date and no receipts shall be accepted 60 days after the end date;
      (2)   For reimbursement, including for partial salary or immunizations,
once the reimbursement is received, the department head/office holder must
prepare and submit a claim to transfer the approved grant funds to the
appropriate fund(s); and
      (3)   For all goods procured using any approved grant funds, including
all supplies, equipment, and vehicles (collectively, "grant goods"), the
department head/office holder must abide by all procurement procedures under
state law and applicable county ordinance(s), including Ordinance 2017-30,
which specifically addresses the county's procurement process. The department
head/office holder shall contact the County Acquisition Administrator for
assistance in following the proper procurement process.
   (H)   When a request for grant funds is made to the grantor agency, the
department head/office holder must use any forms provided by the grantor agency
and present these forms to the Auditor with a completed grant claim request
form (Form B). Form B includes a section where the department head/office
holder must provide any additional information required by the Auditor. The
department head/office holder must provide and obtain approval of all forms by
the Grants Development/Compliance Director prior to submission to the grantor
agency.
   (I)   The department head/office holder shall ensure all claims for payment
of invoices are complete, with all necessary supporting documentation provided
prior to payment of an invoice. Prior to submission of any claim for payment
from a grant fund to the Auditor, the department head/office holder must sign
all claims for payment and email the claims, with all supporting documentation,
to the Grants Development/Compliance Director for review and approval.
   (J)   For any request to modify or amend a grant agreement, the department
head/office holder must:
      (1)   Complete a modification request form (Form C) and provide the same
to: (i) the Commissioners, (ii) the Auditor, and (iii) the Grants Development
Director or Grants Compliance Officer;
      (2)   Present the completed modification request form to the
Commissioners for approval at a public meeting, at which the department head/
office holder must attend, in person, and present the request to the
Commissioners for approval at the Commissioners' public meeting;
      (3)   If it involves any budget modification, submit the completed
modification request form to the Council Administrator for advertisement of an
appropriation, and present the same for approval at a public meeting of the
Council, at which the department head/office holder must attend, in person; and
      (4)   Provide a copy of all approved requests to modify or amend the
grant agreement ("amended grant agreement") to: (i) the Commissioners, (ii) the
Auditor, and (iii) the County Grants Development/ Compliance Director.
   (K)   At all times during the term of the grant agreement, the department
head/office holder shall maintain an inventory of all supplies and equipment
purchased under an approved grant, using the property inventory form (Form D),
including the serial numbers, value, location, and mode of dispensation (if
applicable) of each item. At all times, all grant goods shall be titled in and
are the property of the county, including during and following the term of the
grant agreement.
   (L)   Upon completion and/or termination of the approved grant:
      (1)   The department head/office holder shall submit to the Grants
Development/Compliance Director a completed (i) property inventory form (Form
D) and (ii) close out form (Form E);
      (2)   The Grants Development/Compliance Director shall review and, if in
proper form, execute the close out form (Form E) and provide it to the
Commissioners and the Auditor; and
      (3)   Following the approval by the Grants Development/Compliance
Director, and upon submission to the Commissioners, the Commissioners shall
review and take appropriate action on the close out form (Form E) at a public
meeting; and
      (4)   Following the approval by the Grants Development/Compliance
Director and Commissioners, the Auditor shall take all necessary steps to
return any unused approved grant funds to the grantor agency or otherwise
comply with the grantor agency's requirements.
   (M)   This section is effective upon adoption by the Commissioners,
including any previously applied for or received grants by any department head/
office holder,
   (N)   The violation of this section by any person may result in the
following nonexclusive actions:
      (1)   The immediate cessation of the use of any approved grant funds;
      (2)   The denial of any request for use of the approved grant funds;
      (3)   The termination of the grant agreement, subject to the terms of the
grant agreement;
      (4)   The denial of any request for budget modification by the Council;
and/or
      (5)   Any other disciplinary action as determined by the Commissioners to
be appropriate under the circumstances, as permissible by state law.
(BC Ord. 2024-08, passed 5-29-24)
§ 39.13 SECOND AMENDMENT SANCTUARY COUNTY.
   (A)   The right to keep and bear arms is a fundamental individual right, and
shall not be infringed. All local, state, and federal acts, laws, orders,
rules, or regulations regarding firearms, firearms accessories, and ammunition
enacted or promulgated that violate the fundamental individual right to keep
and bear arms infringe upon the Second Amendment of the Constitution of the
United States, and Article 1, Section 32, of the Indiana Constitution.
   (B)   The individual right to keep and bear arms predates the Constitution
of the United States and the Indiana Constitution. It encompasses the right to
legal ownership, possession, purchase, other acquisition, transport, storage,
carrying, sale, other transfer, manufacture, shooting range activities, private
property shooting, and training. Therefore, be it hereby ordained by the Board
of Commissioners of Warrick County, Indiana, that the right of the citizens of
Warrick County to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed by any agent or
representative of Warrick County or any other person.
(BC Ord. 2021-14, passed 2-8-21)
JUDICIAL CENTER AND COURTHOUSE SQUARE
§ 39.15 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   That no skateboarding, rollerblading, bicycling or use of any other type of
recreational wheeled object shall be allowed on or about the County Judicial
Center premises, grounds, sidewalks, parking lots, or otherwise within the
immediate vicinity of the Judicial Center as well as the premises known as the
Courthouse Square and the grounds thereof.
(BC Ord. 2000-2, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see §
39.99
§ 39.16 DEADLY WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Deadly weapons of any kind, as defined by I.C. 35-41-1-8, are
prohibited from being carried or maintained within the premises of the County
Judicial Center by anyone, with the exception of duly recognized law
enforcement officials.
   (B)   Deadly weapons of any kind as defined by I.C. 35-41-1-8 are prohibited
from being carried or maintained within the premises of the Courthouse Square
by anyone with the exception of elected government officials who have been
issued and carry a license under I.C. 35-47-2 and duly recognized law
enforcement officials.
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 35-41-1-8, deadly weapon is hereby defined as
follows:
      (1)   A loaded or unloaded firearm;
      (2)   A weapon, device, taser (as defined in I.C. 35-47-8-3) or
electronic stun weapon (as defined in I.C. 35-47-8-1), equipment, chemical
substance, or other material that in the manner it is used, or could ordinarily
be used, or is intended to be used, is readily capable of causing serious
bodily injury; and
      (3)   An animal (as defined in I.C. 35-46-3-3) that is:
         (a)   Readily capable of causing serious bodily injury; and
         (b)   Used in the commission or attempted commission of a crime.
(BC Ord. 2000-3, passed 4-1-00; Am. BC Ord. 2002-02, passed 1-23-02) Penalty,
see §
39.99
§ 39.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating§
39.03 or §
39.16 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
   (B)   Any person violating §
39.15 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.
(BC Res. 1987-6, passed 9-18-87; Am. BC Ord. 1997-18, passed 12-1-97; Am. BC
Ord. 2000-2, passed 2-28-00; Am. BC Ord. 2000-3, passed 4- 1-00; Am. BC Ord.
2002-02, passed 1-23-02; Am. BC Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-10-20)
CHAPTER 40: FIXED ASSET CAPITALIZATION POLICY
Section
   
40.01   Definitions
   
40.02   Land
   
40.03   Machinery and equipment
   
40.04   Buildings
   
40.05   Improvements other than buildings
   
40.06   Furniture and fixtures
   
40.07   Recording and accounting
   
40.08   Safeguarding of assets
§ 40.01 DEFINITIONS.
      For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPITAL OUTLAYS. Expenditures which benefit both the current and future
fiscal periods. This includes costs of acquiring land or structures;
construction or improvement of buildings, structures or other fixed assets; and
equipment purchases having an appreciable and calculable period of usefulness.
These are expenditures resulting in the acquisition of or addition to the
government's general fixed assets.
   ENTERPRISE FUNDS. Those funds used to account for operations (a) that are
financed and operated in a manner similar to private business enterprise, where
the intent of the governing body is that the costs (expenses, including
depreciation) of providing goods or services to the general public on a
continuing basis be financed or recovered primarily through user charges; or
(b) where the governing body has decided that periodic determination of
revenues earned, expenses incurred, and/or net income is appropriate for
capital maintenance, public policy, management control, accountability and
other purposes.
   FIXED ASSET. Tangible assets of a durable nature employed in the operating
activities of the unit and that are relatively permanent and are needed for the
production or sale of goods or services are termed  property, plant and
equipment or fixed assets. These assets are not held for sale in the ordinary
course of business. This broad group is usually separated into classes
according to the physical characteristics of the items (e.g. land, buildings,
improvements other than buildings, machinery and equipment, furniture and
fixtures).
   HISTORICAL COST. The cash equivalent price exchanged for goods or services
at the date of acquisition. Land, buildings, equipment, and most inventories
are common examples of items recognized under the historical cost attribute.
   IMPROVEMENTS OTHER THAN BUILDINGS. Improvements to land for better
enjoyment, attached or not easily removed, and with a life expectancy of
greater than two years. Examples are walks, parking areas and drives, golf cart
paths, fencing, retaining walls, pools, outside fountains, planter underground
sprinkler systems, and other similar items. Improvements do not include roads,
streets, or assets that are of value only to the public. For example, Vann Road
is a public road with greatest value to the public. Roads or drives upon
county-owned land that provide support to our facilities are assets. A sidewalk
down the road for public enjoyment is an infrastructure improvement and is not
capitalized. However, sidewalks installed upon county-owned land for use by the
public and for the support of our facility are capital assets.
   MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT. An apparatus, tool, or conglomeration of pieces to
form a tool. The tool will stand alone and not become a part of a basic
structure or building.
   TANGIBLE ASSETS. Assets that can be observed by one or more of the physical
senses. They may be seen and touched and, in some environments, heard and
smelled.
(BC Ord. 1997-19, passed 12-1-97)
§ 40.02 LAND.
   (A)   This county will capitalize all land purchases, regardless of cost.
Exceptions to land capitalization are land purchased outright, as easements, or
rights-of-way for infrastructure. Examples of infrastructures are roads and
streets, street lighting systems, bridges, overpasses, sidewalks, curbs,
parking meters, street signs, viaducts, wharfs, and storm water collection.
   (B)   Original cost of land will include the full value given to the seller,
including relocation, legal services incidental to the purchase (including
title work and opinion), appraisal and negotiation fees, surveying and costs
for preparing the land for its intended purpose (including contractors and/or
county workers [salary and benefits]), such as demolishing buildings,
excavating, clean up, and/or inspection.
   (C)   A department will record donated land at fair market value on the date
of transfer plus any associated costs.
   (D)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will follow the source
funding policies and above procedures.
(BC Ord. 1997-19, passed 12-1-97)
§ 40.03 MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Warrick County shall capitalize and inventory machinery and equipment
assets with an individual value equal to or greater than $5,000. Machinery and/
or equipment combined with other machinery and/or equipment to form one unit
with a total value greater than the above-mentioned limit shall be considered
to be one unit.
   (B)   Any other reasonable and necessary costs incurred to make such
machinery and/or equipment operable for its intended purposes shall be
capitalized, including, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   Shipping and/or transportation charges;
      (2)   Professional fees, such as consultant and accounting fees;
      (3)   Damage payments;
      (4)   Any other cost directly associated with the purchase, delivery, or
set up of the machinery and/or equipment, including payments to contractors
and/or salary and benefit payments to Warrick County employees.
   (C)   Improvements or renovations to existing machinery and/or equipment
shall be capitalized only if the result of such improvement(s) or renovation(s)
meet all of the following conditions:
      (1)   Total cost of such improvement(s) or renovation(s) exceed $5,000;
      (2)   The useful life is extended two years or more; and
      (3)   The total cost of such improvement(s) or renovation(s) will be
greater than the current book value and less than the fair market value.
   (D)   A department shall record donated machinery and equipment at fair
market value on the date of transfer, with any associated costs.
   (E)   Purchases of machinery and/or equipment using federal or state funding
shall follow the source funding policies and above procedures.
(BC Ord. 1997-19, passed 12-1-97; Am. BC Ord. 2021-11, passed 1-11-21)
§ 40.04 BUILDINGS.
   (A)   A department will capitalize buildings at full cost with no
subcategories for tracking the cost of attachments. Examples of attachments are
roofs, heating, cooling, plumbing, lighting, or sprinkler systems, or any part
of the basic building. The department will include the cost of items designed
or purchased exclusively for the building.
   (B)   A department's new building will be capitalized only if it meets the
following conditions:
      (1)   The total cost exceeds $5,000, and
      (2)   The useful life is greater than two years.
   (C)   A department improving or renovating an existing building will
capitalize the cost only if the result meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The total cost exceeds $5,000,
      (2)   The useful life is extended two or more years, and
      (3)   The total cost will be greater than the current book value and less
than the fair market value.
   (D)   Capital building costs will include preparation of land for the
building, architectural and engineering fees, bond issuance fees, interest cost
(while under construction), accounting costs of material, and any costs
directly attributable to the construction of a building.
   (E)   A department will record donated buildings at fair market value on the
date of transfer with any associated costs.
   (F)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will follow the source
funding policies and above procedures.
(BC Ord. 1997-19, passed 12-1-97)
§ 40.05 IMPROVEMENTS OTHER THAN BUILDINGS.
   (A)   This county will capitalize new improvements other than buildings only
if it meets the following conditions:
      (1)   The total cost exceeds $5,000, and
      (2)   The useful life is greater than two years.
   (B)   A department will capitalize improvements or renovations to existing
improvements other than buildings only if the result meets the following
conditions:
      (1)   The total cost exceeds $5,000,
      (2)   The asset's useful life is extended two or more years, and
      (3)   The total cost will be greater than the current book value and less
than the fair market value.
   (C)   A department's donated improvements other than buildings will be
recorded at fair market value on the date of transfer with any associated
costs.
   (D)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will follow the source
funding policies and above procedures.
(BC Ord. 1997-19, passed 12-1-97)
§ 40.06 FURNITURE AND FIXTURES.
   (A)   Warrick County shall capitalize and inventory furniture and fixture
assets with an individual value equal to or greater than $5,000. Furniture and/
or fixtures combined with other furniture and/or fixtures to form one unit with
a total value greater than the above-described limit shall be considered to be
one unit.
   (B)   Any other reasonable and necessary costs associated with the purchase,
delivery, and/or set up of the furniture and/or fixtures shall be capitalized.
   (C)   Improvements, repairs, or renovations to existing furniture and/or
fixtures shall be capitalized only if the result of such improvement(s), repair
(s), or renovation(s) meet all of the following conditions:
      (1)   Total cost of such improvement(s), repair(s), or renovation(s)
exceed $5,000;
      (2)   The useful life of the furniture or fixture is extended two years
or more; and
      (3)   The total cost of such improvement(s), repair(s), or renovation(s)
will be greater than the current book value and less than the fair market
value.
   (D)   An office or department shall record donated furniture and/or fixtures
at fair market value on the date of transfer, with any associated costs.
   (E)   Purchases of furniture and/or fixtures using federal or state funding
shall follow the source funding policies and above procedures.
(BC Ord. 2021-12, passed 1-25-21; Am. BC Ord. 2022-08, passed 2-14-22)
§ 40.07 RECORDING AND ACCOUNTING.
   (A)   The county and its various departments shall classify capital
expenditures as capital outlays within the fund from which the expenditure was
made in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The cost of
property, plant and equipment includes all expenditures necessary to put the
asset into position and ready for use. For purposes of recording fixed assets
of the county and its departments, the valuation of assets shall be based on
historical cost or where the historical cost is indeterminable, by estimation
for those assets in existence.
   (B)   When an asset is purchased for cash, the acquisition is simply
recorded as the amount of cash paid, including all outlays relating to its
purchase and preparation for intended use. Assets may be acquired under a
number of other arrangements including:
      (1)   Assets acquired for a lump-sum purchase price;
      (2)   Purchase on deferred payment contract;
      (3)   Acquisition under capital lease;
      (4)   Acquisition by exchange of nonmonetary assets;
      (5)   Acquisition by issuance of securities;
      (6)   Acquisition by self-construction;
      (7)   Acquisition by donation or discovery.
Some of these arrangements present special problems relating to the cost to be
recorded. For example, in utility accounting, interest during a period of
construction has long been recognized as a part of the asset cost. Reference to
an intermediate accounting manual will illustrate the recording of acquisition
of assets under the aforementioned acquisition arrangements. For purposes of
recording fixed assets of the utilities, the valuation of assets shall be based
on historical cost.
   (C)   In addition, an asset register (prescribed form 211) shall be
maintained to provide a detailed record of the capital assets of the
governmental unit.
(BC Ord. 1997-19, passed 12-1-97)
§ 40.08 SAFEGUARDING OF ASSETS.
   Accounting controls shall be designed and implemented to provide reasonable
assurances that:
      (1)   Capital expenditures made by the county, its various departments
and possible future utilities be in accordance with management’s authorization
as documented in the minutes.
      (2)   Transactions of the possible future utilities be recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in conformity with
generally accepted principles.
      (3)   Adequate detail records be maintained to assure accountability for
county and possible future utility owned assets.
      (4)   Access to assets be permitted in accordance with management’s
authorization.
      (5)   The recorded accountability for assets be compared with the
existing assets at least every two years and appropriate action be taken with
respect to any differences.
(BC Ord. 1997-19, passed 12-1-97)
APPENDIX A: FIXED ASSET NOTIFICATION FORM
DEPARTMENT: ___________________________
THIS NOTIFICATION IS FOR:   ADDITION      UPDATE      TRANSFER      DISPOSAL
ACQUISITION IS BY:      PURCHASE    DONATION    LEASE         TRANSFER
   (ATTACH COPY)
DATE OF TRANSACTION: ________________________________________
ACCOUNT NO. _______________ P. O. NO. __________________
ESTIMATED: LIFE EXPECTANCY _________ MILEAGE OR HOURS ________
CIP NUMBER: __________________ LOCATION: ___________________
SERIAL OR VIN NUMBER: ________________________________________
TOTAL/PARTIAL VALUE OF ASSET: _______________________________________
(PLEASE ATTACH OR FORWARD COPY OF CHECK(S) TO DOCUMENT COST.
IF DONATED FAIR MARKET VALUE, HOW DETERMINED, AND DATE BOARD APPROVED.)
DESCRIPTION:
___________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________
(BUILDING DESCRIPTION MUST INCLUDE SQUARE FOOTAGE, BUILDING MATERIAL, ROOF
TYPE, AND IF EQUIPPED WITH SPRINKLER SYSTEM OR BOILER.)
BRAND OR MAKE: _______________      MODEL NO.: _________________
YEAR: _______________________          LICENSE NO.: ________________
                                       ATTACH COPY OF REGISTRATION
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT: ___________            TYPE OF FUEL: __________________
                  TRUCKS ONLY
IF DISPOSED-METHOD:         SOLD $________ TRADED         JUNKED   SCRAPPED
STOLEN/WRECKED            END-OF-LEASE      TRANSFERRED TO: _____________
(ATTACH POLICE REPORT)
DATE BOARD APPROVED: ___________            DATE COUNCIL APPROVED: _______
(ATTACH COPY OF MINUTES)                  (REAL PROPERTY VALUE> $9,999)
DATE MAYOR APPROVED: ___________ SIGNATURE:
_____________________________________
      (REAL PROPERTY ONLY)
PERSON RESPONSIBLE: ___________________         ______________________________
                  SIGNATURE                  PRINTED NAME
RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT HEAD'S SIGNATURE: ________________________
IF TRANSFERRED
RECEIVING PERSON'S SIGNATURE: ___________________________________
            PRINTED NAME: _________________________________
CLERK-TREASURER'S USE ONLY
RECEIVED: ______________________         ENTERED FIXED ASSET: ___________
INSURED: _______________________         CLERK-TREASURER'S INITIAL: _______
CHAPTER 41: HEALTH DEPARTMENT FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
41.01   General
   
41.02   Fee schedule
§ 41.01 GENERAL.
   This chapter shall establish and include all fees for those specific
services and records provided and permits issued by the County Health
Department. All applicable fees set forth in this chapter, and any subsequent
amendments or revisions thereto, shall be made payable to the County Health
Department.
(BC Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24; BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24)
§ 41.02 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following fee schedule shall govern and control all fees and penalties
charged or assessed by the County Health Department. In the event of a conflict
between any other county ordinance and this chapter, this chapter shall
control.
FOOD
FOOD
Application                                                        Fee
Alteration, construction, or renovation of food establishment      $100
Change of ownership to food establishment                          $75
Food safety education program                                      $100
Plan review                                                        $100
Permit                                                             Fee
Catering permit                                                    $100
Food establishment permit: 0-5 employees                           $100
Food establishment permit: 6-25 employees                          $125
Food establishment permit: 26-50 employees                         $150
Food establishment permit: 51 or more employees                    $175
Micro market permit                                                $100
FOOD (continued)
Permit (continued)                                                 Fee
Mobile food vendor permit                                          $100
Temporary event food vendor permit                                 $25/day
Vending machine unit permit: 0-12 vending machine units            $100
Each additional vending machine unit operated in excess of 12      $10
Penalty                                                            Fee
First offense                                                      $100
Second and subsequent offense (not to exceed amount)               $500
Late fee                                                           $200
An applicant who fails to pay a permit fee by a specified due date. Food
establishment, micro market, and vending machine unit permits are valid for a
period beginning on the date the permit is issued and expire on December 31 of
the same year.
VITAL RECORDS
Item                                                               Fee
Death certificate                                                  $20
Birth certificate                                                  $15
Paternity affidavit                                                $50
Paternity affidavit copy                                           $10
Birth correction                                                   $50
NURSING
Item                                                               Fee
Children s immunization                                            $15
Adult immunization                                                 $15
Flu shots for county employees, uninsured + cost of vaccine        $15
TB skin test                                                       $20
Pregnancy test                                                     $10
TB certification                                                   $30
Free capillary blood lead testing is offered for children under 7 years of age
and for pregnant or breast-feeding women.
ENVIRONMENTAL
Item                                                               Fee
Septic permit                                                      $100
Dye test                                                           $50
Water sample                                                       $25
   Penalty                                                      Fee
First offense                                                      $100
First offense second and subsequent offense (not to exceed amount) $500
TATTOO
Permit                                                             Fee
Artist                                                             $100
Establishment, acquired January 1 - March 31                       $500
Establishment, acquired April 1 - June 30                          $375
Establishment, acquired July 1 - September 30                      $250
Establishment, acquired October 1 - December 31                    $125
 
(BC Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   PERMITS TO WORK WITHIN COUNTY RIGHT-OF-WAY
      
52.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
53.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
      
54.   CONSTRUCTION SITE AND POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE STORMWATER CONTROL
      
55.   STORMWATER UTILITY RATES
      
56.   DRAINAGE MANAGEMENT
         
APPENDIX A:   FLOWCHARTS
         
APPENDIX B:   DRAINAGE PLAN DRAWING CHECKLIST
         
APPENDIX C:   DECLARATION OF COVENANTS; INSPECTION/MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGE
FACILITY
         
APPENDIX D:   CERTIFICATION FORM
         
APPENDIX E:   TRENCH DETAILS
         
APPENDIX F:   RAINFALL INTENSITY TABLE
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Solid Waste Management District
   
50.02   Sanitary landfill regulations adopted by reference
Use of Landfills; Disposal of Waste
   
50.15   Definitions
   
50.16   Use limited to county citizens
   
50.17   Permit required for landfill
   
50.18   Permit application and hearing; fee
   
50.19   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
50.20   Revocation
   
50.21   Bringing waste into county, depositing in landfill
   
50.22   Private landfills
   
50.23   Enforcement; injunctive relief
   
50.24   Landfill fees
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Collection, delivery and processing, see
Ch. 136
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   There is created within the county a Solid Waste Management District
encompassing all of the incorporated and unincorporated territory of the
county.
   (B)   The Board of Directors of the Solid Waste Management District shall be
comprised of the following:
      (1)   Two members of the Board of Commissioners appointed from its
membership.
      (2)   One member appointed by the County Council as the county fiscal
body from the membership of that body.
      (3)   The Mayor the City of Boonville, being the municipality having the
largest population in the county.
      (4)   One member of the legislative body of the City of Boonville being
the municipality with the largest population of the county, said member being
appointed by the legislative body of the City of Boonville.
      (5)   One member who is a member of the fiscal body of a town other than
the City of Boonville, which said member shall be appointed by the
Commissioners of Warrick County to represent the municipalities in the county
other than the City of Boonville.
      (6)   One additional member appointed by the Board of Commissioners from
its membership.
(BC Ord. 1990-20, passed 5-7-90)
§ 50.02 SANITARY LANDFILL REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The regulations for public disposal of garbage and rubbish at county
operated sanitary landfill areas and on any land which is situated outside the
corporate limits of any city or town, as adopted by Ord. 72-1, are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this code the same as if set forth in
full herein. These regulations shall be in effect until the county ceases to
operate the landfill.
(BC Ord. 72-1, passed 5-6-72)
USE OF LANDFILLS; DISPOSAL OF WASTE
§ 50.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible animal solid, vegetable solid and semi-solid wastes
resulting from the processing, handling, preparation, cooking, serving, or
consumption of food or food materials.
   GOVERNMENTAL UNIT. Any county, city or town or any subdivision thereof.
   LANDFILL. A tract of land on which a landfill operation is conducted and
which has been approved by the State Board of Health.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm or association.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid and semi-solid wastes,
except human excreta, but including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, offal and solid commercial, industrial and institutional wastes.
   RUBBISH. All non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, such as
cardboard, paper, plastic, metal or glass food containers, rags, waste metal,
yard clippings, small pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, crockery, and
other waste materials that ordinarily accumulate around a home, business or
industry. It shall not include garbage, ashes, bulk refuse, dead animals,
hazardous refuse, industrial waste or building waste resulting from the
operations of a contractor.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78)
§ 50.16 USE LIMITED TO COUNTY CITIZENS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the citizens of the
county to use the landfill operated by the County Commissioners. This section
shall not affect any existing contracts, until their termination.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than county citizens to
deposit refuse, garbage, or rubbish in containers used by the county in its
landfill operation.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.17 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR LANDFILL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or governmental unit to operate a
landfill in the county except the Board of Commissioners without having first
obtained a permit from the Board of Commissioners and having had the site
approved by the State Board of Health for a proper landfill.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.18 PERMIT APPLICATION AND HEARING; FEE.
   (A)   Any permit issued by the Board of Commissioners will be granted only
after application by the proposed operator and the owner of the real estate to
be used. The application shall describe the real estate to be used, along with
a description, ownership and usage of all real estate within one half mile of
the proposed landfill. It shall also contain a map showing the route or routes
to be used coming to and from such landfill. The application shall also
designate any governmental units or units the operator intends to serve. It
shall also describe the type and volume of refuse to be handled.
   (B)   On the receipt of an application for a landfill, the Board of
Commissioners shall assign the same for hearing, which hearing shall not be
less than two weeks from the date of filing. Notice shall be given by
publication in two newspapers of opposite political faith published in the
county, plus notice by certified mail to all persons listed as living or owning
real estate within one half-mile of the proposed landfill.
   (C)   It shall be the burden of the applicant to introduce proof that the
landfill will be environmentally safe, that the routes to the landfill will not
be an excessive burden on county roads, that proper precautions will be taken
to prevent spillage of refuse along county roads, and that the landfill
operation will comply with all laws governing landfills.
   (D)   A fee of $100 shall accompany every application to cover the cost of
the hearing. The fee shall not be returnable.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78)
§ 50.19 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   In the event the Commissioners are satisfied that the landfill will not be
detrimental to the citizens of the county, or that the benefits to the county
or its citizens outweigh any detriments the Board of Commissioners shall issue
a permit. The permit shall be for a term of five years, and may be renewed. The
permit shall be conditioned on the property becoming property zoned and the
applicant having obtained approval from the Indiana State Board of Health. The
Commissioners may also require the applicant to furnish bond. The Commissioners
shall also designate the route to and from the landfill and may require the
operator to maintain all or part of said route.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78)
§ 50.20 REVOCATION.
   In the event of a violation of the terms of the permit, or of state law, or
in the event the landfill becomes a public nuisance, the Commissioners may
revoke the permit, after hearing, with right of appeal to the Circuit or
Superior Court of the county.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78)
§ 50.21 BRINGING WASTE INTO COUNTY, DEPOSITING IN LANDFILL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or governmental organization to
bring refuse, garbage, or rubbish from outside of the county except to an
approved landfill.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or governmental unit to deposit
refuse, garbage, or rubbish within the county except in a landfill approved by
the Board of Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.22 PRIVATE LANDFILLS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent any person or corporation from
operating any landfill on their premises for waste materials accumulated on his
own premises and not brought from off the premises.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78)
§ 50.23 ENFORCEMENT; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   The Circuit and Superior Courts of the county shall have concurrent
jurisdiction to enforce the penalty provided in §
50.99.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners, or any citizen aggrieved, may institute a
suit for injunction to restrain any person or governmental unit from violating
the provisions of this subchapter. Any landfill used in violation of this
subchapter is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated in such a manner as
nuisances are now or hereafter abated.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78)
§ 50.24 LANDFILL FEES.
   The fees for the use of the county landfill established by ordinance of the
Board of Commissioners from time to time are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this code as if set forth in full herein.
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or governmental organization who violates the provisions of §§
50.15 through
50.23 shall be subject to penalties outlined in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances. Each day of violation shall be
considered a separate offense.
(BC Ord. 1978-11, passed 11-6-78; Am. BC Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
CHAPTER 51: PERMITS TO WORK WITHIN COUNTY RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
   
51.01   Permits to work within county right-of- way adopted by reference
§ 51.01   PERMITS TO WORK WITHIN COUNTY RIGHT OF WAY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The regulations for permits to allow work within the county right-of-way, as
adopted by ordinance 1998-4, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this code the same as if set forth in full herein. (BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 5-
11-98; Am. BC Ord. 1999-37, passed 10-25-99)
Cross-reference:
   Restrictions on work within right-of-way, see §§
92.45 through
92.50
CHAPTER 52: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
52.01   Policy adopted
Cross-reference:
   Department of Stormwater Management, see §§
33.80 et seq.
§ 52.01 POLICY ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby adopts as policy those
recommendations made by the Warrick County Drainage Board for stormwater runoff
from developed real property.
   (B)   The following shall be required:
      (1)   All stormwater drainage systems shall be designed for a minimum 50-
year one hour storm. A time concentration for each sub-area, based on post
development conditions shall be used to determine the appropriate rainfall
intensity for the sizing of all storm sewer pipes, inlets, and catch basins
that will be located inside the developed area. All storm sewers shall be
installed on proper backfill and with proper cover, as per manufacturer
specifications for the particular materials being used.
      (2)   For the purpose of calculating stormwater retention basins, pre-
developed run-off from the site shall be determined as a five-year storm
intensity rainfall event release rate. Stormwater storage shall be then
calculated as a 50-year storm storage capacity (developed) over a 5-year
release rate (undeveloped). Pipes flowing into retention basins shall be
designed in such a manner that the design pipe flow capacity is not restricted
by the basin pool elevation. All storm water storage basins shall include a
controlled discharge structure for the restricted release rate, plus an
emergency surface overflow at or equal to the basin design storage elevation.
      (3)   The Rational Method shall be used for the purpose of calculating
pre-development and post- development run-off. Run-off coefficients shall be
taken from the Herpic Storm Drainage Manual. A composite coefficient for post-
developed conditions shall be determined by using methods described in the
Herpic Storm Drainage Manual.
      (4)   All preliminary drainage plans submitted will show the following
information on the plat:
         (a)   X-sections of all surface drains and waterways.
         (b)   Surface contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet.
         (c)   Flow direction arrows on all streets and surface waterways.
         (d)   All storm sewers within and adjacent to the subdivision by size,
length, type, grade, invert and rim elevations.
         (e)   Locations, storage volumes, release rates, discharge structure
details and overflow details for all retention basins.
         (f)   All sub-drainage areas inside the development shall be
delineated. Off-site areas draining through the development site should also be
shown.
         (g)   Certification and signature of the design engineer.
      (5)   All preliminary drainage plans submitted shall be accompanied by
the following:
         (a)   A copy of the drainage study and calculations for the proposed
subdivision.
         (b)   A letter of certification by the design engineer stating that
the drainage plan was prepared in accordance with the criteria as set forth in
the Herpic County Storm Drainage Manual and the plan requirements of the
Warrick County Drainage Board.
(BC Res. 2000-06, passed 12-18-00)
CHAPTER 53: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
Section
   
53.01   Purpose; intent
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Applicability
   
53.04   Responsibility for administration
   
53.05   Interpretation
   
53.06   Discharge prohibitions
   
53.07   Suspension of MS4 system access
   
53.08   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
53.09   Discharge inspections and monitoring
   
53.10   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by
the use of best management practices
   
53.11   Storage of hazardous and toxic material
   
53.12   Watercourse protection
   
53.13   Notification of spills
   
53.14   Enforcement
   
53.15   Appeal of notice of violation
   
53.16   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
53.17   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
53.18   Injunctive relief
   
53.19   Compensatory action
   
53.20   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
53.21   Remedies not exclusive
 
   
53.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Department of Stormwater Management, see §§ 33.80 et seq.
   On-site sewage systems, see
Ch. 130
§ 53.01 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Warrick County, Indiana, through the
regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 to themaximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants from illicit discharges
and connections into the drainage system and the waters of the State of Indiana
per the Clean Water Act and the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management's (“IDEM”) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”)
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System General Permit (“MS4GP”). The objectives
of this chapter are:
   (A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants into the county's separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by any user;
   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the county's MS4;
and
   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge prohibited by this chapter that occurs by
chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the County
Department of Stormwater Management.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   BOARD. The County Stormwater Management Board.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Stormwater
General Permit. These include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
   CONVEYANCE.  Any structural process for transferring stormwater between at
least two points. The term includes piping, ditches, swales, curbs, gutters,
catch basins, channels, storm drains, and roadways.
   EPA. The Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
   FLOATABLE. Any solid waste that, due to its physical characteristics, will
float on the surface of water. For the purposes of this rule, the term does not
include naturally occurring floatables, such as leaves or tree limbs.
   GROUND WATER.  Accumulations of underground water, natural or artificial,
public and private, or parts thereof, that are wholly or partiallywithin, flow
through, or border upon this state. The term does not include manmade
underground storage or conveyance structures.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, SUBSTANCES or WASTES.  Any material, including any
substance, waste, or combination thereof, that, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause,
or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health, safety, property, or the environment, when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   IDEM. Refers to the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including, but not
limited to, any conveyances that allow any non-stormwater discharge, including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the storm drain system,
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether the drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps,
or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to a MS4 conveyance that is not composed
entirely of stormwater, except naturally introduced floatables, such as leaves
or tree limbs. Sources of illicit discharges include, but are not limited to,
sanitary wastewater, septic tank effluent, commercial car wash wastewater, oil
spills or disposal, radiator flushing disposal, laundry wastewater, roadway
accident spillage, pollutant run-off, and household hazardous wastes.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in §
53.06.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. A performance standard or requirement within a
permit to reduce the discharge of pollutants from a MS4 to protect water
quality, and to satisfy the appropriate water quality requirements of the Clean
Water Act, which is achieved through planning and implementation of specific
measures that are identified in the stormwater quality management plan.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MSA A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, glitters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, that is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by a federal, state, city, town, county,
district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state
law), having jurisdiction over stormwater, including special districts under
state law, such as a sewer district, flood control district, or drainage
district, or similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency
under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1288) that discharges into
waters of the state; or privately owned stormwater utility, hospital,
university, or college having jurisdiction over stormwater that discharges into
waters of the state. This does not include the City of Boonville, Tennyson,
Lynnville, Elberfeld, and other MS4 territories;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at
40 CFR 122.2.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; excess pesticides, excess herbicides, and excess
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STATE WATERS or WATER OF THE STATE. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other
bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or
forming a part of the boundaries of the state that are not entirely confined or
retained completely upon the property of an individual, partnership or
corporation.
   STORM DRAIN STENCILING. A method to label storm drain inlets with a message
warning the public not to dump polluting materials into the storm drain.
Methods can include a marker or a paint stencil.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   WARRICK COUNTY.  A county located in the U.S. state of Indiana.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
   WATERCOURSE. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or man-made
drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow, either
continuously or intermittently.
   WATER QUALITY.  A term used to describe the chemical, physical, and
biological characteristics of water, usually in respect to its suitability for
a particular purpose.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all discharges, including illicit and illegal
discharges, entering the MS4 that was generated on any developed and
undeveloped lands, unless explicitly exempted by the authorized enforcement
agency.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The Department of Stormwater Management shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed
upon the Department of Stormwater Management as the authorized enforcement
agency may be delegated by the Board to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest or in the employ of the authorized enforcement agency.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.05 INTERPRETATION.
   Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to then
common and accepted meanings, except that words and phrases defined in §
53.02 shall be construed according to the respective definitions given in that
section. Technical words and phrases that are not defined in this chapter, but
which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical usage, shall be
construed according to such meanings.
(BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.06 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.
      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a MS4
conveyance, waterbodies, or watercourses, directly or indirectly, any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than stormwater.
      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge
to the MS4 is prohibited, except as described as follows:
         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line and hydrant flushing for maintenance;
irrigation water; uncontaminated pumped ground water; uncontaminated
foundation, footing, and crawl space drains; fire suppression activities;
uncontaminated excess storm sewer cleaning water not collected by a vacuum
truck; residential car washing; non-commercial washing of vehicles by community
organizations; external building wash down without detergents; uncontaminated
condensate from air conditioning units, coolers, and other compressors, and
from outside storage of refrigerated gases or liquids; springs; dechlorinated/
debrominated residential swimming pool discharges; pavement wash waters
provided spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred
(unless all spilled material has been removed) and where detergents are not
used; and uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20)).
         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the
test.
         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the EPA or IDEM, provided
the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person shall be in violation of this chapter if the person
connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.07 SUSPENSION OF MS4 SYSTEM ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
      (1)   The Board may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access
to a person when it is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge,
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of
the state or United States.
      (2)   If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in
an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the state or
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of elicit discharge.
      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have their MS4 access terminated if it would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge.
      (2)   The authorized enforcement agency will notify in writing a violator
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
      (3)   The violator may petition the Board for a reconsideration and
hearing within days of receiving written notice of a violation.
      (4)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
authorized enforcement agency.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.08 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of that permit.
Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.09 DISCHARGE INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING.
   (A)   Inspection and monitoring. The authorized enforcement agency has the
authority to periodically inspect any portion of the MS4, whether publicly or
privately owned, to detect and eliminate illicit connections and discharges
into the MS4. The inspection may include dry weather screening of discharges
from outfalls connected to the MS4 to determine if prohibited flows are being
conveyed into the MS4. It could also include spot testing of waters contained
in the MS4 itself to detect the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 by
means other than a defined outfall, such as dumping or contaminated sheet
runoff.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The authorized enforcement agency, or a representative thereof,
shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under
this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force, which require
properidentification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
      (2)   Persons shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.
      (3)   The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary, in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's stormwater discharge.
      (4)   The authorized enforcement agency may require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency,
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
      (6)   Any obstruction delays in allowing the authorized enforcement
agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge
permit and of this chapter.
      (7)   A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if
the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this chapter.
      (8)   If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he or she is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement
agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26- 06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.10 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   (A)   The authorized enforcement agency is authorized to require dischargers
to implement pollution prevention measures, utilizing best management practices
(BMPs) necessary to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the MS4
or waters of the state or United States.
   (B)   The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses
through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.
   (C)   Any person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the
person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the MS4.
   (D)   Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to
the
extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this
section.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26- 06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.11 STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIAL.
   Storage or stockpiling of hazardous or toxic material within any
watercourse, or in its associated floodway or floodplain, is prohibited.
Storage or stockpiling of hazardous or toxic material, including sewage
treatment plant stockpiles, on a property must include adequate protection and/
or containment to prevent any such material from entering any temporary or
permanent stormwater conveyance or watercourse.
(BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.12 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26- 06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.13 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   (A)   Any person who operates, controls, or maintains a facility, premises,
or property from which a spill occurs is responsible for notifying emergency
response agencies and taking all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of the release. This section is in addition to the
procedures and requirements identified in the Indiana Spill Rule, 327 IAC 2-
6.1.
   (B)   Any discharger who accidentally discharges into the MS4 or a body of
water any substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge shall
immediately inform the authorized enforcement agency concerning the discharge.
   (C)   A written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with the
authorized enforcement agency,by the dischargers, within five days. The written
report shall specify:
      (1)   The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;
      (2)   The date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge;
      (3)   All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all
measures proposed to be taken to prevent any recurrence; and
      (4)   The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and
the name and telephone number of a person who may be contacted for additional
information on the matter.
   (D)   A properly reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative
defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this chapter against a
discharger for such discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal
action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs, or to
obtain other relief because of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge
shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all
the requirements of this section and the Indiana Spill Rule (327 IAC 2-6.1).
This requirement does not relieve discharger from notifying other entities as
required by state or federal regulations.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to
comply with any provision of this chapter. Any person who has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this chapter may be subject to the
enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction
or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
   (B)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person.
      (2)   The notice of violation may require without limitation:
         (a)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
         (b)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
         (c)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
         (d)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
         (e)   Payment to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
         (f)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
      (3)   The notice of violation shall contain:
         (a)   The names and addresses of the owner and violator;
         (b)   The address when available, or a description of the building,
structure of land upon which the violation has occurred;
         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
illegal activity into compliance with this chapter, and a time schedule for the
completion of the remedial action, which may include designating the violation
requires immediate action of less than 24 hours;
         (e)   A statement that should the violator fail to remediate or
restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense thereof shall be charged
to the violator;
         (f)   A description of the remedial measures, if any, that were
necessary to bring the illegal activity into compliance with this chapter that
were already taken by the authorized enforcement agency, the cost thereof, and
a statement that the violator shall be responsible for the remedial action
already taken; and
         (g)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is sent.
   (C)   Emergency. In the event that an emergency exists and immediate action
is required, the Board and the authorized enforcement agency and the authorized
enforcement agency may abate or remedy the violation, and notice may be given
after the abatement or remediation has occurred. In the event of such
emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may enter onto the subject
property and may take all measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall
be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow access to the government agency
or designated contractor to enter upon the property for the purposes set forth
above.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.15 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal it by filing a
notice of appeal with the authorized enforcement agency.
      (1)   The notice of appeal must be received within ten days from the date
of the notice of violation is issued.
      (2)   Hearing on the appeal before the Stormwater Department shall take
place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
   (B)   A decision of the authorized enforcement agency shall be appealed to
the Board.
      (1)   The Board must receive a notice of appeal with ten days of the
decision of the authorized enforcement agency.
      (2)   Hearing on the appeal before the Board shall take place within 30
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
   (C)   A decision of the Board may be taken as provided by state law.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.16 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   (A)   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten
days after all appeals have been exhausted, then representatives of the
authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and
are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.17 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within 30 days after the abatement of the violation by authorized
enforcement agency, the owner of the premises shall be billed for the cost of
abatement, including administrative costs. The notification will include copies
of all invoices paid by the county, and a log of all hours spent by county
personnel (or its designated contractor). If the amount contained in the
notification is not paid within 30 days of the receipt of the bill, the county
may certify to the County Auditor the amount of the bill, plus any additional
administrative costs incurred in the certification, and the amounts shall be
collected as delinquent taxes are collected pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-2.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.18 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction,
restraining the person from activities that would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24) Penalty,
see §
53.99
§ 53.19 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, and the like.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.20 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of the nuisance may be taken.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.21 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter may be
responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a maximum fine of $2,500 for
each offense, plus costs, damages, and expenses. Each day a violation continues
after the original notification shall be deemed a separate offense under this
chapter.
   (B)   The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(BC Ord. 2006-13, passed 7-26-06; Am BC Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-13-24)
CHAPTER 54: CONSTRUCTION SITE AND POST-CONSTRUCTION SITE STORMWATER CONTROL
Section
   
54.01   Introduction and purpose
   
54.02   Legal authority
   
54.03   Definitions
   
54.04   Responsibility for administration
   
54.05   Severability
   
54.06   Ultimate responsibility
   
54.07   Disclaimer of liability
   
54.08   Applicability
   
54.09   Requirements for individual building lots within a permitted project
   
54.10   General requirements for post-construction stormwater control
   
54.11   Post-construction design requirements
   
54.12   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by
the use of best management practices
   
54.13   Stormwater approval application.
   
54.14   Review and approval
   
54.15   Responsibility of construction site owner after approval
   
54.16   County inspections
   
54.17   Enforcement
   
54.18   Injunctive relief
   
54.19   Compensatory action
   
54.20   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
54.21   Remedies not exclusive
   
54.22   Stormwater Board Violations, Restoration, Abatement and/or Penalty Fund
 
   
54.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Department of Stormwater Management, see §§
33.80 et seq.
§ 54.01 INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Construction site stormwater control.
      (1)   During the construction process, the soil is highly vulnerable to
erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing
water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates the repair of sewers, ditches,
and streams. In addition, clearing and grading during construction causes the
loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
      (2)   As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard
persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the environment in the county.
This chapter will also promote public welfare by guiding, regulating, and
controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development,
redevelopment, or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results
in the movement of earth on land in the county.
   (B)   Post-construction stormwater control.
      (1)   Land development projects and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater
runoff rates, runoff volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment
transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased
quantities of water-borne pollutants. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and non-
point source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation
of stormwater runoff from development sites. Following the completion of
construction activities, dust, dirt, erosion, and runoff from developed areas
(parking lots, driveways, rooftops, roadways, and the like) will continue to
affect the stormwater facilities and receiving streams, unless post-
construction practices are implemented during construction and are maintained
in perpetuity.
      (2)   This chapter establishes minimum stormwater management requirements
and controls for the protection of the general health, safety, and welfare of
the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This chapter seeks
to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
         (a)   Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development to
reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank
erosion, and maintain the integrity of stream channels;
         (b)   Minimize increases in point and non-point source pollution
caused by stormwater runoff from development that would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
         (c)   Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff that
flows from any specific site during and following development so as not to
exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable;
and
         (d)   Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and
other source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
controls, and ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and
pose no threat to public safety.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.02 LEGAL AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted per statutory authority granted under code
authorizing jurisdiction over the storm system and further is required by the
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program (FR Doc. 99-
29181) authorized by the 1972 amendments to the Clean Water Act and the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management's (IDEM) Construction Stormwater General
Permit (CSGP) and Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) General Permit
(MS4GP). Based on this authority and these requirements, this chapter
regulates:
   (A)   Stormwater drainage improvements related to the development of lands
located within county boundaries;
   (B)   Drainage control systems that were installed during new construction
and grading of lots and other parcels of land;
   (C)   Erosion and sediment control measures that were installed during new
construction and grading of lots and other parcels of land;
   (D)   Stormwater pollution prevention planning for land-disturbing
activities;
   (E)   The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater drainage
facilities and systems;
   (F)   The design, construction, and maintenance of stormwater quality
facilities and systems.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
   AGRICULTURAL CONSERVATION PRACTICES. Practices that are constructed on
agricultural land for controlling soil erosion and sedimentation. These
practices include, but are not limited to, grass waterways, sediment basins,
terraces, and grade stabilization structures.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Tillage, planting, cultivation, or
harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or nursery vegetative
crops. The term also includes pasture renovation and establishment, the
construction of agricultural conservation practices, and the installation and
maintenance of agricultural drainage tile. The term does not include land-
disturbing activities for the construction of agricultural-related facilities,
such as:
      (1)   Barns;
      (2)   Buildings to house livestock;
      (3)   Roads associated with infrastructure;
      (4)   Agricultural waste lagoons and facilities;
      (5)   Lakes and ponds;
      (6)   Wetlands; and
      (7)   Other infrastructure.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good-housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   BOARD. The Warrick County Stormwater Management Board.
   BORROW AREA. Areas where materials are excavated for use as fill.
   BUFFER STRIP. An existing, variable-width strip of vegetated land intended
to protect water quality and terrestrial and aquatic habitat in an adjacent
resource or area.
   CLASS V INJECTION WELL. A type of well, which typically has a depth greater
than its largest surface dimension, emplaces fluids into the subsurface and
does not meet the definitions of Class I through Class IV wells as defined
under 40 CFR 146.5. While the term includes the specific examples described in
40 CFR 144.81, septic systems that serve more than  one single-family dwelling
or provide service for non-domestic waste, dug wells, bored wells, improved
sinkholes, french drains, infiltration sumps, and infiltration galleries, it
does not include surface impoundments, trenches, or ditches that are wider than
they are deep.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits and
land-disturbing activities and land-disturbing associated with the construction
of infrastructure and structures. This term does not include routine ditch or
road maintenance or minor landscaping projects.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN.  A representation of a project site and all activities
associated with the project.
   CONSTRUCTION PROJECT or PROJECT. An organized effort to start, conduct,
manage, and complete a single construction activity, or a series of
construction activities.
   CONSTRUCTION PROJECT SITE or CONSTRUCTION SITE. The physical location or
locations where a construction project is being accomplished, or the physical
or legal boundaries within which a construction activity or a series of
construction activities is planned to be or is being accomplished.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS.  A stabilized surface at all points of ingress or
egress to a project site to capture and detain sediment carried by the tires of
vehicles or other equipment entering or exiting the project site.
   CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER GENERAL PERMIT (CSGP). An Indiana Department of
Environmental Management permit that regulates erosion and sediment control
practices on construction projects disturbing greater than one acre of land.
   CONSTRUCTION SUPPORT ACTIVITY. An activity that specifically supports the
project and involves land disturbance and/or activities that may result in
pollutant-generating activities on their own.  These activities include, but
are not limited to, concrete or asphalt batch plants, staging areas, material
storage areas, disposal sites, and soil stockpile areas.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE OPERATOR. Shall have the same meaning as PROJECT SITE
OPERATOR.
   CONTRACTOR or SUBCONTRACTOR. An individual or company hired by a project
site or individual lot owner, their agent, or the individual lot operator to
perform services on the project site.
   CONVEYANCE. A combination of drainage components used to convey stormwater
discharge, either within or downstream of the land-disturbing activity,
including a:
      (1)   MANMADE STORMWATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM. A pipe, ditch, vegetated
swale, or other stormwater conveyance system constructed by man, except for
restored stormwater conveyance systems;
      (2)   NATURAL STORMWATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM. The main channel or a natural
stream and the flood-prone area adjacent to the main channel; or
      (3)   RESTORED STORMWATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM. A stormwater conveyance
system that has been designed and constructed using natural channel design
concepts. Restored stormwater conveyance systems include the main channel and
the flood-prone area adjacent to the main channel.
   COUNTY. Employees or designees of the Commissioners of Warrick County,
Indiana.
   IDEM.  The Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   DEVELOPER.  Any person financially responsible for construction activity; or
an owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or lease, any lots
in a subdivision.
   DEWATERING. The act of draining rainwater and/or groundwater from
excavations, stormwater measures, building foundations, vaults, and trenches.
   DISPOSAL.  The discharge, deposit, injection, spilling, leaking, or placing
of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that the
solid waste or hazardous waste, or any constituent of the waste, may enter the
environment, be emitted into the air, or be discharged into any waters,
including ground waters.
   DITCH MAINTENANCE. To restore a conveyance system to its originally
constructed channel capacity and to perform the function for which it was
originally constructed as defined in I.C. 36-9-27. MAINTENANCE includes:
      (1)   Cleaning (removal of accumulated sediments, de-brushing, and
mowing);
      (2)   Spraying;
      (3)   Removing obstructions;
      (4)   Conducting minor repairs.
   DRAIN.  An open channel or a pipe, or a combination thereof, implemented to
gather, store, convey, and release stormwater.
   EQUIVALENT. Producing or achieving similar results and performance.
   EROSION. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURE. A practice, or a combination of
practices, to control erosion and resulting sedimentation.
   FILTER STRIP. An area of undisturbed or planted vegetation used to retard or
collect sediment for the protection of watercourses, reservoirs, or adjacent
properties.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. The establishment of permanent vegetative cover or the
application of a permanent non-erosive material to areas where all land-
disturbing activities have been completed and no additional land-disturbing
activities are planned under the current permit.
   FLOATABLE.  Any solid or liquid that, due to its physical characteristics,
will float on the surface of water. For this chapter, the term does not include
naturally-occurring floatables, such as leaves or tree limbs.
   GRADING. The excavation of the land surface to a desired slope or elevation.
   GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE. An approach to water management that protects,
restores, or mimics the natural water cycle.
   GROUNDWATER. Such accumulations of underground water, natural or artificial,
public and private, or parts thereof, that are wholly or partially within, flow
through, or border upon this state. The term does not include manmade
underground storage or conveyance structures.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE or IMPERVIOUS AREA. An area where the land surface has
been altered in such a way that it decreases the amount of rainwater
infiltration. IMPERVIOUS SURFACES include, but are not limited to, paved roads,
sidewalks, streets, parking areas, and paved driveways, packed gravel or soil,
and rooftops. Materials may include concrete, asphalt, and compacted gravel.
   INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOT. A single parcel of land within a multi-parcel
development.
   INDIVIDUAL LOT OPERATOR.  A contractor or subcontractor working on an
individual lot.
   INDIVIDUAL LOT OWNER. A person who has financial control of construction
activities for an individual lot.
   INFILTRATION.  The process by which surface water enters the soil and
recharges streams, lakes, rivers, and underground aquifers. STORMWATER
INFILTRATION is a fundamental component of the water cycle and is a centerpiece
of stormwater management strategies.
   INFILTRATION PRACTICES. Any structural system designed to facilitate the
percolation of runoff through the soil to groundwater. Examples include
infiltration basins or trenches, dry wells, and porous pavement.
   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any manmade change of the land surface, including
removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying soil, excavating,
filling, transporting, and grading.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT. A plan, undertaken by a single project
site owner or a group of project site owners acting in concert, to offer lots
for sale or lease; where such land is contiguous or is known, designated,
purchased, or advertised as a common unit or by a common name, such land must
be presumed as being offered for sale or lease as part of a larger common plan.
The term also includes phased or other construction activity by a single entity
for its use.
   LOT OPERATOR. A builder, contractor or subcontractor working on an
individual lot.
   LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID).  Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes that result in the infiltration, evapotranspiration, or use
of stormwater to protect water quality and associated aquatic habitat.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. A performance standard or requirement within a
permit to reduce the discharge of pollutants from an MS4 to protect water
quality, and to satisfy the appropriate  water quality requirements of the
Clean Water Act; which is achieved through planning and implementation of
specific measures that are identified in the stormwater quality management plan
(SWQMP). The term applies to an MS4 that demonstrates to IDEM’s satisfaction
that a performance standard is not achievable and that a lower level of
performance is appropriate. The MS4 must document that all reasonable and
economical options have been evaluated, considered, and/or implemented to
comply with and achieve the requirements of the permit, except those where it
can demonstrate that they are not technically feasible in the locality, or
whose cost would exceed any water quality benefit.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MS4. A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, that is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by a federal, state, city, town, county,
district, association, or other public body (created by or per state law)
having jurisdiction over stormwater, including special districts under state
law, such as a sewer district, flood control district, or drainage district, or
similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency under Section
208 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1288) that discharges into waters of the
state; or privately-owned stormwater utility, hospital, university, or college
having jurisdiction over stormwater that discharges into waters of the state;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at
40 CFR 122.2.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT.  A permit issued by EPA or IDEM that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to  waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.  Discharges that do not originate from storm
events. These discharges include, but are not limited to, process water, air-
conditioner condensate, non-contact cooling water, sanitary waste, concrete-
washout water, paint-wash water, irrigation water, or pipe-testing water.
   NOTICE OF INTENT LETTER or NOI LETTER. A written notification from the
project site owner submitted to IDEM and the Stormwater Management Department
at least 48 hours before initiating construction activities at the construction
site.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION LETTER or NOT LETTER. A written notification from the
project site owner submitted to IDEM and the Stormwater Management Department
that the construction activities for a site have been terminated and have met
the requirements of this chapter.
   OPEN SPACE. Any land area devoid of any disturbed or impervious surfaces
created by industrial, commercial, residential, agricultural, or other manmade
activities.
   PERMITTEE. The individual or entity required to obtain a permit coverage as
defined by the project site owner.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation, or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or the owner’s agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations that may cause  or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and
wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals;
animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any other kind.
   PROJECT SITE. The entire area on which construction activity is to be
performed.
   PROJECT SITE OWNER. A developer, or a person who has financial and
operational control of construction activities, project plans and
specifications, including the authority to approve expenditures or funds and
the ability to modify project plans and specifications.
   RECEIVING STREAM or RECEIVING WATER. A body of water that receives a
discharge from an outfall. The term does not include private drains, retention
and detention basins, or constructed wetlands used as treatment.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Alterations of a property that change a site or building in
such a way that there is a disturbance of land. The term does not include such
activities as exterior remodeling.
   RUNOFF.  Water that originates during a precipitation event and flows over
the land rather than infiltrating into the ground or evaporating.
   SEDIMENT. Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth’s surface.
   SEDIMENTATION. The settling and accumulation of unconsolidated sediment
carried by stormwater runoff.
   SENSITIVE AREA. A body of water identified as needing priority protection or
remediation, based on:
      (1)   Having threatened or endangered species in their habitat;
      (2)   Usage as public surface water supply intake;
      (3)   Usage for full-body recreation, such as bathing beaches; or
      (4)   Exceptional use classification as found in 327 IAC 2-1-11(b),
outstanding state resource water classification as found in 327 IAC 2-l-2(3)
and 327 IAC 2-1.5-19(b).
   SILVICULTURAL. The practice of controlling the establishment, growth,
composition, health, and quality of forests to meet diverse needs and values.
      (1)   Non-point activities that do not require permit coverage include
source silvicultural activities, such as nursery operations, site preparation,
reforestation, and subsequent cultural treatment, thinning, prescribed burning,
pest and fire control, harvesting operations, surface drainage, or logging road
construction and maintenance from which there is natural runoff. Some of these
activities (such as stream crossings for roads) may involve the placement of
dredged or fill material that may require a CWA section 404 permit and a 401
water quality certification.
      (2)   Point source activities subject to permit coverage include any
discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance related to rock crushing, gravel
washing, log sorting, or log storage facilities that are operated in connection
with silvicultural activities and from which pollutants are discharged into
waters of the United States or the state.
   SITE. A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
construction or land-disturbing activity is performed as a single unified
operation.
   SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the surface of the
earth that serves as the natural medium for the growth of plants.
   SOLID WASTE.  Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment
plant, sludge from an air pollution control facility, or other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, or agricultural operations or
from community activities. The term does not include:
      (1)   Solid or dissolved material in:
         (a)   Domestic sewage; or
         (b)   Irrigation return flows or industrial discharges; that are point
sources subject to permitsunder Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments (33 USC 1342);
      (2)   Source, special nuclear, or byproduct material (as defined by the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 USC 2011 et seq.));
      (3)   Manures or crop residues returned to the soil at the point of
generation as fertilizers or soil conditioners as part of a total farm
operation; or
      (4)   Vegetative matter at composting facilities registered under I.C.
13-20-10.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE. A practice or a combination of practices
selected to improve the quality of runoff discharges, divert runoff, or
mitigate the impacts related to quantity runoff.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan developed to minimize
the impact of stormwater pollutants resulting from construction activities.
   STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWQMP). A comprehensive written document
that outlines the activities that will be implemented and administered by an
MS4 entity to address stormwater runoff to improve water quality.
   STORMWATER QUALITY MEASURE. A practice, or a combination of practices, to
control or minimize pollutants associated with stormwater runoff.
   STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL.  A structural stormwater management facility
or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of
that runoff, including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the
period of release, or the velocity of flow.
   TRAINED/QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. An individual who is trained and experienced
in the principles of stormwater management, including erosion and sediment
control, as is demonstrated by state registration, professional certification,
completion of coursework, or annual training, that enables the individual to
make judgments regarding stormwater management, treatment, and monitoring.
   TREAT. Improving the stormwater runoff quality, reducing runoff volume,
reducing peak flow, or any combination thereof.
   VEGETATIVE PRACTICES. Utilization of various forms of vegetation to enhance
pollutant removal, maintain and improve natural site hydrology, promote
healthier habitats, and increase aesthetic appeal. Examples include, but are
not limited to, grass swales, filter strips, buffer strips, constructed
wetlands, and rain gardens.
   WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv). The volume of runoff generated by one inch of
rainfall on a site.
   WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA. Having the meaning set forth at 327 IAC 8-4.1-1
(27).
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The county shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon authorized personnel may be
delegated in writing by the County Drainage Board to persons or entities acting
in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the county through the County
Stormwater Management Department.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.05 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter, or the application
thereof, to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.06 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated per this chapter are minimum
standards. Therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by
any person will ensure that there will not be violations of NPDES permits.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.07 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on historical records, engineering, and
scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur or stormwater runoff
amounts or stormwater quality may be altered by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land uses permitted will be free from
stormwater damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
county, or any officer, representative, or employee thereof, for any damage
that may result from reliance on this chapter, or on any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.08 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Applicability. This applies to all land-disturbing activities within
the MS4 jurisdiction with a land disturbance greater than or equal to one acre,
or disturbances of less than one acre of land that are part of a larger common
plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb
one or more acres of land.
   (B)   Exemptions. The requirements under this chapter do not apply to the
following activities.
      (1)   Agricultural land-disturbing activities, including tillage,
planting, cultivation, or harvesting operations to produce agricultural or
nursery and vegetative crops, pasture renovation and establishment, the
construction of agricultural conservation practices, and the installation and
maintenance of agricultural drainage tile.
      (2)   Silvicultural activities associated with non-point discharges (40
CFR 122.27).
      (3)   Stormwater discharges associated with oil and gas exploration,
production, processing or treatment operations, or transmission facilities (40
CFR 122.26).
      (4)   Ditch maintenance for activities performed on a regulated drain by
a county drainage board as defined in Appendix B and I.C. 36-9-27.
      (5)   The land-disturbing activities listed below, provided other
applicable permits contain provisions requiring immediate implementation of
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater management measures:
         (a)   Landfills that have been issued a certification of closure under
329 IAC 10;
         (b)   Coal-mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34;
         (c)   Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste per a
permit issued by IDEM under 329 IAC 10 that contains equivalent stormwater
requirements, including the expansion of landfill boundaries and construction
of new cells, either within or outside the original solid waste permit
boundary;
         (d)   The Indiana Department of Transportation when it conducts its
business within the county corporate limits.
      (6)   Any construction project that has had its final drainage plan
approved by the county two years before the effective date of this chapter
shall be exempt from all requirements of this chapter that exceed the
requirements in effect at the time of approval.
   (C)   Discharges authorized by this chapter. This chapter authorizes the
following discharges to waters of the state.
      (1)   Stormwater, including stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and
surface runoff and drainage, associated with construction activity (40 CFR §
122.26(b)(14) or § 122,26(b)(15)(i)).
      (2)   Stormwater discharges designated by IDEM as needing to obtain
coverage under the CSGP (40 CFR § 122.26(a)(l)(v) or § 122.26(b)(15)(ii)).
      (3)   Stormwater discharges from construction support activities (e.g.,
concrete or asphalt batch plants, equipment staging yards, material storage
areas, excavated material disposal areas, borrow areas), provided the support
activity is directly related to the construction site required to have coverage
for stormwater discharges; and:
         (a)   The support activity is not a commercial or industrial
operation, nor does it serve multiple unrelated construction projects;
         (b)   The support activity does not continue to operate beyond the
completion of the construction activity for the project it supports; and
         (c)   Stormwater measures are implemented per the stormwater pollution
prevention plan, performance standards, and the Stormwater Management approval.
      (4)   Non-stomiwater discharges or flows, provided they are not
identified by IDEM as significant sources of pollutants to waters of the state,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Emergency fire-fighting water;
         (b)    Fire-hydrant-flushing water;
         (c)    Landscape-irrigation water;
         (d)    Water-line-flushing water;
         (e)   Routine, external, building-washdown water that does not use
detergents;
         (f)   Water used to wash vehicles and equipment that does not contain
soaps, solvents, or detergents;
         (g)    Uncontaminated, non-turbid discharges of ground water or spring
water;
         (h)   Foundation or crawl space footing drainages where flows are not
contaminated with process materials such as solvents or contaminated
groundwater;
         (i)    Uncontaminated condensate from air-conditioning units, coolers,
and other compressors, and from outside refrigerated gases or liquids;
         (j)   Construction dewatering that has been treated by an appropriate
stormwater quality measure or series of measures, provided other contaminants
are not present.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.09 REQUIREMENTS FOR INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOTS WITHIN A PERMITTED PROJECT.
   All stormwater quality measures, including erosion and sediment control on
individual building lots regulated under the original permit of a project site
owner, shall include the following requirements.
   (A)   Implementation of stormwater quality measures and erosion and sediment
controls per the approved stormwater approval and sufficient to satisfy the
requirements of the CSGP and the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual.
   (B)   The individual lot operator, whether owning the property or acting as
the agent of the property owner, is responsible for erosion and sediment
control requirements associated with activities on individual lots, including:
      (1)   Installation and maintenance of a stable construction site access
for ingress and egress;
      (2)   Installation and maintenance of appropriate perimeter erosion and
sediment control measures before land disturbance;
      (3)   Sediment discharge and tracking from each lot must be minimized
throughout the land-disturbing activities on the lot until permanent
stabilization has been achieved;
      (4)   Management of concrete washout;
      (5)   Clean-up of sediment that is either tracked or washed onto roads.
Bulk clearing of sediment shall not include flushing the area with water.
Cleared sediment must be redistributed or
disposed of in a manner that is compliant with all applicable laws and
ordinances;
      (6)   Adjacent lots disturbed by an individual lot operator must be
repaired and stabilized with temporary or permanent surface stabilization;
      (7)   Notification to IDEM and the county by submittal of a construction
stormwater residential development registration form certifying the intent to
comply with the CSGP. The form is found on IDEM’s website;
      (8)   The project lot operator shall inform all general contractors,
construction management firms, grading or excavating contractors, utility
contractors, and the contractors that have primary oversight on individual
building lots, of the terms and conditions of this rule and the conditions and
standards of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, and the schedule for
proposed implementation;
      (9)   For individual residential lots, final stabilization is achieved
when all land-disturbing activities have been completed, temporary BMPs have
been removed, permanent BMPs have been cleaned, and a uniform perennial
vegetative cover with a density of 70% has been established by the individual
lot operator before occupation of the home by the homeowner, and has informed
the homeowner of the requirement for, and benefits of, final stabilization.
   (C)   For an individual lot where land disturbance is expected to be one
acre or more, and the lot lies within a project site permitted under this
chapter, the individual lot owner shall:
      (1)   Ensure that a sufficient construction plan is completed and
submitted per procedures established by the county;
      (2)   Complete an IDEM notice of intent form;
      (3)   Apply for a building permit per the procedures established by the
county;
      (4)   Apply for a stormwater approval per this chapter.
   (D)   For an individual lot where the land disturbance is less than one acre
and the lot lies within a project site permitted under this rule, the
individual lot operator shall:
      (1)   Comply with the provisions and requirements of the plan developed
by the project site owner per the procedures established by the county;
      (2)   Comply with the provisions outlined in §
54.12;
      (3)   Apply for a building permit per the procedures established by the
county. (Note: An IDEM notice of intent is not needed per this section.)
   (E)   As applicable, the project site owner shall follow the County
Subdivision Control Ordinance (Ordinance 2006-05 or the latest version).
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.10 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The requirements under this section are the same as those under §
54.08.
      (2)   New public or private fueling areas or those that replace existing
tank systems, regardless of tank size or total land disturbance.
   (B)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The exemptions under this section are the same as those under §
54.08.
      (2)   Construction activities associated with a single-family residential
dwelling disturbing less than one acre, when the dwelling is not part of a
larger common plan of development or sale; or individual building lots within a
larger permitted project.
      (3)   Land-disturbing activities where there will be no additional
impervious surfaces associated with the final completed project, including, but
not limited to, ditch construction/reconstruction and utility installation/
maintenance activities.
   (C)   Minimum requirements. A project site owner shall meet the following
minimum requirements.
      (1)   When using infiltration measures, take into consideration the
pollutants associated with runoff and the potential to contaminate groundwater
resources. When there is a potential for contamination, choose alternative
measures or measures that pretreat runoff to eliminate or reduce the pollutants
of concern.
      (2)   Where there is a potential for groundwater contamination, including
in wellhead protection areas, measures shall be implemented that pretreat the
water quality volume or flow rate to eliminate or reduce the pollutants of
concern, including total suspended solids (TSS) and oil/grease at a minimum.
      (3)   Registration of any Class V injection well with EPA Region 5.
      (4)   All post-construction stormwater quality and quantity measures
necessary to comply with this chapter must be implemented per the approved
construction plan, and sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the CSGP and
the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual.
      (5)   Any fueling area, publicly- or privately-owned, that installs or
replaces fuel tanks must install appropriate post-construction stormwater
quality treatment measures to reduce lead, copper, zinc, and polyaromatic
hydrocarbons in stormwater runoff. Treatment must include the water quality
volume or flow rate.
      (6)   Performance standards identified in the CSGP.
      (7)   The Board may require the use of any storage, infiltration,
filtering, and/or vegetative practices to reduce the impact of pollutants on
stormwater runoff. Where appropriate, and to the extent of the Stormwater
Management Department’s authority, the planning procedures may also include the
following:
         (a)   Buffer strip and riparian zone preservation;
         (b)   Filter strip creation;
         (c)   Minimization of land disturbance and surface imperviousness;
         (d)   Minimization of directly-connected impervious areas;
         (e)   Maximization of open space;
         (f)   Directing the community’s growth away from sensitive areas and
towards areas that can support growth without compromising water quality.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.11 POST-CONSTRUCTION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   Unless judged by the Board to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following
performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at the
applicable sites.
   (A)   The post-development runoff discharge from the project site must not
exceed the pre-development discharge, based on the two-year, ten-year, and one-
hundred-year peak storm events.
   (B)   All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to
control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified
design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should
seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate (when
possible) stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots,
and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical, to provide treatment for
both water quality and quantity.
   (C)   Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by promoting
infiltration using structural and nonstructural methods.
   (D)   BMPs must be capable of removing 80% of the TSS load from post-
construction runoff. Constructed BMPs listed in
Table 54.11 are approved to meet this requirement. For the purposes of this
requirement, TSS is defined as particles smaller than 125 microns in diameter.
Larger material is considered part of the total solids load of the stormwater
runoff.
   (E)   BMPs shall incorporate floatables control to capture floating debris
and remove it as part of the routine maintenance of the BMPs. Standalone BMPs
must include floatables control. For BMP systems, or treatment trains, at least
one of the components of the BMP system, located after the last inflow point to
the system, must provide control of floatables.
   (F)   Measures shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Utilize one or more post-construction measures working in tandem to
treat stormwater runoff and to increase the overall efficiency of individual
and specialized measures;
      (2)   In combination with proper post-construction measure selection,
design and development strategies must be selected and incorporated into the
plan to reduce the contribution of pollutants from the project area to the
post-construction measures. These strategies include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Low-impact development (LID) and green infrastructure;
         (b)   When selected, infiltration measures must take into
consideration the pollutants associated with runoff and the potential to
contaminate groundwater resources. Where there is a potential for
contamination, implement measures that pre-treat runoff to eliminate or reduce
the pollutants of concern. Infiltration practices will not be allowed in
wellhead protection areas.
   (G)   In addition to TSS removal, BMPs must also be designed to treat the
water quality volume (WQv) or water quality flow rate. All projects requiring
post-construction SWPPPs shall be required to treat the WQv or flow rate,
depending on the selected BMP. Redevelopment projects will be required to
obtain stormwater approval if the redevelopment activity disturbs more than one
acre. Refer to the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual or another technical
resource for further details regarding the calculation of the WQv or flow rate.
   (H)   The BMPs in
Table 54.11 are acceptable for use in the county if they are designed,
constructed, and maintained according to the criteria outlined in the Indiana
Stormwater Quality Manual. It is presumed that these acceptable BMPs achieve a
target TSS removal rate of 80% when correctly constructed and maintained.
   (I)   Should they choose to implement a stormwater control device, method,
or system not listed as one of the acceptable BMPs for the county, the
developer or project site owner must provide proof that the stormwater control
device, method, or system can achieve the target TSS removal rate of 80% and
include floatables control when correctly constructed.
Table 54.11 - Acceptable BMPs for Warrick County
BMP Type Description Quantity Control Quality and 80% TSS Floatables Control
                                      Removal
BMP Type        Description     Quantity Quality and 80% Floatables
                                Control  TSS Removal     Control
Stormwater      Stormwater
ponds: Wet      detention/                               Yes, when
pond, wet       retention ponds                          floatables
extended        are constructed                          control is
detention pond, stormwater      Yes      Yes             implemente d at
micropool       basins with a                            inlets or
extended pond,  permanent pool                           outlets to the
multiple-pond   (or micropool)                           pond.
systems         of water.
                Stormwater
                detention or
Dry detention   infiltration                             Yes, with
or infiltration ponds designed           Yes, with       infiltration,
pond (must have to hold water   Yes      infiltration or pretreatment, or
upstream        and release it           pretreatment    outlet control
pretreatment)   slowly or
                infiltrate into
                the ground.
                Stormwater
                wetlands are
                constructed,
                artificial
Stormwater      wetland systems
wetlands:       used for
Shallow         stormwater
wetland,        management.
extended        They use        Yes      Yes             Yes
detention       natural
wetland, pond/  processes
wetland         involving
systems, pocket wetland
wetland         vegetation,
                soils, and
                microbes to
                improve water
                quality.
                Bioretention
                areas are
                shallow
                stormwater
                basins or
Bioretention    landscaped
areas: Rain     areas that
gardens or      utilize         Yes      Yes             Yes
landscape       engineered
depressions     soils and
                vegetation to
                capture and
                treat
                stormwater
                runoff.
                Sand filters
                are multi-
                chamber
                structures
Sand filters:   designed to
Surface sand    treat
filter,         stormwater      No       Yes             Yes
perimeter sand  runoff through
filter          filtration,
                using a sand
                bed as the
                primary filter
                media.
                Water-quality
                swales are
                vegetated open
                channels that
                are designed
                and constructed
                to filter
Water-quality   stormwater
swales: Dry     runoff with     No       No              No
swale           vegetation and
                gentle slopes.
                Can be used as
                part of a
                treatment
                train, but do
                not meet 80%
                TSS removal
                While
                biofilters
                provide some
                filtering of
                stormwater
                runoff, by
                themselves they
Biofilters:     cannot meet the
Filter strip,   80% TSS removal No       No              No
grass channel   goal. These
                measures can
                only be used as
                pretreatment
                measures or as
                part of a
                treatment
                train.
 
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.12 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   (A)   The owner or operator of a construction site shall provide, at their
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the county’s storm drainage system or
watercourses using structural and non-structural BMPs.
   (B)   Any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at their own
expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. These
BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance with the requirements of the NPDES permit.
   (C)   Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity
shall, to the extent practicable, be deemed compliant with the provisions of
this section.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.13 STORMWATER APPROVAL APPLICATION.
   (A)   No land-disturbing activity that would require the uncovering of one
acre or more shall be initiated without submittal of all the required
documentation identified in the county's construction/stormwater pollution
prevention plan technical review form, and receiving stormwater approval from
the Stormwater Management Department.
   (B)   A stormwater approval is not required for any emergency activity that
is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural
resources.
   (C)   The owner or developer shall submit one hard copy and one electronic
copy of the following:
      (1)   The county’s construction/stormwater pollution prevention plan
technical review form and required fees;
      (2)   Design plans with erosion and sediment control measures identified
and details following the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual;
      (3)   Construction site stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) per
the CSGP;
      (4)   Post-construction SWPPP and design calculations (for water quality
and detention design) that meet at least the minimum requirements of §§
54.10 through
54.12 and the CSGP;
      (5)   Post-construction operation and maintenance manual (O&M manual);
      (6)   SWPPP and post-construction stormwater BMP owner acknowledgment;
      (7)   IDEM’s notice of intent form with proof of public notice.
   (D)   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and
waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria outlined in the Indiana
Stormwater Quality Manual, and shall be adequate to the satisfaction of the
county to prevent transportation of sediment from the site. Cut and fill slopes
shall be no greater than 3:1, except as approved by the county to meet other
community or environmental objectives.
   (E)   The applicant may, at the option of the county, be required to file
with the county a faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or other
improvement security, in an amount deemed sufficient by the county to cover all
costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements for such period
as specified by the county, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the
cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
   (F)   This permit and posting of the notice under division (C)(7) of this
section, does not provide the public with any right to trespass on a project
site for any reason, nor does it require that the project site owner allow
members of the public access to the project site.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.14 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   The county will review each application to determine its conformance
with the provisions of this chapter and the Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual.
The county will follow the procedures outlined on the form. Upon review, the
county shall, in writing:
      (1)   Approve the permit application;
      (2)   Approve the permit application, subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure the objectives of this regulation, and
issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      (3)   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for
disapproval, and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.
   (B)   After receiving approval, if revisions to the construction plans
require a change in measures appropriate to control the quality or quantity of
stormwater runoff, then revised plans must be submitted to the county.
   (C)   Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving more
than one lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to
property deeds, unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body,
and determined before the final stormwater approval is approved.
   (D)   The applicant may be required to file with the county a performance
bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in the amount deemed
sufficient by the county to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, and
maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the county, and
engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure to repair
improvements installed on the project site.
   (E)   The performance bond will require periodic renewal since it must cover
the perpetual maintenance and care of the permanent post-construction runoff
control structure or system in place. The applicant will notify the county of
the impending expiration of a performance bond and the issuance of a renewed
performance bond.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.15 RESPONSIBILITY OF CONSTRUCTION SITE OWNER AFTER APPROVAL.
   In granting stormwater approval, it is the responsibility of the project
site owner to:
   (A)   Ensure proper construction and installation of all stormwater measures
in compliance with the approved submittal, this chapter, the Indiana Stormwater
Quality Manual, and the CSGP (as applicable);
   (B)   Submit the approval from the county with the completed and signed NOI
with proof of public notice for the CSGP to IDEM, along with copies to the
Stormwater Management Department, at least 48 hours before any land disturbance
or discharges occur;
   (C)   Ensure compliance with this chapter, the approved submittal, and the
CSGP during the construction activity and implementation of the construction
plan;
   (D)   For off-site construction activities that provide services (for
example, road extensions, sewer, water, and other utilities) to a permitted
project site, these off-site activity areas must be considered a part of the
permitted project site when an activity is under the control of the project
site owner;
   (E)   The permittee or their agent shall maintain a self-monitoring program
and complete regular inspections of all control measures per the inspection
schedule outlined in the CSGP. The purpose of such inspections will be to
determine the overall effectiveness of the SWPPP and the need for additional
control measures. All inspections shall be documented and submitted to the
county upon request within 48 hours. Self-monitoring reports are to be
completed by a trained and qualified individual;
   (F)   Develop and maintain a project management log per the CSGP;
   (G)   Notify the county of final site stabilization so that the county can
complete and sign off on a final site inspection before submittal of the notice
of termination (NOT) to IDEM.
      (1)   Final stabilization is achieved when all land-disturbing activities
have been completed, temporary BMPs have been removed, permanent BMPs have been
cleaned, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% has
been established.
      (2)   Final stabilization for construction projects on land used for
agricultural purposes is achieved when:
         (a)   Stabilization is completed per division (G)(1) above as land
disturbance progresses;
         (b)   Land returned to its preconstruction agricultural use is
temporarily or permanently seeded upon completing land-disturbing activities;
and
         (c)   Disturbed areas, not previously used for agricultural
production, such as filter strips, are returned to their preconstruction
agricultural use;
   (H)   After the first three years, pay the county for all post-construction
BMP inspection fees billed to the owner;
   (I)   Maintain the BMPs in good condition per the designed and approved
specifications and O&M manual;
   (J)   Complete routine inspections and maintenance of the post-construction
BMP. Maintenance plans and inspection forms for each type of acceptable BMP are
provided in the O&M Manual and should be used as guidance for performing
maintenance activities. Completed routine inspection forms must be maintained
by the BMP owner and produced upon request by the county;
   (K)   Obtain approval from the county for alterations, revisions, or
replacements of all post-construction BMPs;
   (L)   Notify the county, in writing within 30 days, of any changes in BMP
ownership, major repairs, or BMP failure.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.16 COUNTY INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Right-of-entry. Property owners shall allow right-of-entry for the
county, or its designated agent, for any site covered under this chapter.
   (B)   Construction activity inspections.
      (1)   The county, or its designated agent, shall inspect, as required,
the installation,
implementation, and maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures at any
project site involved in construction activities. The county, or its designated
agent, shall either approve that portion of the work completed or notify the
permittee where the work fails to comply with the SWPPP as approved.
      (2)   Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing
the stamp of approval of the county shall be maintained at the site during the
progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permittee shall follow the
directions on the county's construction/stormwater pollution prevention plan
technical review form at least ten working days before the following:
         (a)   Start of construction;
         (b)   Installation of sediment and erosion measures;
         (c)   Completion of site clearing;
         (d)   Completion of rough grading;
         (e)   Completion of final grading;
         (f)   Close of the construction season; and
         (g)   Completion of final landscaping and final stabilization.
   (C)   Post-construction BMP inspections.
      (1)   The county has the authority to perform long-term, post-
construction inspections of all publicly- or privately-owned stormwater BMPs.
Inspections will cover physical conditions, available storage capacity, and the
operational condition of key facility elements.
      (2)   If deficiencies are found during the inspection, the county will
notify the owner in writing, and the owner will be required to take all
necessary measures to correct such deficiencies. If the owner
fails to correct the deficiencies within the allowed time, as specified in
writing, the county will undertake the work and collect from the owner, using
lien rights if necessary.
      (3)   If the county finds a BMP in need of maintenance or repair, the
county will notify the BMP owner of the necessary maintenance or repairs and
give the landowner a time for completing the maintenance or repairs. If the
maintenance or repairs are not completed within the designated time, the county
shall perform the repairs or maintenance and bill the landowner for the actual
costs of the work.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.17 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be subject to the severity of the
infraction and the property owner’s or site operator’s efforts to comply.
Tiered enforcement will be practiced at the county’s discretion. The tiered
enforcement may include:
      (1)   Verbal warning to the owner or operator to make corrections of
identified deficiencies;
      (2)   Written warning to the owner or operator to make corrections within
a specified time, but not less than 72 hours. The specified time shall account
for issues such as the severity of the problem, pending weather, seasonal
conditions, and the level of effort necessary to correct the problem;
      (3)   Written warning of non-compliance with directions to the owner or
operator that site deficiencies require corrective action within 72 hours;
      (4)   Stop-work order.
         (a)   If deficiencies in a written warning of non-compliance are not
resolved 72 hours after receipt of written notification, the county may issue a
stop-work order or may revoke the owner’s
stormwater approval, in which event all construction work shall cease until and
unless the county determines that compliance has been obtained.
         (b)   Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop-work
order may be fined for each offense, plus costs, damages, and expenses. Each
day such violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and
shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a fine for each day. The
county may assess a permit-reinstatement fee.
         (c)   The county may issue a stop-work order and may suspend or revoke
stormwater approval if any of the work is being conducted in such a manner as
to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood or development site to be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the neighborhood.
   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. The notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work may be done by the county or a contractor, and the expense thereof,
including court costs and attorney fees, shall be charged to the violator.
   (C)   If the property owner fails to complete the corrective actions and the
work is completed through the county or a contractor, the county will provide a
letter to the property owner of the work completed, copies of all invoices paid
by the county, and a log of all hours spent by county personnel and/or its
designated contractor. If the amount contained in the notification is not paid
within 30 days of the receipt of the bill, the county may certify to the County
Auditor the amount of the bill, plus any additional administrative costs
incurred in the certification, and the amounts shall be collected as delinquent
taxes are collected per I.C. 36-1-6-2.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.18 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated,
or continues to violate, the provisions of this chapter, the county may
petition any court of competent jurisdiction for a preliminary or permanent
injunction, restraining the person from activities that would create further
violations. Such enforcement may also include compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation. Costs, including attorney fees, for
injunctive relief may be assessed against the violator.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.19 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   Instead of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the county may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory
action, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,
creek cleanup, and the like.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.20 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter may be deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and
declared and deemed a nuisance that may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator’s expense. Civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may also be taken. Costs, including attorney fees,
for injunctive relief may be assessed against the violator.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.21 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state, or local law. It is within the
discretion of the county to seek cumulative remedies.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.22 STORMWATER BOARD VIOLATION, RESTORATION, ABATEMENT, AND/OR PENALTY
FUND.
   (A)   The County Auditor shall establish a separate and dedicated non-
reverting fund for the benefit of the County Stormwater Management Board, to be
known as the “Stormwater Board Violation, Restoration, Abatement, and/or
Penalty Fund”, to accept and hold deposits of violation and/or restoration
abatement payments collected per §
54.16; for the acceptance of deposits for violation payments collected per §
54.19 for the summary abatement or restoration of a threat to public health,
safety, and welfare that has been declared and deemed a nuisance; and for the
acceptance of penalties collected per §
54.99.
   (B)   The Auditor shall hold such funds in one fund according to the Indiana
State Board of Accounts requirements in such a manner that specific funds can
be identified and traced to each separate enforcement, restoration, abatement,
and/or penalty action.
   (C)   The Auditor shall disburse such funds when authorized by the County
Stormwater Management Board by proper resolution moved, seconded, and receiving
a majority affirmative vote. Such disbursement resolution shall also provide
sufficient information so that the Auditor may ascertain to whom such
disbursement is to be made.
   (D)   The Stormwater Board Violation, Restoration, Abatement, and/or Penalty
Fund shall be perpetual until terminated by the terms of this section or by
enactment of a subsequent ordinance or amendment. In the event the Stormwater
Board Violation, Restoration, Abatement, and/or Penalty Fund is terminated for
any reason, the disposition of the fund balance, if any, shall be determined by
the Board.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be
liable to civil penalties to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to a fine of up to $2,500 per violation per day. Each day a violation
continues after the original notification shall be deemed a separate offense
under this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2024-09, passed 7-8-24)
CHAPTER 55: STORMWATER UTILITY RATES
Section
   
55.01   Purpose and objective
   
55.02   Definitions
   
55.03   Stormwater service charge
   
55.04   Stormwater service charge establishment procedures
   
55.05   Stormwater service charge structure and calculation
   
55.06   Billings; terms of payment
   
55.07   Appeals of ERU determination
   
55.08   Stormwater Revenue Fund
   
55.09   Delinquent charges and penalties as liens; collection
   
55.10   Violations and enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Department of Stormwater Management, see §§
33.80 et seq.
§ 55.01 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The mission of the Department of Stormwater Management shall be to
develop, implement, operate and adequately and equitably fund the acquisition,
construction, operation, maintenance and regulation of stormwater collection
and drainage systems and activities in the county, including without
limitation, stormwater quality, separate storm sewers, neighborhood drainage,
flood control, flood pumping, stormwater conveyance, sewer separation, and
other improvements to the existing and future storm sewers.
   (B)   The Department of Stormwater Management shall safely and efficiently
control stormwater runoff, insure compliance with the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Discharge permit, enhance public health
and safety, protect lives and property, facilitate mobility and enable access
to homes and businesses throughout the county during storms, control the
discharge of pollutants in stormwater to receiving waters and enhance the
natural resources of the county.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07)
§ 55.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Board of Directors of the Department of Stormwater Management.
   COMBINED SEWER. Pipe or conduit primarily used to convey sanitary sewage and
secondarily intended to convey stormwater.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. A lot or parcel of real estate encompassing State Land
Use Code 3, 4 and 8, including but not limited to: commercial, industrial and
retail.
   COUNTY. Territory within the corporate boundaries of Warrick County that is
not located in a municipality or is excluded under MS4 - NPDES Permitting
Program 327 IAC 15-13.
   CUSTOMER or USER. A property owner benefitting from the stormwater system.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Stormwater Management.
   DETENTION. The temporary storage of storm runoff in a basin, pond or other
structural or non-structural device to control the peak discharge rates by
holding the stormwater for a lengthened period of time, which also provides for
the gravity-settling of pollutants.
   DEVELOPED.  The condition of real property altered from its natural state by
the addition to, or construction on such property of impervious surfaces or
physical improvements such that the hydrology of the property, or a portion
thereof, is affected.
   DITCH, LEGAL. Any drainage system under the jurisdiction of the County
Drainage Board.
   DITCH, OPEN. A relatively deep drainage channel that may have a continuous
water flow. Open ditches are outlets for both surface, subsurface or storm
sewer drainage systems.
   DRAIN. Relative to stormwater drainage, any sewer, tile, ditch, stream or
other stormwater runoff conveyance channel or conduit.
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT. The land required for the installation of stormwater
sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or water course
for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to
safeguard the public against flood damage.
   DRAINAGE FACILITIES. All ditches, channels, conduits, retention-detention
systems, tiles, drainage swales, sewers, and other natural or artificial means
of draining stormwater from land.
   DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.  
      (1)   Minimum drainage standards as established by county ordinance;
      (2)   Obligations and requirements relating to drainage established under
the County Subdivision Control Ordinance;
      (3)   Requirements contained in the County Zoning Ordinance, including
floodway zoning requirements;
      (4)   Obligations and requirements relating to drainage established under
the County Drainage Board; and
      (5)   Conditions relating to drainage attached to a grant of variance by
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   DRAINAGE, SUBSURFACE.  A system of pipes, tile, conduit or tubing installed
beneath the ground used to collect underground water from individual parcels,
lots, building footings or pavements.
   DRAINAGE, SURFACE. A system by which the stormwater runoff is conducted to
an outlet. This would include the proper grading of parking lots, streets,
driveways and yards so that storm runoff is removed without ponding, and flows
to a drainage swale, open ditch, or a storm sewer.
   DRAINAGE, SWALE. A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface water
from a field, diversion, or other site feature.
   DRAINAGE, SYSTEM. Any combination of surface and/or subsurface drainage
components fulfilling all applicable drainage requirements.
   EASEMENT.  A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by
the public, a corporation or other legal entity for specified purposes.
   ENGINEER. The Warrick County Engineer.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT or ERU. An amount equal to the average amount of
impervious area found on a typical single-family residential parcel, which is
3,100 square feet. Therefore, one ERU equals 3,100 square feet of impervious
area.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA. The area within developed land that prevents or
significantly impedes the infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Included in
this definition are areas that have been paved and/or covered with buildings
and materials, including but not limited to, concrete, asphalt, rooftop and
blacktop, such that the infiltration of water into the soil is prevented.
Excluded from this definition are undisturbed land, lawns and fields.
   INFILTRATION. A complex process of allowing runoff to penetrate the ground
surface and flow through the upper soil surface.
   LAND ALTERATION. Any action taken relative to land that either: (1) changes
the contour; (2) increases the runoff rate; (3) changes the elevation; (4)
decreases the rate of which water is absorbed; (5) changes the drainage
pattern; (6) creates or changes a drainage facility; (7) involves construction,
enlargement or location of any building on a permanent foundation; or (8)
creates an impoundment. LAND ALTERATION includes (by way of example and not of
limitation) terracing, grading, excavating, constructing earthwork, draining,
installing drainage tile, filling and paving.
   MAINTENANCE. Cleaning out of, spraying, removing obstructions from, and
making minor repairs in a drainage facility so that it will perform the
function for which it was designed and constructed.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES. The EPA program
initiated to reduce and eliminate pollutants reaching water bodies of all
types.
   NPDES PERMIT. The stormwater management permit required of municipalities
and certain industries by the EPA pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water
Act.
   OTHER PROPERTY. All properties not encompassed within the definitions of
residential property or commercial property, including but not limited to,
governmental, institutional, schools and churches.
   PEAK DISCHARGE. The maximum rate of flow of water passing a given point
during or after a rainfall event, sometimes called “peak flow”.
   PRIVATE STORMWATER FACILITIES. Various stormwater and drainage works not
under the control or ownership of the county, the state, or the federal
government, which may include inlets,  conduits, pipes, pumping stations,
manholes, structures, channels, outlets, retention or detention basins, other
structural components and equipment designed to transport, move or regulate
stormwater.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The individual, partnership, corporation or other legal
entity holding the deed or record title to real property.
   PUBLIC DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  Various storm water and drainage works under the
control and/or ownership of the county, the state, or the federal government,
which may include inlets, conduits, pipes, pumping stations, manholes,
structures, channels, outlets, retention or detention basins, other structural
components and equipment designed to transport, move or regulate stormwater
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A lot or parcel of real estate encompassing State Land
Use Codes 101 and 500 through 599, on which a building or house trailer is
situated that contains a group of rooms forming an inhabitable dwelling unit,
with facilities used or intended to be used primarily for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating.
   RETENTION. The holding of stormwater runoff in a constructed basin or pond
or in a natural body of water with a controlled release rate.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any highway, street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane or alley,
including the entire right-of-way for public use thereof, and all surface and
subsurface improvements thereon, including without limitation, sidewalks,
curbs, shoulders, utility lines and mains.
   STATE LAND USE CODES. The classification system used by Indiana counties for
purposes of classification of the assessment of real property.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer designed or intended to convey only stormwater, surface
runoff, street wash waters and drainage, and not intended for sanitary sewage
and industrial wastes. A storm sewer begins at the grating or opening where
water enters the  sewer, through the sewer and any other conduits to the outlet
structure, where water enters a channel, natural watercourse or combined sewer.
   STORMWATER CONVEYANCES. Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to: any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-
made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
   STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGE. A charge imposed on users of the stormwater
system.
   STORMWATER SYSTEM. All constructed facilities, including separate storm
sewers and conveyances, combined sewers, structures and natural watercourses
owned by or under the jurisdiction of the county, the state, or the federal
government used for collecting and conducting stormwater to, through and from
drainage areas to the point of final outlet, including but not limited to, any
and all of the following: inlets, conduits and appurtenant features, creeks,
channels, catch basins, ditches, streams, culverts, retention or detention
basins and pumping stations.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07; Am. SWM Ord. 2008-1, passed 4-9-08)
§ 55.03 STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   A stormwater service charge shall be imposed on each and every lot and
parcel of land within the county that directly or indirectly contributes to the
stormwater system of the county.
   (B)   This charge shall be assessed against the property owner thereof, who
shall be considered the user for the purposes of this chapter.
   (C)   This charge is deemed reasonable and necessary to pay for the repair,
replacement, extension, planning, improvement, operation, regulation and
maintenance of the existing and future stormwater system.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07)
§ 55.04 STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGE ESTABLISHMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Stormwater service charge per ERU. The stormwater service charge shall
be $5 per ERU per month.
      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, a MONTH shall be considered 25
through 35 days.
      (2)   Any billings for stormwater service outside this time shall be on a
per diem basis.
   (B)   Basis for charge.  
      (1)   The stormwater service charge is designed to recover the cost of
rendering stormwater service to the users of the stormwater system, and shall
be the basis for assessment of the stormwater service charge.
      (2)   This service charge is established so as to maintain adequate fund
reserves to provide for reasonably expected variations in the cost of providing
services, as well as variations in the demand for services.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07)
§ 55.05 STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGE STRUCTURE AND CALCULATION.
   (A)   Generally. There is hereby assessed a stormwater service charge for
each property owner owning land situated within the county that contributes
directly or indirectly to the stormwater system of the county, in an amount as
determined below.
   (B)   Impervious area.  
      (1)   For any such property, lot, parcel of land, building or premises
that contributes directly or indirectly to the storm water system of the
county, such charge shall be based upon the quantity of impervious area, as
measured on the records of the County Assessor or site examination, mapping
information, aerial photographs, and other reliable information.
      (2)   Impervious area of public rights-of-way and railroad lines (which
shall not be deemed to include adjacent property, such as a rail yard operated
by a railroad) will not be included in the determination of a storm water
service charge.
      (3)   In addition, the Department shall establish policies and procedures
to make determinations whether commonly-owned, adjoining properties with
separate plat or legal descriptions should be treated as a single parcel of
land for purposes of calculating the storm water service fees to be charged for
such properties.
   (C)   Classification of property.
      (1)   Residential properties. A monthly flat-rate charge for storm water
service rendered to residential properties shall be assessed to each parcel of
residential property within the county. Each parcel of residential property is
hereby assigned one ERU.
      (2)   Commercial properties. A monthly flat-rate charge for storm water
service shall be rendered to properties with impervious area other than
residential properties, based on the total amount of impervious area on the
property (measured in square feet).
      (3)   Other properties. A monthly flat-rate charge for storm water
service shall be rendered to properties with impervious area other than
residential properties, based on the total amount of impervious area on the
property (measured in square feet) as follows:
 
Calculated ERU  ERU Charged to Property
Between 1 and 4 1
Between 4 and 9 2
9 or greater    3
 
   (D)   Land alterations.  
      (1)   The issuance of any building permit or other action that results in
a land alteration of a property other than a residential property, or a
property that currently only contains residential properties but will be no
longer used for such purpose, shall be cause for an adjustment of the
stormwater service charge determined under this section.
      (2)   The property owner shall have the obligation of informing the
Department of any such changes.
   (E)   Exceptions/exemptions.  
      (1)   Agricultural properties with an impervious area under State Land
Use Code 100-199, with the exception of those properties that qualify as
residential properties, shall be exempt from the assessment of stormwater
service charges.
      (2)   Except for public rights-of-ways and railroad lines, and
agricultural properties as defined herein, there shall be no exceptions or
exemptions from the assignment of gross stormwater ERUs for any property with
impervious area, except that properties other than single-family residential
parcels with impervious area of less than 500 square feet shall be exempted
from the assignment of an ERU.
   (F)   Contractual billing and collection. The Department of Stormwater
Management may delegate the billings to the County Treasurer to be forwarded to
customers semiannually.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07; Am. SWM Ord. 2008-1, passed 4-9-08)
§ 55.06 BILLINGS; TERMS OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   Billings.  
      (1)   All stormwater service bills shall be rendered on a semiannual
basis, unless additional or prorated billing is required to reflect customer
changes, initial billings or is otherwise required to adjust billing cycles.
      (2)   Charges for miscellaneous services or work performed on behalf of a
stormwater customer by the Department shall be assessed at the time the work is
completed, and shall be included in the customer's next stormwater service
bill.
      (3)   Stormwater billing for a new property shall commence with the date
the property is assessed for purposes of property taxes, or date of occupancy,
whichever shall first occur.
      (4)   Additional stormwater charges for an established service address
necessitated by a change in the amount of impervious area at the property shall
commence on the date the new certificate of occupancy or compliance is issued.
      (5)   Billing adjustments required to correct impervious area
measurements shall be applied retroactively to the date of the customer's
initial protest.
   (B)   Rights and responsibilities of the property owner.  
      (1)   Charges for stormwater service shall remain the ultimate
responsibility of the property owner, including all penalties, recording fees,
attorney's fees, interest, and court costs.
      (2)   Other than the property owner, no other person shall be permitted
to inspect, examine or otherwise obtain confidential information, including the
Social Security number of the property owner, obtained by the Department for
the sole purpose of billing for stormwater system service.
      (3)   Stormwater service charges attach to the property.
   (C)   Terms of payment. 
      (1)   The stormwater service charges shall be due on the payment date set
out on the bill.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to pay a stormwater
service bill when due.
      (3)   All bills for stormwater services not paid on or before the due
date shall be subject to a collection or deferred payment charge of 10% on the
outstanding balance.
      (4)   Moving from one location to another in no way absolves the customer
from responsibility for any unpaid charges incurred at a previous location.
   (D)   Collection. Delinquent stormwater service charges, along with
reasonable attorney fees and court costs, may be collected in a civil action.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.07 APPEALS OF ERU DETERMINATION.
   (A)   If, in the opinion of any single-family residential property owner,
the ERU multiple assigned to the property of such owner is inaccurate in light
of the amount of impervious area contained on the property, such property owner
shall have the right to contest such ERU determination.
   (B)   The Department shall develop and promulgate policies and procedures to
resolve any such contests, including if necessary, the conducting of hearings
and the making of determinations with respect to the measurement of impervious
area contained on any property.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07)
§ 55.08 STORMWATER REVENUE FUND.
   All revenues earned and fees collected for stormwater service, including but
not limited to, drainage service charges, permit and inspection fees, direct
charges and interest earnings on any unused funds, shall be deposited pursuant
to this chapter. Disbursements from this account shall be authorized by the
Department. Such disbursements shall be used exclusively for the operation,
maintenance, improvement and debt service of the county's stormwater system.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07)
§ 55.09 DELINQUENT CHARGES AND PENALTIES AS LIENS; COLLECTION.
   Delinquent charges for stormwater services, and applied penalties, recording
fees and service charges constitute a lien upon the property, and may be
collected in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-9-25-11.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07)
§ 55.10 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Failure to pay a stormwater service charge when due shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, which shall be enforced by the Department and such
agents as it may appoint for such purposes.
(SWM Ord. 2007-01, passed 8-29-07)
CHAPTER 56: DRAINAGE MANAGEMENT
Section
   
56.01   Statutory authority
   
56.02   Statement of purpose
   
56.03   Conflicting ordinances
   
56.04   Compliance with other ordinances
   
56.05   Definitions
   
56.06   Drainage control policy
   
56.07   Drainage Board’s rights to discretionary decisions
   
56.08   Drainage plan approval required before construction
   
56.09   Record of Board decisions
   
56.10   Special or emergency decisions
   
56.11   Drainage plan description
   
56.12   Drainage plan review procedures
   
56.13   Drainage plan approval
   
56.14   Drainage approval before recording plat
   
56.15   Variances
   
56.16   Floodplain management ordinance
   
56.17   Easements
   
56.18   Amount of runoff to be accommodated by various parts of the drainage
system
   
56.19   Storm sewer design standards
   
56.20   Open channel design standards
   
56.21    Detention/retention design standards
   
56.22   Private drainage facilities
   
56.23   Erosion control
   
56.24   Pipe connections
   
56.27   Stormwater discharge
   
56.28   Inspection of storm sewer system installation
   
56.27   Letter of credit
   
56.28   Record drawings
   
56.29   Modifications to approved drainage plan
   
56.30   Maintenance
   
56.31   Disclaimer of liability
   
56.32   Corrective action
   
56.33   Notice of violation
   
56.34   Illicit discharge and illegal connection
   
56.35   Exempt developments
   
56.37   Updates
 
   
56.98   Violations, enforcement, and penalties
   
56.99   Penalties
   Appendix A:   Flowcharts
   Appendix B   Drainage plan drawing checklist
   Appendix C   Declaration of covenants; inspection/maintenance of drainage
facility
   Appendix D   Certification form
   Appendix E   Trench details
   Appendix F   Rainfall intensity table
§ 56.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The Indiana Legislature granted the power of local government units per I.C.
36-7-4 to control land use within their jurisdictions to accomplish the
following.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.02 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter regulates proposed developments by a mixture of
requirements, performance, and design standards. The purpose of the drainage
standards outlined in this chapter is to establish reasonable rules and
regulations for development in Warrick County to:
      (1)   Reduce harm due to periodic flooding, including loss of life and
property and threats, and inconveniences to public health and welfare;
      (2)   Assure that new development does not increase flood or drainage
hazards, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
      (3)   Create the least financial burden on the taxpayers for flood
control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and
flood rescue and relief operations;
      (4)   Protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources;
      (5)   Protect buildings and improvements from flood damage to the
greatest extent possible;
      (6)   Conserve the natural hydrologic, hydraulic, water quality, and
other beneficial functions of watercourses, floodplains, and wetlands;
      (7)   Prevent disruption of the economy and governmental services due to
stormwater and flood drainage; and
      (8)   Maintain eligibility for Warrick County in the National Flood
Insurance Program by meeting or exceeding its requirements and thus making
federally subsidized flood insurance available at reduced premiums.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.03 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions outlined in these sections shall be deemed as additional to
the minimum standards required by other municipal, state, and federal
ordinances, laws, regulations, and statutes. In the case of conflicting
requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall apply.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.04 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   In addition to the requirements outlined in those sections, compliance with
the requirements outlined in other applicable ordinances adopted by Warrick
County and state and federal regulations shall be met.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.05 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   ABS. Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene.
   APPLICANT. The person, persons, partnership, corporation, or other private,
duly authorized representative or agent, including their heirs and assigns, who
applies to the Drainage Board for Drainage Plan approval.
   BAFFLE. A structure, fabricated with water-resistant materials, that directs
water, impedes water flows, and forces the water to flow around it.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation delineates the flooding level from the
100-year flood.
   BERM. A mound of soil added to the surface of a property to create a level
space, shelf, or raised barrier separating areas vertically.
   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.
   BOARD. Warrick County Drainage Board.
   CAPACITY OF A STORM DRAINAGE FACILITY. The maximum flow rate that can be
conveyed or stored by a storm drainage facility.
   CATCH BASIN. A structure with a grate that collects runoff in non-curbed
paved areas or in grassed areas.
   CATCHMENT AREA.  See WATERSHED.
   CFS. Cubic Feet per second.
   CHANNEL. A natural or man-made watercourse that periodically or continuously
conveys water. It has a bed and a bank that confines the water.
   CMP. Corrugated metal pipe.
   CONTIGUOUS. Adjoining or in actual contact with.
   COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. Board of County Commissioners of Warrick County,
Indiana.
   COUNTY SURVEYOR. The Warrick County Surveyor.
   CULVERT. A closed conduit with at least one end open used to pass surface
drainage water under an impediment.
   CURB INLET. A structure with a grate and opening that collects runoff from
curbed paved areas.
   CURB SPILL-OUTS. See CURB TURNOUT.
   CURB TURNOUT. An opening in the curb that allows runoff to be discharged off
the pavement and into a roadside ditch or drainage structure.
   DESIGN STORM EVENT. The rainfall event that is under consideration.
   DEVELOPER. See APPLICANT.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, or redevelopment;
      (2)   Placement of a building or any addition to a building;
      (3)   Installing a manufactured home on a site;
      (4)   Preparing a site for a manufactured home or a recreational vehicle;
      (5)   Utility installations;
      (6)   Wall or fence erection;
      (7)   Road construction;
      (8)   Parking lot construction; and
      (9)   Residential or commercial subdivision development.
   DETENTION FACILITY. (Also known as pond, lake, basin, tanks, chambers, or
parking lot.) An above or belowground facility with a positive outlet
constructed to restrict the flow rate of stormwater to a specified maximum
rate, while detaining the excess stormwater that accumulates.
   DRAINAGE. See RUNOFF.
   DRAINAGE AREA. (Also known as watershed or catchment area.) See WATERSHED.
   DRAINAGE BOARD. Warrick County Drainage Board.
   DRAINAGE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. Warrick County Drainage Board.
   DRAINAGE DIRECTION. The natural or artificial direction in which runoff
flows.
   DRAINAGE DITCH. A depression in the land created to channel water.
(Typically formed around low-lying areas, roadside or field proximately to a
water body or created to channel water from a more distant water source for
plant irrigation.)
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT. An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel
of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts, other persons, or the public to
install drainage facilities and/or to discharge stormwater onto or through the
tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage casement.
   DRAINAGE FACILITIES. Drainage structures, basins, bridges, pipes, culverts,
ditches, channels, and any other man-made items used in either storing and/or
conveying drainage.
   DRAINAGE PLAN. A set of documents containing a Technical Report, Letter of
Certification, calculations, and drawings.
   DRAINAGE STRUCTURE. A structure designed to collect, direct, or divert
drainage, such as a manhole, curb inlet, yard inlet, catch basin, or outfall
structure.
   DRY BOTTOM DETENTION or DRY BOTTOM RETENTION FACILITY. A facility designed
to completely drain after providing temporary water storage during and after a
storm event.
   DURATION. The time period of a rainfall event.
   EASEMENT. Authorization or grant by a property owner to specific persons or
the public to use the land for specified purposes.
   EMERGENCY SPILLWAY. A waterway in or near a detention or retention facility
to escape excess water.
   EMERGENCY WEIR. The top of the curb at curb inlets for the escape of excess
water.
   ENGINEER. The Warrick County Highway Engineer, the Executive Director of the
Warrick County Stormwater Department or his duly appointed representative(s).
   EXISTING. See PRE-DEVELOPED CONDITION.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overall, unusual, and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the adjoining areas, including wetland,
lake, or watercourse, which have been or hereafter may be inundated by the
regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the floodway
fringe.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of any river, stream, creek, or ditch, and those
portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required
to convey the 100-year flood flow without increasing the water surface
elevation of the 100-year flood by more than the regulatory limit. The Indiana
Department of Natural Resources has jurisdiction over floodways whose
watersheds are greater than one square mile. The Local Floodplain Administrator
has jurisdiction over floodways whose watersheds are less than one square mile.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside the flood way.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (i.e., FPG).  The base flood elevation (i.e., the
100-year flood elevation) plus two feet.
   FLOW LINE. The lowest point in a ditch, swale, creek, stream, river, or any
water body that conveys water.
   FOOTING DRAIN. A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a basement wall
foundation or crawl space to relieve water pressure caused by groundwater.
   FREEBOARD. The vertical distance between a surface or water level and the
top of whatever contains or restrains it. Freeboard is a safety feature that
provides storage capacity and prevents spills.
   GRADE. The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, pipe, culvert, etc., or
natural ground surface, usually expressed in percent of the vertical rise (or
fall) divided by the horizontal distance.
   HERPICC MANUAL. See the latest version of the LTAP Drainage Manual.
   ILLEGAL CONNECTION. Any pipe, open channel, drain, or conveyance, whether on
the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the
stormwater system including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any
non-stormwater discharge including, but not limited to, sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of
whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a municipal or county separate storm
sewer system (stormwater drainage system) not composed entirely of stormwater
runoff (except for discharges allowed under an NPDES permit or non-polluting
flows). These non-stormwater discharges occur due to illegal dumping or illegal
connections to the stormwater drainage system.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA. A relatively hard surface area that does not readily absorb
water. Impervious areas include pavement, parking lots, driveways, roofs, and
other hard surfaces that do not absorb water. An impervious area is one in
which the runoff coefficient is 0.90 or higher.
   INDOT. Indiana Department of Transportation.
   INFILTRATION. The seepage of water into the sub-surface ground.
   INLET PIPE. A pipe that conveys water to a detention or retention facility.
   LTAP DRAINAGE MANUAL. The latest revised Stormwater Drainage Manual, within
reason, with the goal of creating good drainage, as prepared by Purdue Research
Foundation and the Indiana Local Technical Assistance Program. (To obtain a
copy of this manual, call the Indiana Local Technical Assistance Program (LTAP)
at 765- 494-2164.)
   LEGAL DRAIN. An open or tiled ditch, or combination of the two, which arc
subject to the jurisdiction and control of the Warrick County Drainage Board.
   LETTER OF CREDIT. A legally binding instrument, such as an Irrevocable
Letter of Credit or cashier's check, from a duly chartered financial
institution providing surety satisfactory to the Drainage Board that all
proposed Drainage Facilities specified in the Drainage Plan will be constructed
by the standards of this chapter.
   LOCAL FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Executive Director of the Warrick County
Area Plan Commission.
   MANHOLE. A drainage structure with a solid cover, through which a person may
enter to access an underground storm sewer or enclosed drainage structure.
   MS4 (MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM). A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, that is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by a federal, state, city, town, county,
district, association, or other public body (created by or per state law)
having jurisdiction over stormwater, including special districts under state
law such as a sewer district, flood control district, or drainage district, or
similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency under Section
208 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1288) that discharges into water of the
state; or privately owned stormwater utility, hospital, university, or college
having jurisdiction over stormwater that discharges into waters of the state;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at
40 CFR 122.2.
   NORMAL POOL ELEVATION. See PERMANENT POOL ELEVATION.
   OFF-SITE. All right-of-way and all property that is not where the
development is to be constructed.
   ON-SITE. The property where the proposed development is to be constructed.
   OPEN CHANNEL CONVEYANCE. Drainage facilities that are open to the
atmosphere, such as ditches, canals, swales, and channels. Technically, open
channel conveyance occurs when the liquid stream is not completely enclosed by
solid boundaries. For purposes related to this chapter, an open channel will be
considered a drainage conveyance facility that is not closed.
   ORDINANCE. This chapter and all subsequent additions or amendments thereto.
   ORIFICE. See RESTRICTOR.
   OUTFALL. A point where collected and concentrated surface water is
discharged into an open drainage feature. These drainage features include
ditches, channels, swales, streams, rivers, ponds, lakes, or other open bodies
of water. In most cases, an outfall will consist of a pipe discharging runoff
from a detention facility or storm sewer system.
   OUTFALL CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure that may include a restrictor
designed to control the discharge from a detention facility to meet the desired
performance specifications.
   OUTLET PIPE. A pipe that conveys water from a detention facility.
   PEAK FLOW RATE. The rate of flow of water at a given point resulting from a
particular storm event.
   PERMANENT POOL ELEVATION. The permanent pool elevation of a basin must be at
or above the elevation of the outlet pipe and/or downstream BMR. The permanent
pool should not be lower than six inches below the seasonal high-water table.
The permanent pool elevation of a basin must be not less than six feet deep.
   PIPE. A closed containment of geometric shape with open ends used to convey
liquids. See CULVERTS or STORM SEWERS.
   PIPE COLLAR. A device secured to the outside wall of a pipe, specifically
designed to prevent water from flowing along the pipe within the exterior of
the pipe trench.
   PRE-DEVELOPED CONDITION. The site conditions that exist on a site before the
commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the
land development of a site are approved by the Warrick County Area Planning
Commission. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary
grading, roads, utilities, etc.), the existing conditions before the first item
is approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions.
   POST-DEVELOPED CONDITION. The site conditions that may reasonably be
expected or anticipated to exist after the land development activity is
completed on a site.
   PROPOSED. See POST-DEVELOPED CONDITION.
   PVC. Polyvinyl Chloride.
   RAINFALL INTENSITY.  The cumulative depth of rainfall occurring over a given
duration, usually expressed in inches per hour.
   RECORD DRAWINGS. As-built drawings - engineering design drawings that have
been revised to reflect all changes to the design drawings that occurred during
construction.
   RCP. Reinforced concrete pipe.
   RELEASE RATE. The amount of stormwater released from a detention or
retention facility per unit of time.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. (Also known as the Base Flood or the 100-year flood +
intensity calculations). The flood having a one percent probability of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as shown on the Federal Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) or as approved by the Local Floodplain Administrator.
   REGULATED DRAIN. (Also known as a LEGAL DRAIN.) A drain or ditch maintained
by the County Surveyor and the Drainage Board per Indiana Drainage Code, I.C.
36-9-27.
   RESTRICTOR. A device to restrict the flow of water discharging from a
detention facility.
   RETENTION FACILITY. (Also known as a pond, lake, basin, perforated pipe,
chamber, or facility.) An above or below-ground facility to retain runoff that
has no positive outlet. Runoff is removed only by infiltration through a porous
bottom or by evaporation.
   RETURN PERIOD. The average interval of time within which a given rainfall
event will be equaled or exceeded once. For example, a storm event having a
return period of 100 years has a one percent (1/100) probability of being
equaled or exceeded in any year. The occurrence of a 100-year storm event does
not change the chance of another 100- year storm event occurring the next day.
   RUNOFF. (Also known as stormwater runoff.) The portion of rainwater that
does not infiltrate the ground within the land development.
   RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. A decimal fraction relating the amount of rain that
appears as runoff and reaches the storm sewer system to the amount of rain
falling. A coefficient of 0.5 implies that 50% of rain falling on a given
surface appears as runoff.
   SLOPE. The gradient in feet per foot or expressed as a percent (see GRADE).
   STORM SEWERS. Pipes, closed conduits, or any other manufactured or
fabricated product with a geometrical shape designed to convey runoff. Storm
sewers have both ends connected to drainage structures. See CULVERTS.
   STORMWATER. See RUNOFF.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan developed to minimize
the impact of stormwater pollutants resulting from construction activities,
also known as the Construction Stormwater General Permit.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. See RUNOFF.
   STORMWATER DRAINAGE FACILITY. All means, natural or man-made, including
conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches, streams,
culverts, and pipes, used for conveying stormwater.
   STUB OUT. A short length of pipe for future connection.
   SWALE. A drainage ditch with relatively flat side slopes.
   TRASH RACK. A device or equipment that prevents trash and debris from
discharging from a drainage facility.
   TRIBUTARY. Any watercourse that flows into a larger watercourse.
   WATERCOURSE. Any river, stream, brook, ditch, creek, or natural or man-made
drainage system where stormwater or floodwaters flow.
   WATERSHED. A geographic area from which water drains to a specific
concentration point at the furthest downstream (i.e., the lowest elevation)
point.
   WCSWCD. Warrick County Soil and Water Conservation District.
   WET BOTTOM DETENTION FACILITY. A basin designed to permanently retain a pool
of water after temporarily detaining runoff during a storm event.
   YARD INLET/AREA DRAIN. A structure with a grate that collects runoff in
grassed areas.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.06 DRAINAGE CONTROL POLICY.
   (A)   It is recognized that some natural watercourses and existing storm
sewers within Warrick County may not have sufficient capacity to receive and
convey runoff resulting from development. Accordingly, either the temporary
storage and controlled release rale of runoff, or the retention of runoff,
shall be required for any development whenever a development increases the
total impervious area by at least 10,000 square feet, and a drainage plan shall
be prepared and approved for all such developments. For lots that are located
within subdivisions where a detention or retention facility was constructed,
that is considered an increase in impervious area of 10,000 square feet for
said lot, submission of documentation demonstrating that detention and/or
retention for the excess runoff from said lot shall be submitted. If, in the
opinion of the County Surveyor, the documentation is satisfactory, a drainage
plan will not be required.
   (B)   Developments that result in a total impervious area of more than 5,000
square feet, but less than 10,000 square feet, regardless of net increase or
decrease of impervious areas (such as reconstruction, new construction,
replacement, redevelopment, combination, expansion, etc.) may require the
review and approval of the County Surveyor. The County Surveyor may review the
existing site conditions, and he/she may request a sketch, plan, and/or drawing
of the proposed site conditions from the developer.
   (C)   It is understood that during certain storm events, discharging
unretained peak runoff flow from a development into a receiving watercourse,
before the peak runoff flow in that receiving water flows by the development,
might reduce downstream or upstream impacts. However, it is not possible to
guarantee that the discharge of unretained peak flow from a development will
occur before the peak flow of the receiving watercourse during all storm
events. In fact, under most conditions and most common storm events, detaining
the peak runoff flow will reduce downstream and/or upstream impacts. Therefore,
all developments, unless those exempt by this chapter, shall detain or retain
the peak runoff flow generated from a 50-year storm event under the developed
conditions while discharging a release rate that may not exceed the peak runoff
flow generated from a five-year storm event under the pre-developed condition.
Except with the exemptions stated in this chapter, the applicant must either
submit a drainage plan to the Warrick County Drainage Board to demonstrate that
this requirement will be met, or technically demonstrate that during the one-
year, two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year, and the 50-year storm event,
releasing unretained runoff flow will not result in negative impacts downstream
or upstream of the site.
   (D)   The drainage plan must clearly show that the post-developed runoff for
the 50- year storm event discharged off the site does not exceed the pre-
developed peak runoff rate for the five-year storm event.
   (E)   Drainage calculations for developments where the watershed under
consideration is less than 200 acres may be determined by the Rational Method
(Q = CIA) per the latest version of the LTAP Drainage Manual, except that the
rainfall intensity (I) shall be determined from the Rainfall Intensity Table in
Appendix F of this chapter. Note that a minimum time of concentration shall be
ten minutes. Drainage calculations for developments where the watershed under
consideration is more than 200 acres may be determined by the Soil Conservation
Service Curve Number Method, per the latest version of the LTAP Drainage
Manual.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25) Penalty, see §
56.99
§ 56.07 DRAINAGE BOARD'S RIGHTS TO DISCRETIONARY DECISIONS.
   (A)   Because topography, soil types, field conditions, and the availability
and adequacy of outlets for stormwater runoff vary with almost every site, the
requirements for drainage management tend to be a unique matter for each
project; therefore, the Drainage Board retains the right to make discretionary
decisions on an individual basis.
   (B)   The Drainage Board shall authorize and empower certain technical
advisors, including the Warrick County Surveyor and his assigns, as well as the
Warrick County Highway Engineer and his assigns. The Drainage Board shall
empower the technical advisors as follows:
      (1)   To review the submitted drainage plans;
      (2)   Make recommendations to the Drainage Board concerning such reviews,
and make other reports when ordered by the Board;
      (3)   To make periodic inspections before, during, and after completion
of a development project, and to report findings to the Drainage Board; and
      (4)   To act on behalf of the Drainage Board when so authorized, or by
ordinance.
   (C)   The Drainage Board encourages and advises anyone with an interest in a
development project to contact the technical advisors named above as soon as
possible during the planning stage of the project.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.08 DRAINAGE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED BEFORE CONSTRUCTION.
   Construction for development projects, unless exempt from this chapter,
shall not commence without prior approval of the Drainage Plan from the
Drainage Board. However, the applicant must be aware that before construction
commences, all applicable municipal, state, and federal permits must be
secured, including MS4 required SWPPP applications.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25) Penalty, see §
56.99
§ 56.09 RECORD OF BOARD DECISIONS.
   (A)   Decisions by the Drainage Board concerning this chapter shall be made
only during regular or special meetings of the Drainage Board.
   (B)   Records of actions taken by the Drainage Board concerning this chapter
shall be recorded in the appropriate edition of the minutes of each Drainage
Board meeting.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.10 SPECIAL OR EMERGENCY DECISIONS.
   (A)   In special or emergency circumstances where actions must be taken
quickly to enforce this chapter's purposes, policies, or other requirements,
the Drainage Board or the duly authorized representatives may make decisions or
take actions outside of Board meetings.
   (B)   Special or emergency decisions and actions of the Drainage Board and/
or their authorized representatives shall be recorded in the appropriate
edition of each Drainage Board meeting.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.11 DRAINAGE PLAN DESCRIPTION.
   A drainage plan shall include drawings (including the Drawings Checklist), a
technical report, and a Letter of Certification (including the Certification
Form).
   (A)   Drawings.
      (1)   The drawings shall include all plans, profiles, details, notes, and
specifications to construct the development. All applicable items listed in the
Drawings Checklist in the Appendices shall be shown. The Drawings Checklist
shall be filled out and submitted with the drawings. The applicant may mark N/
A for any inapplicable items.
      (2)   The drawings shall portray design concepts in a common format. This
format must present all the information necessary for persons trained in
engineering to review the plans and those skilled in construction work to build
the project according to the design engineer's intent. Supporting documentation
for the site improvement plans must also be presented in an orderly and concise
format that can be systematically reviewed and understood by others. A good
format is also essential for easy access to information for future reference.
      (3)   Plan sheets, profile sheets, or combined plan and profile sheets,
specifications, and detail sheets shall be on 24" x 36" sheet sizes.
      (4)   The drawings shall include a project information/cover sheet with
the following:
         (a)   Title of development or project name (including applicant's
name);
         (b)   Table of contents (if more than three pages);
         (c)   Vicinity map;
         (d)   Name and telephone number of utility field contacts;
         (e)   One-call telephone number;
         (f)   Name and telephone number of the developer's project surveyor;
         (g)   Name and telephone number of the owner/agent;
         (h)   Name and telephone number of the developer;
         (i)   Name and telephone number of the developer's engineering firm
preparing plans; and
         (j)   Legal description (or reference to deed).
      (5)   Existing features shall be shown on the drawings with dashed lines,
and/or are half-toned (screened), to distinguish existing features from
proposed improvements clearly.
      (6)   The vertical datum shall be based on the current flood maps. The
drawings shall show the location, description, and elevation for at least two
permanent benchmarks. Permanent means that the benchmark will not be disturbed
or damaged during the construction of the development.
      (7)   An Overall Site Plan shall be included if the site must be divided
into more than three plan sheets. The overall plan shall include, at least, a
north arrow and graphic scale, the entire property to be developed, existing
and proposed rights-of-way with street names, and the location of the detailed
site plan sheets, indexed to the detailed site plan sheets. The scale of the
overall plan shall be 1" = 40', 1" = 50', 1" = 60', 1" - 100', 1" = 200', l" =
300", 1" = 400', 1" = 500', or 1" = 600', unless otherwise approved by the
County Surveyor.
      (8)   Each drawing shall be stamped, signed, and dated by a professional
civil engineer or a professional land surveyor regularly engaged in stormwater
drainage design, and registered to practice in the State of Indiana.
      (9)   Site plans shall have a north arrow, graphic scale, match lines
showing the matched sheet number, and project phasing, if known at the time of
the drainage plan's submission.
      (10)   Detail sheets shall provide sufficient information to construct
complex elements of the plan. Details may be provided on plan and profile
sheets if space allows. The location and label for each section or other
details shall be provided.
      (11)   Each drawing, except for the title sheet, shall have a title block
that lists, at minimum, the development title, the name, address, and phone
number of the firm or individual preparing the plan, a revision block, page (of
pages) numbering, and sheet title.
      (12)   All natural and proposed drainage collection, conveyance, and
detention/retention systems with structure numbers shall be shown on one
overall site plan showing the entire property, even if only a portion of the
property is to be developed.
      (13)   General, drainage, and structural notes that apply to the plan
shall be provided on the plans.
      (14)   The drawings consist of all the plans, profiles, details, notes,
and specifications necessary to construct roads, grading, and the drainage
system. Detailed site plan scales shall be in legible scales and show the
entire development and off-site work. Details for clarification, including
those for intersections and existing driveways, should be displayed on a larger
scale.
      (15)   The drawings shall include, at least, the following existing
features:
         (a)   If able, the existing ground surface topography within the site
and extending beyond the property line for at least ten feet. Existing and
proposed topography contours shall be shown at one-foot intervals for the
entire area to be developed unless the County Surveyor approves another contour
interval;
         (b)   If able, the existing surface water discharge points. Ground
surface elevations for a reasonable "area" around points of discharge shall
extend at least 20 feet downstream of all discharge points;
         (c)   Existing hydrologic features. Provide spot elevations, in
addition to contour lines to aid in delineating the boundaries and depth of all
existing floodplains, wetlands, channels, swales, streams, storm drainage
systems, roads (low spots), bogs, depressions, springs, seeps, swales, ditches,
pipes, groundwater, and seasonal standing water;
         (d)   Other existing natural features. Provide spot elevations to
delineate perimeter and variations, including existing vegetation and trees, as
needed;
         (e)   Flow arrows to indicate the direction of existing surface flow
on all public and private property and for all existing conveyance systems;
         (f)   Floodplains, as shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) with
the FIRM panel noted, along with the regulatory base flood elevation and the
regulatory flood zone. If the Local Floodplain Administrator requires the
floodplain to be determined by the applicant, that floodplain with base
elevations shall be shown;
         (g)   Floodways, as shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), as
approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources (in cases where the
watershed is greater than one square mile but not shown on the FIRM panel), or
as designated or as required by the Local Floodplain Administrator (in cases
where the watershed is less than one square mile);
         (h)   Wetlands shall be identified by the National Wetland Inventory
Map;
         (i)   Location and limits of all existing property boundaries;
         (j)   If able, the location of all existing structures, including the
locations of all structures on abutting properties within 20 feet of the
proposed site. Maps, plans, and/or aerial photography may be used if verified
by observation;
         (k)   If able, the dimensions of existing easements within the
property to be developed and within 20 feet of the property to be developed;
         (l)   If able, the dimensions of existing property lines and lot lines
within the property to be developed and within 20 feet of the property to be
developed;
         (m)   Location and limits of all existing roads and rights-of-way
within the property to be developed and adjoining the property to be developed.
This includes the opposite side of the road and curb drives/sidewalk entrances
from the property to be developed;
         (n)   Location of all existing sanitary sewers and water mains
(including appurtenances) within the property to be developed and, if possible,
within ten feet from the property to be developed;
         (o)   Location of all existing utilities within the property to be
developed and, if possible, within ten feet from the property to be developed;
         (p)   Location of all drainage facilities within the property to be
developed and, if possible, within ten feet from the property to be developed;
         (q)   Location of all existing utility poles and fences within the
property to be developed and, if possible, within ten feet from the property to
be developed;
         (r)   Location and limits of existing pavement, including type of
pavement (i.e., asphalt, concrete, etc.) within the property to be developed
and, if possible, within ten feet from the property to be developed;
         (s)   Location and limits of all existing common open space within the
property to be developed and, if possible, within ten feet from the property to
be developed;
         (t)   Location and limits of all existing public dedications within
the property to be developed and, if possible, within ten feet from the
property to be developed; and
         (u)   Existing features to be removed shall be clearly labeled as "To
Be Removed".
      (16)   The drawings shall include the following proposed features;
         (a)   Proposed property lines, right-of-way lines, and widths for
proposed roads and intersecting roads;
         (b)   Proposed roadway features such as centerline, edge of pavement
and shoulder, ditch lines, curbs, and/or sidewalks. In addition, points of
access to abutting properties and roadway continuations shall be shown within
the property to be developed and within 20 feet of the property to be
developed, if able;
         (c)   Proposed topography contours shall be shown at one foot
intervals and selected spot elevations within all right-of-way and drainage
easements, as needed. For the remainder of the development, proposed topography
contours shall be shown at one foot intervals with proposed drainage
directions;
         (d)   The location of all proposed utilities, as well as known future
utilities installed by others, that are within right-of-way and drainage
easements shall be shown to the extent that these will be affected by the
proposed project;
         (e)   The proposed right-of-way and easements are sufficiently
dimensioned to clearly show the locations of all proposed dedicated land;
         (f)   Proposed pavement, including type of pavement (i.e., asphalt,
concrete, gravel, etc.);
         (g)   Proposed drainage structures, including all surface drainage
structures, are generally sequentially numbered starting from the furthest
downstream structure;
         (h)   Slope, length, diameter, and material for all proposed pipes,
culverts, and stub-outs. The storm sewer information shall be shown in a table
formal;
         (i)   All proposed drainage facilities;
         (j)   Approximate location of proposed downspout sub-drains or footing
drains for all lots intending to connect to the storm drainage system, with
prior county approval only. All stub-outs shall be located to allow gravity
flow from the lowest corner of the lot to the connecting drainage structure.
Stub-outs shall be terminated with fabricated caps;
         (k)   Proposed stub-out locations for any future pipe connections.
Stub-outs shall be terminated with fabricated caps. For all pipes not RCP, the
cap shall be fabricated from the same material as the pipe to be stubbed. For
RCP stubs, a fabricated cap such as Foreman Night Cap by Advanced Products and
Systems from Lafayette, Louisiana, or a similar product shall be used;
         (l)   Proposed drainage easements, tracts, access easements, streets,
with dimensions and type of restriction and/or use;
         (m)   Location, identification, and dimensions of all proposed
buildings (if known), property lines, streets, alleys, and easements;
         (n)   Sections and details of all retaining walls, if applicable;
         (o)   Profile of all storm sewers showing proposed and existing ground
profiles at 50-foot stations and significant ground breaks and topographic
features. The storm sewer profile shall have the same stationing shown on the
site plan. The profile shall be read from left to right, with lower stationing
on the left. The profile shall have a grid of numbered lines, providing a
continuous plot of vertical positioning against horizontal;
         (p)   Invert elevations of all pipes and culverts, as well as the
inside bottom and rim elevations of all drainage structures. This information
can be shown on the plan or in a table;
         (q)   Show locations where pipes that are proposed to have one foot or
less of cover from the finished grade (measured vertically from the top of the
pipe to the finished grade, not from the top of the pipe to the road centerline
finished grade elevations);
         (r)   Show the profile on the same, sheet aligned underneath the plan
view whenever possible;
         (s)   Clearly label all profiles with respective street names and plan
sheet reference numbers if drawn on separate sheets;
         (t)   Locale match points with existing pavements and show elevations;
         (u)   Locate, in plan and profile, all existing (if a gravity line,
base the location and elevation on the data collected at the upstream and
downstream structure, and if a non-gravity line, make an assumption and note
it), proposed, and future (if known) utilities where they cross proposed storm
sewers, including the elevations of the top and bottom of pipes where they
cross; and
         (v)   Maintenance statement recommending maintenance tasks and
frequency for all drainage facilities.
      (17)   Proposed retention/detention and infiltration facilities.
         (a)   Scaled drawing of each retention/detention or infiltration
facility.
         (b)   Maximum design water elevation for the 50-year storm event.
         (c)   Normal pool elevation.
         (d)   Elevations and dimensions of all berm widths.
         (e)   At least two cross-sections through a facility. One cross-
section must include the outflow restrictor.
         (f)   Detail, section, and plan view of restrictor/outfall control
structure, including restrictor.
         (g)   Pipe collar, if necessary.
         (h)   All inlet and outlet pipes' location, elevation, and orientation
detail.
         (i)   Construction and material requirements for retention/detention
facility construction.
         (j)   Location, elevations, and detail of emergency overflows and
spillways.
         (k)   Rock protection/energy dissipation requirements and details.
         (l)   Invert elevations of all pipes, grates, inlets, tanks, and
vaults of the retention/detention facility, plus spot elevations at the bottom
of dry bottom detention facilities. This information can be in a table form.
         (m)   Provide the location of the access route if required.
         (n)   Minimum freeboard amounts.
         (o)   Maintenance statement recommending maintenance tasks and
frequency for all drainage facilities.
         (p)   Details of all energy dissipators, including splash pads.
         (q)   Size, type, slope, and length of pipes entering or exiling the
retention/detention facility, when applicable. This information can be
presented in a table form.
         (r)   Details shall be drawn at one of the following scales: ½” = 1',
¼” = 1', ” = 1', l"= 1', l”= 2', l”= 3', l” = 4', l” = 5', 1" = 6', l”=10', or
l”= 20', when applicable.
      (19)   Structural plan details. Any structurally designed drainage
facility (e.g., bridge crossing, reinforced concrete footings, walls, or
vaults) shall include plan sheets necessary to provide complete working
drawings showing dimensions, steel placement, and specifications for
construction. Structures may require a design prepared and stamped by a
professional civil engineer regularly engaged in structural design, and
registered to practice in the State of Indiana.
   (B)   Letter of Certification. The Letter of Certification shall be prepared
by a professional engineer registered in the State of Indiana, stating that the
drainage plan was prepared following the criteria of the requirements of the
Drainage Board. This letter shall also contain the estimated cost of the
drainage facilities, as specified in the drainage plan. In addition, a
Certification Form shall be filled out and signed. A sample Certification Form
can be found in Appendix D of this chapter.
   (C)   Technical report.
      (1)   The technical report shall be typed or computer-generated on 8½” X
11" paper and be bound or placed in a three-hole binder. The drainage report
shall include the following sections:
         (a)   Title page;
         (b)   Table of Contents;
         (c)   Project overview;
         (d)   Existing conditions summary;
         (e)   Off-site analysis;
         (f)   Conveyance systems analysis and design;
         (g)    Retention/detention analysis and design;
         (h)   Special reports and studies;
         (i)   Letter of Credit (or Bond) cost estimate;
         (j)   Maintenance and operations manual; and
         (k)   Appendices.
      (2)   The title page shall show the project name, applicant, address if
known of the development, and submission date of the drainage report. The title
page shall be stamped by a professional civil engineer or professional land
surveyor regularly engaged in stormwater drainage design, and registered to
practice in the State of Indiana
      (3)   The project overview shall identify and discuss the site's
location, topography, and size. It shall also include general descriptions of
the site's pre-developed conditions, the existing drainage system (including
drainage to and from the adjacent property), the proposed development, and the
proposed drainage system. The project overview shall also include a map showing
the general location of the site, all roads that border the site, and
significant geographic features and sensitive areas.
      (4)   The existing conditions summary shall include a description of the
site topography, including basins, watershed areas, drainage facilities,
flooding, and backwater. This section shall estimate the runoff peak flow rate
for the five-year storm event generated by the existing site and shall discuss
the capacity of the existing drainage facilities, existing drainage problems,
if known (i.e., scouring, sedimentation, bank sloughing, flooding, etc.), and
location of discharge points, indicating if the discharge points are point
locations and/or areas of overland flow. This section shall include a
discussion of the assumptions and site parameters used to analyze the existing
site hydrology. Watersheds with areas identified in acres, surface conditions
with appropriate runoff coefficients or curve numbers (if any), times of
concentration, and travel times shall be included. Watershed areas within the
site or contributing runoff towards the site, drainage facilities with invert
elevations, and direction of overland drainage shall be shown on a
topographical map showing one-foot interval ground contours at a scale suitable
to show these plan elements sufficiently. Each watershed area shall be labeled
individually, with flow calculations for each watershed area. Information
required under this section, shown on the plans, may be referenced. Information
may be presented in table form.
      (5)   The off-site analysis shall discuss the capacity of the existing
drainage facilities, existing drainage problems, if known (i.e., scouring,
sedimentation, bank sloughing, flooding, etc.), and the location of discharge
points.
      (6)   The conveyance systems analysis and design section shall present a
detailed analysis of the proposed conveyance system. The analysis, which should
be checked and verified, should be presented in a clear, concise manner that
can be easily followed. All drainage structures and storm sewers shall be
clearly labeled and correspond directly to the construction drawings. This
section shall include a discussion regarding the sizing of the elements of the
conveyance system. Documentation supporting the chosen runoff coefficient
values and the chosen concentration time for each catchment area shall be
included in this section or the Appendices. A Storm Sewer Design Table, shown
in Figure 7.2.1 in the latest version of the LTAP Drainage Manual, must be
provided when the rational method is used.
      (7)   The retention/detention analysis and design section shall include a
professionally prepared illustration of any retention or detention facilities
and their appurtenances. This illustration shall include plan, section,
profile, and elevation views. This section shall include the basic measurements
of the facilities necessary to calculate the storage volumes available from
zero to the maximum head available, orifice/restrictor sizes, head
relationships, and outfall structure orientation concerning the retention or
detention facility. The section shall include calculations, equations, storage/
volume tables, graphs, references, and other necessary documents to clearly
show the results and methodology used to determine the storage facility
volumes. This section should provide a clear sequence of how the retention or
detention facility was determined. Section 6.3 of the latest version of the
LTAP Drainage Manual shall be followed for detention/retention; calculations
may reference plans.
      (8)   The special reports and studies section shall include a summary of
special reports prepared by persons with expertise in the particular area of
analysis in cases where site characteristics pose unique and challenging road
and drainage design problems. Special reports and studies may involve
geotechnical/soils, wetlands, floodplains, slope protection/stability,
groundwater, erosion and deposition, structural design, geology, hydrology,
hydraulics, water quality, and/or structural fill. If the submitted drainage
plan does not include a special report or study that would technically address
the potential impacts and mitigation implementations associated with a unique
feature of the site, the County Surveyor may request a special report or study.
A copy of the special report or study shall be included in the Appendices of
the Technical Report.
      (9)   The Letter of Credit Cost Estimate section shall include a quantity
tabulation and appropriate unit costs for each work item specified in the
drainage plan. The total cost of the drainage system shall then be specified.
Once approved, the total cost, of the remaining construction shall be the value
of a Letter of Credit. That estimated cost maybe specified in the Letter of
Certification.
      (10)   The Maintenance and Operations Manual section shall include a
maintenance and operations manual for each retention or detention facility
specified in the drainage plan. The manual should be simply written and briefly
describe the retention or detention facility, what it is, and how it works. In
addition, the manual shall provide an outline of recommended maintenance tasks
with the recommended frequency at which each task should be performed, and an
estimate of the recommended life expectancy of the major drainage structures.
      (11)   Appendices shall include copies of reference material (if a
reference is made in the drainage report, and the reference is less than ten
pages, a copy of the reference will be placed in the appendices), maps, plans,
special reports, or studies, drawings (if there are several construction
drawings, the drawings may be submitted as a bound and stapled separate set,
although it is preferable for all of the drawings to be in the appendices).
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.12 DRAINAGE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (See the Flowcharts in
Appendix A of this chapter.)
   (A)   All requests for drainage plan approval for commercial projects shall
be made by the applicant to the Warrick County Drainage Board through the
County Surveyor's office. The applicant shall submit four copies of the
drainage plan, including four blacklines of the drawings, to the office of the
County Surveyor for review at least 28 days before the Drainage Board meeting
in which the drainage plan is to be presented and discussed. See Appendix A-
1 of this chapter.
   (B)   All requests for drainage plan approval for subdivisions shall be made
by the applicant to the Warrick County Area Plan Commission. The applicant
shall submit four copies of the drainage plan, including four blacklines of the
drawings to be included in the primary plat application. See Appendix A-2 of
this chapter.
   (C)   After reviewing the drainage plan, the County Surveyor will respond to
the applicant in writing with a copy sent to the engineer. If the drainage plan
is determined to be sufficient by the County Surveyor, the County Surveyor will
include it in the agenda for the next scheduled Drainage Board meeting,
assuming that the agenda is not full and there is ample time for it to be
placed on the agenda. If the Drainage Plan is insufficient, the County Surveyor
will return a marked-up drainage plan checklist indicating the areas of
deficiency, and he/she shall return a marked-up Technical Report and/or drawing
(s). The applicant will then revise the drainage plan to address the
deficiencies. The applicant shall submit four complete, sufficient drainage
plans, including four blacklines of the drawings, to the County Surveyor at
least seven days before the Drainage Board meeting in which the drainage plan
is to be presented and discussed. If the County Surveyor returned a marked-up
Technical Report and/or drawing(s) to the applicant, the applicant shall return
the marked-up Technical Report or drawing(s) with the revised drainage plan.
Note that any changes in the drainage plan that were not required to address an
identified deficiency must be noted.
   (D)   Once the County Surveyor has four copies of a sufficient drainage
plan, at least seven days before the Drainage Board meeting in which the
drainage plan is to be presented and discussed, he/she will include it in the
agenda for the next scheduled Drainage Board meeting, assuming that the agenda
is not full and there is ample time, and he/she will present the drainage plan
to the Drainage Board for its consideration. The applicant or his/her
representative should attend that Drainage Board meeting.
   (E)   If the drainage plan is approved by the Drainage Board, the Board will
send one copy to the applicant with a written notice of approval.
   (F)   Within 14 days of the date of drainage plan approval, the applicant
shall submit an electronic version of the approved drawings in portable
document format (pdf) that is acceptable to the County Surveyor.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25) Penalty, see §
56.99
§ 56.13 DRAINAGE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Drainage Board shall approve any drainage plan that complies with
the requirements of this chapter and with the conditions and requirements
applied by the Drainage Board. A drainage plan becomes effective when the
Drainage Board approves it.
   (B)   The applicant must initiate construction within 36 months from the
date that the applicant receives the approved drainage plan approval from the
Drainage Board. If construction has not commenced within 36 months, the
drainage plan approval shall be void, and the drainage plan must be resubmitted
and reviewed. The applicant may request the Drainage Board, in writing and
through the County Surveyor, to extend the drainage plan approval.
   (C)   If the drainage work specified in the drainage plan has not been
completed within five years from the date the secondary plat was approved, the
drainage plan must be resubmitted and reviewed. The applicant may request the
Drainage Board, in writing and through the County Surveyor, to extend the
drainage plan approval.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.14 DRAINAGE APPROVAL BEFORE RECORDING PLAT.
   Drainage plan approval shall be obtained before the consideration by the
Warrick County Area Plan Commission of the plat and before the recording of the
plat for development.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.15 VARIANCES.
   Variances may be requested on rare occasions when a proposed development
justifies varying from this chapter. The Warrick County Drainage Board may
grant variances. Any variances must be based on a demonstration that such
variances are in the public interest and that the objectives of safety,
function, appearance, environmental protection, and maintainability, based on
sound engineering judgment, are fully met. All variances must be approved
before the drainage plan is approved.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.16 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
   The Warrick County Floodplain Management Ordinance contains specific
requirements that apply to this chapter. Each Development shall be reviewed for
compliance with the same.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.17 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   All facilities conveying or detaining/retaining stormwater runoff
(except for those specified in this section), including, but not limited to;
pipes, storm sewers, conduits, culverts, catch basins, manholes, headwalls,
ditches, channels, swales, ponds, basins, and outfall structures shall be
located within an easement. Downspouts from buildings, footings, and yard
inlets from private property do not have to be located within casements.
   (B)   Drainage easements shall be dedicated to stormwater facilities only.
Other structures, such as utility pipelines, may cross drainage easements at no
less than 45 degrees, but preferably at an angle of 90 degrees. There shall be
a minimum 12 inch vertical clearance between storm sewers and other utilities
that cross, except as specified in sections below.
   (C)   Utilities, other than drainage facilities, that cross a drainage
easement shall have a minimum of 36 inches of cover unless otherwise approved
by the Drainage Board.
   (D)   All county regulated drains have 75 foot wide right-of-entry
easements, as measured from the top of the banks, except where a variance has
reduced the right-of-entry easements. Other structures, such as utility, may
cross a regulated drain easement, upon application, the payment, of a $300 fee,
and the approval of the Drainage Board at an angle no less than 45 degrees, but
preferably at an angle of 90 degrees. There shall be a minimum of 60 inches of
cover for utilities below the bottom of the drain that crosses a regulated
drain easement, unless otherwise approved by the Drainage Board.
   (E)   (1)   Easements for open channels based upon typical sections provided
in the drainage plans shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. Additional easement
widths are as follows;
         (a)   For channels less than two feet in depth, the distance is
measured from the top of the bank to the top of the bank plus 1.5 feet along
both banks.
         (b)   For channels less than four-feet depth but greater than two-feet
depth, the distance is measured from the top of the bank to the top of the bank
plus 2.0 feet along both banks.
         (c)   For channels greater than four-feet depth, the distance measured
from top of bank to top of bank plus ten feet minimum along one side for access
purposes.
      (2)   Easements for existing natural channels shall be as follows:
         (a)   Natural channels with side slopes of 3:1 or less shall have a
minimum easement width equal to the distance measured from top of bank to top
of bank plus ten feet minimum along one side for access purposes.
         (b)   Natural channels with side slopes greater than 3:1 shall have a
minimum easement width equal to the distance measured from top of bank to top
of bank plus 12 feet minimum along one side for access purposes.
      (3)   All easements reserved for pipes shall be at least 12 feet in
width.
 
Pipe Diameter    Feet of Cover         Minimum Easement Width
24" or less      Up to 4' cover        12'
Greater than 24" Up to 4' cover        12' + diameter of pipe
24" or less      Greater than 4' cover [(Total cover - 4') x 2] + 12'
Greater than 24" Greater than 4' cover [(Total cover - 4') x 2] + (12' +
                                       diameter of pipe)
 
      (4)   If special circumstances exist, the Warrick County Engineer and/or
Warrick County Surveyor may require additional easement widths.
   (F)   After the construction specified in the drainage plan has been
accepted, no improvements within the easement shall be performed, including but
not limited to, installing fences or poles, constructing sheds or buildings,
planting trees or shrubs, regrading, excavating, placing fill, or anything else
that may impede the flow of water in the easement without the expressed written
approval from the County Surveyor.
   (G)   Drainage and sanitary sewer easements (DSSE) shall be dedicated to
stormwater facilities and sanitary sewer facilities that run parallel and eight
feet apart (measured from centers).
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.18 AMOUNT OF RUNOFF TO BE ACCOMMODATED BY VARIOUS PARTS OF THE DRAINAGE
SYSTEM.
   (A)   All drainage facilities shall be designed for a minimum peak flow
runoff generated from the 50-year storm event.
   (B)   Detention facilities shall release a maximum flow rate equal to the
runoff generated from a five-year storm event under the pre-developed
condition, while detaining at a minimum the excess runoff generated from a 50-
year storm event under the developed conditions.
   (C)   Retention facilities shall retain at a minimum the runoff generated
from a 50-year storm event under the developed conditions.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.19 STORM SEWER DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All storm sewers, whether private or public, and whether constructed on
private or public property, shall conform to the design standards and other
requirements contained herein.
   (A)   Manning Equation, Q = (A) X (V) = (A) X (1.486 / n) X (R2/3) X (S1/2),
where:
      Q = Discharge in cubic feet per second.
      A = Waterway area of the pipe in square feet.
      V = The mean velocity of flow in feet per second.
      R = The hydraulic radius in feet (cross-sectional area / wetted
perimeter).
      S = The slope of the energy grade line in feel per foot.
      n = The roughness coefficient, where:
         PIPE (n values)
         RCP   0.013
         Concrete Box Culverts    0.013
         PVC or HDPE (smooth-wall pipe)    0.010
         CMP   0.021
         Steel (smooth-wall pipe)   0.011
         Ductile iron    0.011
      For roughness coefficients for pipes or ditches, other than those
specified above, refer to Table 4.2.1 or the equivalent in the latest version
of the LTAP Drainage Manual.
   (B)   Minimum pipe capacity. All storm sewers shall be designed to be a
maximum of 90% full when conveying at a minimum the peak flow of a 50-year
storm event, except for basin discharge pipes, which can be designed to convey
100% of their capacity.
   (C)   Minimum pipe size. The minimum size of all storm sewers shall be 12
inches in diameter. Where a 12 inch diameter pipe will not limit the required
release rate, a stainless-steel orifice plate or similar device shall control
the release rate for detention facilities.
   (D)   Minimum cover. The storm sewer grade shall be such that, generally, a
minimum of one foot of cover shall be maintained over the top of the pipe,
unless pipe manufacturer literature recommends a greater minimum cover.
   (E)   Slopes. Uniform slopes shall be maintained between drainage
structures. Minimum and maximum slopes shall produce velocities between two and
15 feet per second when the pipe is flowing full.
   (F)   Horizontal alignment. Storm sewers shall be straight between drainage
structures, except in the case of box culverts which may have bends with access
manholes.
   (G)   Location of drainage structures.
      (1)   Drainage structures shall be installed to provide access to storm
sewers for inspection and maintenance.
      (2)   Except for box culverts, drainage structures shall be installed at
the following locations:
         (a)   Where two or more storm sewers converge with a minimum diameter
of 12 inches;
         (b)   Where pipe sizes change;
         (c)   Where a change of vertical alignment occurs;
         (d)   Where a change of horizontal alignment occurs; and
         (e)   Where a change in pipe slope occurs.
      (3)   For box culverts, access manholes shall be installed at the
following locations:
         (a)   Where two or more box culverts converge;
         (b)   Where box culvert sizes change;
         (c)   Where a change of vertical alignment occurs;
         (d)   Where a change of horizontal alignment occurs; and
         (e)   Where a change in slope occurs.
      (4)   The maximum distance between surface drainage structures shall be
600 feet. The maximum distance between structures shall be 300 feet for access.
      (5)   Manhole covers shall not be installed at the following locations:
         (a)   Within a curb and/or gutter.
   (H)   Curb inlets. Curb inlets shall collect surface water on curbed and
paved areas through grated openings. Curb inlets shall be designed according to
the latest version of the LTAP Drainage Manual. Curb inlet openings shall be
adequate to pass a runoff from a 50-year storm event with a maximum gutter flow
depth of four inches in sag areas. An emergency weir with an overflow channel
or similar drainage facility shall be installed adjacent to curb inlets in sags
so that the maximum depth of water that is ponded in a street sag during a 50-
year storm event, assuming the inlet is plugged, shall not exceed ten inches,
as measured at a point from, and perpendicular to, the front of the grate. The
maximum distance between curb inlets shall be 600 feet.
   (I)   Area drains and yard inlets. Area drains and yard inlets shall be
utilized to collect surface water on paved, non-curbed surfaces through grated
openings. Area drains and yard inlet openings shall be adequate to pass a
runoff from a 50-year storm event.
   (J)   Minimum road elevation.  The minimum road elevations shall be such so
that all manhole rims and curb inlets/front of the grate shall be above the
100-year flood elevation.
   (K)   Curb turnouts. Curb turnouts shall not be allowed to be part of a
drainage plan unless specifically approved by the County Surveyor and County
Engineer.
   (L)   Construction and materials. The specifications for the construction of
storm sewer drainage structures shall not be less than those outlined in the
latest edition of the Indiana Department of Transportation (INDOT) Standard
Specifications or as modified by the County Surveyor or County Engineer. Pipe
trench details are shown in the Appendices. The most current manufacturer's
installation recommendations shall be followed. All workmanship in implementing
the drainage plan shall be of high quality and reflect compliance with this
chapter's requirements and with all applicable local, state, and federal laws
and regulations, as well as common industry standards.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.20 OPEN CHANNEL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All open channels, whether private or public, and whether constructed on
private or public property, shall conform to the design standards and other
requirements contained herein.
   (A)   Manning Equation, Q - (A) X (V) = (A) X (1.486 / n) X (R2/3) X (S1/2),
where:
      Q = Discharge in cubic feet per second.
      A = Waterway area of the pipe in square feet.
      V = The mean velocity of flow in feet per second.
      R = The hydraulic radius in feet (cross-sectional area / wetted
perimeter).
      S = The slope of the energy grade line in feet per foot.
      a = The roughness coefficient, where:
      Ditch (i.e., open channel) n values
      Concrete (trowel finish)   0.013
      Concrete (broom or float finish)   0.015
      Guite   0.018
      Rip-rap, placed   0.030
      Rip-Rap, dumped    0.035
      Gabions   0.028
      For roughness coefficients for pipes or ditches other than those
specified above, refer to Table 4.2.1 or an equalizing table in the latest
version of the LTAP Drainage Manual.
   (B)   Cross section and grade. The required channel cross-section and grade
are determined by the design capacity, the material lining the channel, and the
maintenance requirements. A minimum depth may be required to provide adequate
outlets for subsurface drains, tributary ditches, or streams. The channel grade
shall be such that the velocity in the channel is high enough to prevent
siltation but low enough to avoid erosion and to maintain channel stability.
Velocities less than 1.5 feet per second should be avoided because siltation
will occur, reducing the channel capacity.
   (C)   Side slopes. Earthen channel side slopes shall be no steeper than
three horizontal to one vertical. Flatter slopes may be required to prevent
erosion and for case of maintenance. Where channels will be lined, side slopes
shall be no steeper than 1 - ½ to 1 with adequate provisions for weepholes.
Side slopes steeper than 1- ½ to 1 may be used for lined channels, provided the
sidelining is designed and constructed as a structural retaining wall.
   (D)   Channel stability.
      (1)   Characteristics of a stable channel are:
         (a)   It neither aggravates nor degrades beyond tolerable limits.
         (b)   The channel banks do not erode to the extent that the channel
cross section is changed appreciably.
         (c)   Excessive sediment bars do not develop.
         (d)   Excessive erosion does not occur around culverts, bridges, storm
drains, channel outfalls, or elsewhere.
         (e)   Gullies do not form or enlarge due to the entry of uncontrolled
flow into the channel.
   (E)   Low flow channels. Low-flow channels shall be installed in wide bottom
channels. The bottom width of a grass-lined channel shall not exceed 15 feet
unless a concrete low-flow channel is provided to prevent flowline meandering.
   (F)   V-shaped channels shall not be allowed.
   (G)   Drainage of waterways. Vegetated waterways subject to long-term low
flows or where wet conditions prevail shall be drained with a tile system or by
other means, such as paved gutters. Tile lines may outlet through a drop
structure at the end of the waterway or through a standard tile outlet.
   (H)   Appurtenant structures. The effect of channel improvements on existing
culverts, bridges, buried cables, pipelines, and inlet structures for surface
and subsurface drainage to the channel being improved and the channel laterals
shall be evaluated to determine the need for modification or replacement.
Culverts and bridges that are modified or added as part of channel improvement
projects shall meet reasonable standards for the type of structure and shall
have a minimum capacity equal to the design discharge.
   (I)   Disposition of spoil. Spoil material resulting from clearing,
grubbing, and channel excavation shall be disposed of in such a manner that
will:
      (1)   Minimize overbank wash.
      (2)   Provide for the free water flow between the channel and floodplain
unless the valley routing and water surface profile are based on continuous
dikes being installed.
      (3)   Do not hinder the development of maintenance travel ways.
      (4)   Leave the right-of-way or right-of-entry in the best condition
feasible, consistent with the project purposes, for productive use by the
owner.
   (J)   Construction and materials.
      (1)   The specifications for the construction of storm sewer open
channels shall not be less than those outlined in the latest edition of the
Indiana Department of Transportation (INDOT) Standard Specifications.
      (2)   The most current manufacturer's installation recommendations shall
be followed.
      (3)   Acceptable materials for channel lining shall be Grass, Riprap,
Concrete, Grouted Riprap, or Gabions. Other lining materials shall require
specific approval from the County Surveyor and shall comply with the latest
edition of the INDOT "Standard Specifications."
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.21 DETENTION/RETENTION DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following shall govern the design of any improvement concerning the
detention/retention of stormwater runoff.
   (A)   Acceptable detention/retention methods. As this chapter requires,
runoff from a proposed development shall be detained on-site by appropriate
detention or retention facilities. As these standards explain, detention
facilities shall be sized to store excess flows. In the case of detention
facilities, control devices shall limit the discharge to a rate no greater than
that prescribed in this chapter. All storm water pipes carrying runoff water
into a detention facility shall be installed and maintained in a manner that
does not hold standing water. The permanent pool elevation of a detention
facility shall not be changed without the Drainage Board's approval.
   (B)   Design storm. The design of stormwater detention facilities shall be
based on a return period of once every 50 years. The storage volume and outflow
rale shall be sufficient to accommodate the stormwater runoff from such a
storm.
   (C)   Allowable release rate.
      (1)   The allowable release rate of stormwater originating from a
proposed development shall not exceed the amount specified in §
52.06.
      (2)   In the event the natural downstream channel or storm sewer system
is inadequate to convey the release rate provided above, then the allowable
release rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the capacity of the
receiving downstream channel or storm sewer system, and additional detention,
as determined by the County Surveyor, shall be required to store that portion
of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers or waterways.
      (3)   An allowance, equivalent to the reduction in flow rate provided,
shall be made for upstream detention when the Warrick Drainage Board has
previously approved such upstream detention and release rate, and evidence of
the upstream detention facility's as-built condition and operation can be
demonstrated to the Drainage Board.
   (D)   Emergency overflow spillway.
      (1)   An emergency overflow spillway shall be provided to release runoff
that exceeds the maximum detention volume, or all runoff, should the normal
discharge devices for the detention facility become totally or partially
inoperative.
      (2)   As a safety factor, a minimum freeboard of one-half foot above the
calculated maximum of the design storm detention high water level to the
elevation of the emergency overflow spillway is required.
      (3)   The emergency overflow spillway shall be designed so that it
operates openly, and automatically, does not require manual attention, and will
pass all of the unretained runoff from storms with intensities of the 50-year
storm event while maintaining a minimum vertical height of six inches from the
water surface flowing over the spillway to the lowest ground elevation in the
earthwork surrounding the spillway.
      (4)   The runoff flowing over the spillway shall be directed to
watercourses and shall not be directed to cause damage.
   (E)   Determination of storage volume - Rational Method. For areas of 200
acres or less, the Rational Method shall be used to determine the required
stormwater storage volume. The procedure for calculating the storage of
stormwater needed using the Rational Method is included in Section 6.2.1 of the
latest version of the LTAP Drainage Manual. The facility must be designed to
store the largest volume, which is calculated for storm durations of up to 24
hours.
   (F)   Determination of storage volume - Other Methods. For tributary
drainage areas larger than 200 acres, computerized runoff hydrographs and
routing techniques shall be used. Various standard methods may be used, as long
as the source of the method is documented. The facility must store the largest
volume, which is calculated for storm durations of up to 24 hours.
   (G)   General detention or retention basin design requirements.
      (1)   Basins shall be constructed to temporarily detain the stormwater
runoff that exceeds the maximum peak flow rate authorized by this chapter. The
volume of storage provided in these basins, together with such storage as may
be permitted in other on-site facilities, shall be sufficient to control excess
runoff from the design storm.
      (2)   The following design principles shall be followed:
         (a)   The maximum volume of water stored and subsequently released at
the design release rale shall not result in a storage duration over 48 hours
unless additional storms occur;
         (b)   The inside top of a bank for stormwater detention or retention
facilities shall be separated by at least 20 feet from any occupied building or
structure. The Lowest Adjacent Grade (including walkout basement floor
elevations) shall be set at least 12 inches above the lowest point at the top
of the detention or retention basin bank; and
         (c)   The maximum depth of water to be stored in a dry-bottom
detention or retention facility during the design storm event shall not exceed
four feet, and the maximum depth of water to be stored above the normal pool
level in a wet bottom detention or retention facility shall not exceed four
feet during the design storm event.
      (3)   All excavated excess spoil may be spread for aesthetic and
recreational features.
      (4)   All detention and retention basins with grassed, earthen side
slopes shall have side slopes no steeper than four horizontal units of
measurement to one vertical unit of the same measurement (4:1) to the base of
dry-bottom basins and the permanent pool elevation of wet-bottom basins.
      (5)   All detention and retention basins with rip-rap armored side slopes
shall have side slopes no steeper than two horizontal units of measurement to
one vertical unit of the same measurement (2:1) at any point in the side slope.
The rip-rap shall extend below the minimum depth of the permanent pool
elevation by at least two feet below the permanent pool elevation. The minimum
depth of rip-rap armament shall be 12 inches in all areas. Structural retaining
walls shall be constructed on side slopes steeper than two horizontal units of
measurement to one vertical unit of the same measurement (2:1).
      (6)   For retention basins with non-armored earthen side slopes, the
submerged side slopes shall have side slopes no steeper than four horizontal
units of measurement to one vertical unit of the same measurement (4:1) from
the permanent pool elevation to a level that is two vertical feet below the
permanent pool elevation.
      (7)   Safety screens having a maximum opening of six inches shall be
provided for any pipe or opening discharging from a detention facility to
prevent children or large animals from crawling into the structures.
      (8)   Danger signs shall be mounted on signposts at appropriate locations
to warn of deep water or possible flooding during storm periods.
      (9)   Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate as simply as
possible and require minimal maintenance and/or attention for proper operation.
Regardless of the primary outlet device, this structure shall include a grate
or similar device set at the emergency overflow elevation for the 50-year
storm.
      (10)   Grass or suitable vegetative cover shall be provided on all side
slopes where rip-rap is not used. Grass should be cut regularly at
approximately monthly intervals during the growing season or as required.
      (11)   Debris and trash removal and other necessary maintenance shall be
performed regularly to assure continued operation in conformance to design.
Trash racks, fabricated from and secured by stainless steel, aluminum, or any
other water-resistant material, shall be installed to prevent trash from
discharging from the detention/retention facility.
      (12)   Inlet pipes shall discharge runoff into the basins as reasonably
far as practically possible from the outlet control structure to provide the
maximum time for sediments to settle. If inlet pipes cannot be located
reasonably far from the outlet control structure, permanent baffles constructed
of water-resistant materials shall be installed to provide a longer time for
sediments to settle.
   (H)   Parking lot storage. Paved parking lots may be designed to provide
temporary detention storage of runoff on all or a portion of their surface.
Outlets shall be designed to slowly empty the stored water. Depths of storage
shall be limited to a maximum depth of six inches to prevent damage to parked
vehicles, so that access to parked vehicles is not restricted. Parking lot
storage should, in general, be confined to those areas of the parking lot that
are furthest from the areas being served by the parking lot.
   (I)   Dry bottom basin design requirements. Detention basins that will not
contain a permanent pool of water shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Provisions shall be incorporated to facilitate complete interior
drainage of dry bottom basins, including the provisions of natural grades to
outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage
facilities, paved gutters, or the installation of subsurface drains.
      (2)   The detention basin shall, whenever possible, be designed to serve
a secondary or multipurpose function, such as recreational facilities,
aesthetic qualities (open spaces) or other types of use. Such detention basin
shall be regularly mowed and maintained free of excess brush and vegetation.
   (J)   Wet bottom basin design requirements. Where part of a detention basin
will contain a permanent pool of water, all the items required for detention
storage shall apply, except that the system of drains with a positive gravity
outlet required to maintain a dry bottom basin will not be required. A
controlled positive outlet will be required to maintain the design water level
in the wet bottom basin and provide required detention storage above the design
water level. However, the following additional conditions shall apply:
      (1)   Basins designed with permanent pools or containing permanent ponds
shall have a minimum water depth at any point of six feet, except as required
by division (3) below;
      (2)   In excavated ponds, the underwater side slopes in the pond shall be
stable. In the case of valley storage, natural slopes may be considered to be
stable; and
      (3)   Ponds require periodic maintenance to control weed and larval
growth. They must also be designed to easily remove sediment accumulated during
operation periods.
      (4)   Aeration facilities may be installed to enhance and maintain pond
water quality in wet-bottom basins. The type and size of the aeration
facilities shall be determined either by the manufacturer of the aeration
facilities or by the engineer. Design calculations and written recommendations
by the manufacturer to substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration
facilities may be submitted.
      (5)   If the local fire department requires it, a dry hydrant shall be
installed. The dry hydrant shall meet the Department's specifications and
requirements.
   (K)   Trash racks.
      (1)   The trash racks shall be fabricated or manufactured from stainless
steel, aluminum, or any other durable water- and weather-resistant material.
For outlets greater than six inches in any dimension, the trash rack shall have
openings no wider than six inches in any dimension. For outlets six inches or
less in any dimension, the trash rack shall have openings no wider than the
greatest dimension of the outlet in any dimension.
      (2)   The trash racks shall be securely fastened to the outlet control
structure or similar structure with stainless steel, aluminum, or any other
durable, water- and weather- resistant material.
      (3)   The trash rack must be large enough that partial clogging will not
adversely restrict the outflow. It shall be fabricated so that it will pass the
designed outflow rate even if as many as 25% of the openings are clogged. The
trash rack shall be placed at a suitable distance from the outlet to avoid
interference with the outlet's hydraulic efficiency.
      (4)   The trash rack shall be installed so that debris can be removed
from it while standing from the top of the outlet control drainage facility and
using only manual tools and/or equipment.
   (L)   Restrictors.
      (1)   Restrictors shall be an opening with a closed perimeter, usually
sharp-edged, and of geometric shape in the form of a plate, wall, or partition,
through which water may flow at a restricted flow rate. For example, a
stainless-steel plate with an opening secured within the inside of a pipe to
reduce the cross-sectional area to restrict the flow, or an opening in a
concrete wall of an outlet control structure to restrict the amount of flow
discharging from a detention facility.
      (2)   Restrictors shall be fabricated or manufactured from stainless
steel, aluminum, or any other durable, water- and weather-resistant material.
They shall be securely fastened to the outlet control structure or similar
structure with stainless steel, aluminum, or any other durable, water- and
weather-resistant material.
      (3)   The minimum dimension in any direction of the restrictor shall be
12 inches. If hydraulic calculations show that the restrictor must be less than
12 inches in any dimension, a special device shall be designed. This device may
consist of a perforated riser, vertical slotted pipe, inlet-controlled
perforated pipe, internally- controlled perforated pipe, hooded orifice or
riser that draws water at least one foot below the permanent pool elevation
(for retention basins only), negatively sloped pipe that draws water at least
one foot below the permanent pool elevation (for retention basins only), or any
other specialty device that has been designed to meet the hydraulic
requirements while minimizing clogging.
   (M)   Pipe collars. The County Surveyor may require pipe collars in the
trench for the outlet pipe to prevent water from flowing from the detention
facility. Fabricated or manufactured devices shall be stainless steel,
aluminum, concrete, bentonite, ABS (i.e., Ripley's Dam), or any other water/
weather-resistant material. The pipe collar shall span the trench's entire
width and create a watertight seal against the pipe.
   (N)   Paved ditch. If the slope of the pond bottom in a detention basin is
less than one percent, a paved ditch shall be constructed by constructing a
concrete ribbon (minimum 4000 psi and 5%—6% air entrainment) with a minimum
thickness of six inches of reinforced concrete and a minimum width of 16
inches. The minimum slope shall be 0.2%.
   (O)   To minimize the wetness of the pond bottom that might harbor insects,
if a paved ditch is required, the pond bottom between the toe of the side
slopes and the paved ditch shall be graded to a minimum slope of one percent.
   (P)   Sub-surface detention or retention design requirements.
      (1)   Subsurface storage units may be accommodated using tanks, chambers,
vaults, pipes, stones, voids, or any other fabricated or manufactured
container, but such storage units shall not be located in the county right-of-
way.
      (2)   The minimum diameter for a pipe, and the minimum vertical height or
horizontal span for any other type of detention or retention storage unit shall
be 30 inches, unless otherwise approved by the County Surveyor.
      (3)   Materials, including material limitations, on all detention or
retention units shall be per the latest edition of the INDOT Standard
Specifications.
      (4)   In areas where seasonal groundwater may induce dotation, buoyancy
tendencies must be balanced by either adding ballast, placing heavier backfill
materials like concrete, installing hold-down straps and concrete anchors,
increasing the total weight of the units, or providing sub-surface drains to
lower the groundwater table permanently.
      (5)   The maximum depth to the invert of any sub-surface detention or
retention units shall be 12 feet. Spacing between access openings shall not
exceed 200 feet. All access openings shall be readily accessible to maintenance
vehicles. Openings shall have a 24 inch diameter with a scaled cover.
   (Q)   Water quality.
      (1)   Water quality during and after construction of the development
shall be specifically addressed through the Construction/Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan, as required for the development of sites that disturb an area
that is equal to or greater than one acre in size. Vegetated filter strips,
vegetated swales, infiltration trenches, infiltration basins, detention or
retention facilities, constructed or restored wetlands, filtration systems, and
oil-grit separators can improve water quality.
      (2)   For the development of sites that disturb an area that is less than
one acre in size, water quality shall still be considered in the development's
overall design.
   (R)   Off-site drainage provisions. When allowable runoff is released in an
area susceptible to flooding, the developer may be required to construct
appropriate storm drains through such an area to avert increased flood hazard
caused by the concentration of allowable runoff at one point instead of the
natural overland distribution. The requirement of off-site drains shall be at
the discretion of the Drainage Board unless the applicant technically proves
that the development will not cause or increase downstream flooding.
   (S)   Infiltration systems. The design of infiltration systems shall follow
section 6.3.5 or its equivalent of the latest, version of the LTAP Drainage
Manual.
   (T)   Construction and materials. The specifications for the construction of
detention and retention facilities shall be at least those outlined in the
latest edition of the Indiana Department of Transportation (INDOT) Standard
Specifications.
   (U)   Inspections. All public and privately owned detention or retention
facilities may be inspected by representatives of the county, at any time.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.22 PRIVATE DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge groundwater and other
stormwater shall be directed to the storm surface system where possible, or
discharged into a designated storm sewer channel, but never allowed to
discharge or pool in public roadways or storm inlet structures. Sump pumps
installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow or sanitary sewage must be
connected to the sewer system or an approved septic system. A sump pump shall
be used for one function only, either the discharge of storm water/groundwater
or the discharge of floor drain/sanitary sewage.
   (B)   All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or be
directed to the storm surface drainage structures. No downspouts or roof drains
shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
   (C)   Footing drains shall discharge onto the ground or be directed to storm
surface drainage structures, where possible, or be discharged into a designated
storm sewer surface channel. No footing drains or drainage tile shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer system.
   (D)   Basement floor drains shall not be connected to the storm system.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 56.23 EROSION CONTROL.
   If a construction project disturbs one acre or more of land, the site owner
must apply for a Construction Stormwater General Permit from the Warrick County
MS4.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 56.24 PIPE CONNECTIONS.
   No unauthorized connections to stormwater pipes are allowed.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 56.25 STORMWATER DISCHARGE.
   Runoff from developments shall discharge into the existing stormwater
drainage facility.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.26 INSPECTION OF STORM SEWER SYSTEM INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Photo documentation of pipe, installation showing bedding and backfill
per the manufacturer's standards. If special circumstances exist, the Warrick
County Engineer and/or Warrick County Surveyor may require deflection testing
of flexible pipe per the next section.
   (B)   All storm sewer construction of flexible pipe, including pipe
manufactured from Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE),
and corrugated metal pipe (CMP), shall be inspected or tested for deflection
per the following:
      (1)   Pipes that cannot be inspected and measured for deflection with
video cameras, visual inspection, or manual measurement to the satisfaction of
the County Engineer or the Warrick County Surveyor to determine less than five
percent deflection shall be tested using a mandrel;
      (2)   The mandrel shall be pulled by hand without mechanical assistance,
and the mandrel test shall be a "go/no-go" procedure;
      (3)   The mandrel shall be approved by the County Engineer or the Warrick
County Engineer or their authorized representative before its use to certify
that the mandrel is rigid, non-adjustable, has an odd number of legs not less
than nine, and has a length not less than its nominal diameter;
      (4)   The diameter of the mandrel at any point shall not be less than the
allowed percentage of deflection of the certified actual mean inside diameter
of the tested pipe;
      (5)   The mandrel shall be fabricated of metal, fitted with pulling rings
at each end, stamped or engraved on some segment other than a runner with the
nominal pipe size and the mandrel's outside diameter;
      (6)   For any vertical or horizontal deflection test, pipe failure shall
be defined as a five percent or greater deflection of the tested pipe's
internal diameter;
      (7)   The project site owner/operator shall perform or cause to be
performed all required deflection tests no sooner than 30 days after the final
backfill, per the manufacturer's specifications, has been placed over the pipe
to be tested;
      (8)   Pipe inspection and test methods, procedures, and equipment,
whether conducted or employed for mandrel testing under special circumstances
or other video inspections necessary to comply with this section, shall be
subject to the County Engineer's or the Warrick County Surveyor's approval and
all tests and inspections must be conducted in the presence of the County
Engineer or his or her authorized representative;
      (9)   The pipe inspection and test results must be reviewed and certified
by the County Engineer or authorized representative before the storm sewer
facilities' final acceptance or release and applicable portion improvements;
and
      (10)   All flexible pipes failing the deduction test within the warranty
period shall be replaced or caused to be replaced by the project site owner or
operator at no cost to the county.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.27 LETTER OF CREDIT.
   For major subdivisions, a separate Letter of Credit for the stormwater
system will not be required because the Letter of Credit for approval of the
major subdivisions, as defined in the Warrick County, Indiana Subdivision
Control Ordinance, includes the stormwater system.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.28 RECORD DRAWINGS.
   (A)   After completion of the project, but before final approval and/or
acceptance by the county, two blackline sets of the drawings and by email, USB
drive or drop-box containing an electronic version of the record drawings in
PDF that is acceptable to the County Surveyor shall be submitted to the
Drainage Board through the office of the County Surveyor. The blacklines shall
be stamped, signed, and dated by a professional civil engineer or professional
land surveyor regularly engaged in stormwater drainage design, and registered
to practice in the State of Indiana.
   (B)   Certified "Record Drawings".
      (1)   After completion of the project, and before final approval and/or
acceptance can be made, two professionally prepared and certified sets of
"Record Drawings" shall be submitted to the County Surveyor and the County
Engineer for review. The plans shall also be submitted electronically in PDF
format, which does not allow edits. If the Drainage Plan is constructed
essentially as designed or with only minor variations within acceptable
Engineering Practice, a Certification Statement may be submitted on the
approved County Certification for 803.
      (2)   These plans shall include all pertinent data relevant to the
completed stormwater drainage system and shall include:
         (a)   Pipe size, length, and material;
         (b)   All rim and invert elevations of all drainage structures;
         (c)   Spot elevations on all drainage swales and ditches. Elevations
shall be provided on the flow line at 100-foot intervals, or at each property
line (whichever is less). Upon request of the County Engineer or County
Surveyor, the top of the bank shall also be shown on the "as-built" plans;
         (d)   Correctly located limits and alignment of all drainage
facilities, intended to remain in place, in correlation to platted easements
and rights-of-way;
         (e)   Data and calculations showing all basin storage volumes and
storage elevations as built with a statement that the volumes contained within
any retention or detention facility meet or exceed the required design storage
volumes; and
         (f)   An engineer's certified statement on the “Record Drawings” plans
that the completed stormwater drainage system complies with the final drainage
plan approved by the Board, or clearly depicts, describes, and explains
deviations from the approved final drainage plan.
      (3)   The County Surveyor will store "Record Drawings" with the drainage
plan. The County Surveyor shall store one copy of the "as-built" plans with the
approved drainage plan.
      (4)   The County Engineer will store "Record Drawings" with Street Plans.
The County Engineer shall store one copy of the "as-built" or “Record Drawings”
plans with the approved street plans.
      Drainage Certification
      The completed stormwater drainage system complies with the final drainage
plans approved by the Warrick County Drainage Board on
                          except as noted on the Record Drawings.
                                                                 
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.29 MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED DRAINAGE PLAN.
   (A)   Modifications during construction.
      (1)   Any major modification (or modifications) to an approved drainage
plan shall be filed with the Drainage Board before implementing the major
modification(s). The word "major" shall be determined by the County Surveyor.
If the Drainage Board approves the modification(s), it will become part of the
approved drainage plan. If the Drainage Board does not approve it, the
applicant must revise the modification(s) and resubmit them to the Drainage
Board for approval. If the major modification(s) have been implemented and then
not approved by the Drainage Board, the major modification(s) will either have
to be removed or modified to satisfy this chapter.
      (2)   Any minor modification (or modifications) to an approved drainage
plan shall be filed with the Drainage Board before implementing the minor
modification(s). The word "minor" shall be determined by the County Surveyor.
The County Surveyor may approve the minor modification(s), not approve the
minor modification(s), or request the Drainage Board to consider the minor
modification(s). If the minor modification(s) have been implemented and then
not approved by the County Surveyor or by the Drainage Board, the minor
modification(s) will cither have to be removed or modified to satisfy this
chapter.
   (B)   Modifications after project completion and acceptance. Any
modification (or modifications) to any part of the approved drainage plan shall
require a new approval of the drainage plan from the Drainage Board. If the
modification(s) are major, as determined by the County Surveyor, a new drainage
plan conforming to this chapter shall be submitted to the Drainage Board for
approval.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.30 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General maintenance.
      (1)   Before project completion and acceptance, maintenance of proposed
(as shown on the approved drainage plan) drainage facilities within existing
and proposed county right-of-way shall be the applicant's responsibility.
Before project completion and acceptance, the county shall be responsible for
maintaining existing drainage facilities that receive stormwater from the
development and are within the existing county right- of-way. However, if the
County Surveyor determines that the sole reason for performing maintenance on
existing drainage facilities is due to the implementation of the approved
drainage plan (such as sedimentation, damage, and construction debris), the
applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance. After project completion
and acceptance, maintenance of existing and proposed (as shown on the approved
drainage plan) drainage facilities, which are within existing and accepted
county right-of-way and drainage easements (which were shown to be proposed in
the drainage plan), shall be the responsibility of the county, excluding
retention/detention facilities.
   (B)   Assignment of maintenance of drainage easements and drainage
facilities.
      (1)   The county shall perform structural and non-structural maintenance
of drainage facilities within the right-of-way.
      (2)   The property owner of the said easement shall perform non-
structural maintenance of the land with drainage easements. See Appendix C's
“Declaration of Covenants, Inspection/Maintenance of Drainage Facility.”
      (3)   The county shall perform structural maintenance of drainage
facilities within drainage easements, excluding retention/detention facilities.
See Appendix C’s “Declaration of Covenants, Inspection/Maintenance of Drainage
Facility.”
      (4)   Structural and non-structural maintenance of the land and drainage
facilities not within drainage easements shall be performed by the property
owner of the said land.
   (C)   Types of maintenance.
      (1)   Non-structural maintenance shall include; mowing grass, removing
trash, controlling weeds, and maintaining the designed cover over the storm
sewers.
      (2)   Structural maintenance shall include: keeping all parts of the
stormwater drainage system operating as designed and constructed, keeping
channels, embankments, shorelines, and bottoms of waterways and basins free of
all erosion and sedimentation; maintaining the drainage facilities which lie on
his or her property following the conditions described in the accepted drainage
plan on file in the County Surveyor's office, and in compliance with this
chapter; preventing all persons or parties from causing any unauthorized
alternations, obstructions, or detrimental actions from occurring to any part
of the stormwater drainage facility and drainage casement.
   (D)   Drainage facility repair account.
      (1)   A drainage facility repair account established for each development
will pay for the costs of structural maintenance of the drainage facilities
shown on the record plans for this subdivision, which are either within county
right-of-way or are outside of the county right-of-way and but within drainage
easements, as shown on the plat of this subdivision.
      (2)   The Drainage facility repair account shall be created and
maintained by the Warrick County Auditor as follows;
         (a)   The County Auditor shall create an account into which the County
Treasurer shall deposit the prepaid maintenance money received from the
applicant using this maintenance method and all money collected through fines
and liens from properties within subdivisions. This account shall also collect
all money received from fines, tax liens, interest payments, and penalties
generated by violations of the terms of this chapter.
         (b)   The County Surveyor shall sign a warrant for payment of a claim
for materials and/or labor used to repair structural failures of drainage
facilities, or to bring a project or a part thereof into compliance with the
terms of this chapter all as described in this section of this chapter; but
only if the criteria are met.
         (c)   The applicant shall submit to the County Treasurer a sum equal
to $5 times the linear feet of stormwater sewers and culverts installed for
this development that are 12" or greater in nominal diameter ($5/linear foot),
plus $200 times the number of drainage structures installed for this
development ($200/structure).
   (E)   Inspection.
      (1)   The entire drainage system, including the basins, for all
developments requiring a drainage plan shall be inspected by the County
Surveyor or his representative after construction. A written approval and
acceptance of the drainage facilities, including basins and off-site
facilities, shall be subject to an inspection conducted by the County Surveyor
according to the following procedure:
         (a)   The County Surveyor's inspection shall be conducted by the
following procedure:
            1.   The applicant shall give written notice to the County Surveyor
that the drainage system for the development is completed;
            2.   The County Surveyor shall inspect, or cause to be inspected,
the drainage system, including the basins, and shall issue, within 21 days from
the receipt of the owner's/developer's written notice, either a written
approval of the facilities or a notice listing any inadequacies in the system;
            3.   Upon correction of inadequacies, if any, written notice of
completion again shall be given to the County Surveyor by the owner(s)/
developer(s); and
            4.   The applicant shall maintain and guarantee the entire storm
sewer system, including the basin(s), for one year beginning on the date of the
County Surveyor's written approval of the system; and
      (2)   Periodic inspections of storm sewer systems and basins.
         (a)   Drainage facilities constructed under the provisions of this
chapter will be inspected by the County Surveyor or his/her agent on a periodic
or as-needed basis.
         (b)   A permanent record of all inspections shall be kept in the
Office of the County Surveyor.
         (c)   The purpose of such periodic inspections shall be to determine
compliance or noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter and
compliance with the conditions of the approved drainage plan.
         (d)   If required by the Drainage Board, a certified inspection report
covering physical conditions, operational conditions, compliance with ordinance
requirements, and other pertinent data will be filed with the Drainage Board
and made available for public viewing.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.31 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The Drainage Board accepts no responsibility for any impacts due to
deviations from the approved drainage plan.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.32 CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent Warrick County, Indiana, from taking
lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All costs
of such action shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.33 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   If the Warrick County Surveyor determines that an applicant or other
responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of an
approved drainage plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a
written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person.
Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having
first secured a permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or
the person responsible for the activity being conducted on the site.
   (B)   The notice of violation shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner, the applicant or the responsible
person;
      (2)   The address or other description of the site upon which the
violation is occurring;
      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
      (4)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management
plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action;
      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed
against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and
      (6)   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the Drainage Board by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after
the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an
immediate danger to public health or public safety, a 24-hour notice shall be
sufficient).
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.34 ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION.
   Discharges to the storm sewer system not composed entirely of stormwater
runoff contribute to increased non-point source pollution and degradation of
receiving water. These non- stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping,
and improper connections to the municipal/county separate storm sewer system
from residential, industrial, commercial, or institutional establishments.
These non-stormwater discharges impact waterways not only individually, but
geographically dispersed, small volume non-storm water discharges can have
cumulative impacts on receiving waters. Those discharges adversely affect
public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other
aquatic life, property values, and other uses of lands and waters. These
impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping, and
discharges into the storm sewer system; Warrick County is required to comply
with many state and federal laws, regulations, and permits that require a
locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint
source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the (municipal/
county) separate storm sewer system. Therefore, Warrick County prohibits such
non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system and has determined that the
regulation of spills, improper dumping, and discharges to the municipal/county
separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats
to the public health and safety, and the environment.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.35 EXEMPT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Any development that has had its drainage plan approved by the
Drainage Board before the effective date of this chapter and has not made any
unapproved changes to the approved drainage plan since the approval date of the
drainage plan shall be exempt from all of the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Developments that will increase less than 10,000 square feet of
impervious area do not require a drainage plan.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.36 UPDATES.
   This drainage chapter may be updated and revised as recommended by the
County Surveyor, with the approval of the Warrick County Board of
Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.98 VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES.
   Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this chapter or the
requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject
to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or
inaction that is continuous over time is deemed a public nuisance and may be
abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. Imposing any of the penalties
described below shall not prevent such equitable relief.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
§ 56.99 PENALTIES.
   In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have
not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of
violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken
or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed.
Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following
penalties, the County Surveyor shall first notify the applicant or other
responsible person in writing of the intended action and shall provide a
reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event
the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public
safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. If the
applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such
notice and cure period, the County Surveyor may take any one or more of the
following actions or impose any of the following penalties.
   (A)   Stop-work order. The County Surveyor may issue a stop-work order,
which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop-
work order shall remain in effect until the remedial measures outlined in the
notice of violation have been cured or the violation or violations described
therein have otherwise been cured, provided that the stop-work order may be
withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to
take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations.
   (B)   Withhold certificate of occupancy. The Warrick County Building
Department may be directed in writing by the County Surveyor to refuse to issue
a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed
or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible
person has taken the remedial measures outlined in the notice of violation or
has otherwise cured the violations described therein.
   (C)   Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The Warrick County
Area Plan Commission may be directed in writing by the County Surveyor to
suspend, revoke, or modify the permit authorizing the land development project.
A suspended, revoked, or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant
or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures outlined in the
notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein,
provided such permit may be reinstated to enable the applicant or other
responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such
violations.
   (D)   Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible
person fails to take the remedial measures outlined in the notice of violation
or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or
such greater period as the County Surveyor shall deem appropriate (except, that
in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or
public safety, 24-hour notice shall be sufficient) after the County Surveyor
has taken one or more of the actions described above, the County Surveyor may
impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000 (depending on the severity of the
violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the
notice of violation.
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
APPENDIX A: FLOWCHARTS
COMMERCIAL SITE
FLOWCHART A-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1810.png]
 
SUBDIVISION SITE
FLOWCHART A-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1812.png]
 
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
APPENDIX B: DRAINAGE PLAN DRAWING CHECKLIST 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1814.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1816.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1818.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1820.png]
 
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
APPENDIX C: DECLARATION OF COVENANTS
INSPECTION/MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGE FACILITY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1822.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1824.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1826.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1828.png]
 
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
APPENDIX D: CERTIFICATION FORM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1830.png]
 
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
APPENDIX E: TRENCH DETAILS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1832.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1834.png]
 
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
APPENDIX F: RAIN FALL INTENSITY TABLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1836.png]
 
(BC Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-11-25)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
71.   VEHICLE TAXES
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
70.01   Vehicle speed limits
   
70.02   Traffic-control devices
   
70.03   General parking regulations
   
70.04   Parking regulations for county parking site
   
70.05   Weight restrictions
   
70.06   Bridge load restrictions
   
70.07   Frost law restrictions
   
70.08   Road usage agreements
   
70.09   Repetitive hauling
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 VEHICLE SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or move, a motor
vehicle on and across county highways at a speed limit greater than 35 miles
per hour except as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Whenever road conditions and traffic conditions warrant, the Board of
Commissioners shall reserve the right by resolution to post highways at
different speed limits than as hereinabove set forth and when said limits are
so posted, said posted limits shall prevail as the existing speed limit on the
highway.
(BC Ord. 1984-4, passed 2-6-84)
   (C)   The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be
applicable on all roads within the county, except as the Board of Commissioners
shall declare and determine certain speed regulations as applicable on
specified roads or in certain areas, from time to time. Such declarations and
determinations shall be made upon the recommendation of the County Highway
Engineer that the maximum speed permitted by the state traffic laws is greater
or less than reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist after
engineering and traffic investigation in accordance with I.C. 9-21-5-6.
      (1)   The County Highway Department shall have the power to place and
maintain all necessary signs when and as required in order to regulate traffic
in accordance with the declarations and determinations of the Board of
Commissioners posting the necessary signs on or at the entrances to the
entrances to the roads or part or parts thereof affected in a position most
appropriate.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this §
70.01(C) for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so
declared by the Board of Commissioners when signs are in place giving notice
thereof.
(BC Ord. 1992-24, passed 12-7-92; Am. BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9- 21)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The state traffic laws regulating traffic-control signs, signals, and
devices used to regulate traffic, including intersection control, truck routes,
weight restrictions on bridges and roads, and road use restrictions for trucks,
semi-tractors, and semi-trailers, shall be applicable on all roads within the
county, except as the Board of County Commissioners shall declare and determine
certain regulations concerning such traffic-control signs, signals, and devices
as applicable on specified streets or in certain areas, from time to time. Such
declarations and determinations shall be made upon the recommendation of the
County Highway Engineer that, under conditions found to exist after engineering
and traffic investigations, certain traffic control signs, signals, and devices
are needed in order to regulation traffic.
   (B)   The County Highway Department shall have the power to place and
maintain traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when and as required in
order to regulate traffic in accordance with the declarations and
determinations of the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this §
70.08 for an operator of a vehicle to fail to obey any traffic-control sign,
signal, or device so declared by the Board of Commissioners when such signs,
signals, or devices are in place, unless otherwise directed to proceed by a
police officer.
(BC Ord. 1992-24, passed 12-7-92; Am. BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9- 21) Penalty,
see §
70.99
§ 70.03 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The state traffic laws regulating parking shall be applicable upon all
roads within the county, except as the Board of Commissioners shall determine
certain regulations concerning the prohibition or regulation of parking
applicable upon specified roads or in certain areas. Such declarations and
determinations shall be made upon the recommendation of the County Highway
Engineer that, under the conditions found to exist after engineering and
traffic investigations, certain prohibitions or regulations are needed in order
to regulate parking.
   (B)   The County Highway Department shall have the power to place and
maintain painted signs or markers on the curb and on avenues, streets or lots
to designate parking spaces. Each vehicle parked along side of, or adjacent to,
any curb or parking area shall park within the lines or marks so established.
It shall be a violation of this section to park any vehicle across any such
line or mark or to park any such vehicle in such a way that the vehicle shall
not be within the area so designated by the lines or marks.
   (C)   No owner or person in control of a vehicle shall allow that vehicle to
occupy, in whole or in part, more than one parking space at a time.
   (D)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person in control of a
vehicle to fail to obey any sign or marker so declared by the Board of County
Commissioners when such signs or markers are in place giving notice thereof.
(BC Ord. 1992-24, passed 12-7-92; Am. BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9-21)
§ 70.04 PARKING REGULATIONS FOR COUNTY PARKING SITE.
   (A)   Parking on the parking site on the premises defined herein on the
weekdays Monday through Friday and during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
shall be reserved for the employees and office holders of the county and that
the right to park an automobile on said parking site shall be evidenced by the
issuance to the owner thereof of a parking permit sticker which shall be
affixed to the rear of any such motor vehicle.
   (B)   No motor vehicle shall be parked within or upon said parking site
unless said motor vehicle shall display a parking permit sticker as provided
herein.
   (C)   Any unauthorized vehicle parked on the parking site defined herein may
be towed away at the owner's expense.
   (D)   Signs shall be erected and maintained on the parking site defined
herein, which said signs shall inform the general public of the restricted
nature of parking therein on the above mentioned days and during the above
mentioned hours and unauthorized vehicles parked therein may be towed at the
owners expense, and the owner of an unauthorized vehicle parked therein may be
subject to criminal prosecution.
   (E)   The jurisdiction to enforce this and all other parking regulations
upon the parking site defined herein is hereby granted to the county, or any
police officer of the county, and to the City of Boonville, or any police
officer of the City of Boonville.
(BC Ord. 1979-20, passed 12-17-79; Am. BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9-21) Penalty,
see §
70.99
§ 70.05 WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, no vehicle with a gross weight in excess
of ten tons or 20,000 pounds shall be operated on or across any county highway
which has been posted as to said weight restriction without prior authorization
pursuant to a road usage agreement validly executed by and between the operator
of such vehicle and the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided under §§
70.06,
70.07, or any other applicable restrictions codified in I.C. 9-20, et seq., the
following vehicles with a gross weight in excess of ten tons or 20,000 pounds
are exempt from the weight restrictions set forth in this §
70.05:
      (1)   Local delivery vehicles;
      (2)   Refuse, garbage, and/or recycling haulers when operating on county
roadways in the ordinary course of business;
      (3)   Police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency service vehicles;
      (4)   Warrick County Highway Department road and maintenance vehicles;
      (5)   United States Postal Service and/or other parcel-delivery service
vehicles operating in the ordinary course of business;
      (6)   Farm trucks, farm trailers, farm semitrailer and tractors, or other
covered farm vehicles as defined in I.C. 9-13-2-58;
      (7)   Farm wagons, as that term is defined in I.C. 9-13-2-60;
      (8)   Implements of agriculture, as that term is defined in I.C. 9-13-2-
77;
      (9)   Any vehicle which is the subject of a road usage agreement validly
executed and in effect at the time of such operation; and
      (10)   Any school transportation vehicle when transporting students.
(BC Ord. 1989-6, passed 5-1-89; Am. BC Ord. 2021-22, passed 5-24- 21; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9-21) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Specific roads designated, see
Ch. 72, Sched. II
§ 70.06 BRIDGE LOAD RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this Title VII to the contrary,
no person shall drive, operate, or move upon or over any county bridge any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the posted weight limit for such
bridge.
   (B)   The following vehicles are exempt from this §
70.06:
      (1)   Warrick County Highway Department road and maintenance vehicles;
      (2)   Police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency service vehicles; and
      (3)   Any vehicle which is the subject of a road usage agreement validly
executed and in effect at the time of such operation.
   (C)   The County Highway Department shall conspicuously post any bridge
weight limit signage at the nearest intersections located on both sides of the
bridge, as well as at each entrance of the bridge structure itself.
(BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9-21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 FROST LAW RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Warrick County Highway Engineer may, in its sole discretion,
impose further restrictions pertaining to the operation of vehicles or the
permitted weight of operated vehicles on a roadway when there exists the
potential for damage to such roadway(s) as a result of deterioration, rain,
snow, or other climatic or environmental conditions.
   (B)   The County Highway Engineer shall limit the duration of any
restrictions imposed under §
70.07(A) to the greatest extent reasonably possible, taking into consideration
the risk of potential damage of the roadway(s) resulting from adverse climatic
or environmental conditions. In no event shall the cumulative duration of any
restrictions imposed by the County Highway Engineer under §
70.07(A) total more than 90 days in a calendar year.
   (C)   In the event of any imposition of restrictions by the County Highway
Engineer as described in §
70.07(A), signage informing vehicle operators of such restrictions shall be
posted by the Highway Department at each entrance to the affected roadway(s).
   (D)   The following classifications of vehicles are exempted from any
restrictions imposed under §
70.07(A):
      (1)   Warrick County Highway Department road and maintenance vehicles;
      (2)   Police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency service vehicles;
      (3)   School transportation vehicles when transporting students;
      (4)   Refuse, garbage, and/or recycling haulers when operating on county
roadways in the ordinary course of business;
      (5)   Any other vehicles that have been validly granted an exemption to
such restrictions by the County Highway Engineer; and
      (6)   Any vehicle which is the subject of a road usage agreement validly
executed and in effect at the time of such operation.
   (E)   Any exemptions granted by the County Highway Engineer as described in
§
70.07(D)(5) shall be valid for up to 24 hours.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this Title VII, no other
exemptions, permits, or authorizations, except for those set forth in this §
70.07, shall be construed so as to authorize a vehicle to operate on a roadway
for which the County Highway Engineer has imposed restrictions under §
70.07(A).
(BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9-21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 ROAD USAGE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   When required by this
Chapter 70, and as otherwise may be required by the Board of Commissioners and/
or the Warrick County Highway Engineer, no person shall drive, operate, or move
a vehicle upon or over any county road, highway, or bridge without first
entering into a road usage agreement with the Board of Commissioners
authorizing such operation and use.
   (B)   Following the execution of a road usage agreement as described under
this §
70.08, no person shall drive, operate, or move a vehicle upon or over any
county road, highway, and/or bridge except for such road(s), highway(s), and/or
bridge(s) which are permitted pursuant to said road usage agreement.
   (C)   In the event a road usage agreement is required under this
Chapter 70, and in addition to any other payments or fees provided for in such
agreement, the person or operator entering into such road usage agreement with
the Board of Commissioners shall pay an annual fee in the amount of $250.
(BC Ord. 2021-22, passed 5-24-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9- 21; Am. BC
Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 REPETITIVE HAULING.
   (A)   No person shall repetitively drive, operate, haul, or move upon or
over any county road, highway, or bridge any vehicle or object in such a manner
so as to cause damage to such road, highway, or bridge. For purposes of this
Chapter 70, what constitutes "repetitive driving, operating, hauling, or moving
of a vehicle" shall be determined by the Warrick County Engineer, in its sole
and absolute discretion.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall repetitively drive,
operate, haul, or move a vehicle with a gross weight of 12 tons or 24,000
pounds on any non-commercial county highway, regardless of any posted weight
restriction or limit, without first entering into a road usage agreement with
the Board of Commissioners authorizing such operation and use.
   (C)   Any person who causes damage to a county road, highway, or bridge as a
result of repetitive driving, operating, hauling, or moving of a vehicle as
described in §
70.09(A) shall be responsible for any and all costs necessary to repair and/or
replace the damage to such road, highway, or bridge.
   (D)   In the event a person causes damage to a county road, highway, or
bridge as described in §
70.09(A), above, the existence of a validly executed road usage agreement
between said person and Warrick County shall be no defense to any action or
claim brought against said person.
   (E)   Any payments, costs, or fees provided under this §
70.09 shall be in addition to, and in no way in lieu or substitution of, any
fines or penalties authorized to be assessed to a person in accordance with §
70.99, below.
(BC Ord. 2021-22, passed 5-24-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9-21) Penalty,
see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The Warrick County Sheriff's Office is authorized to, and shall,
enforce any and all violations of this chapter, including, without limitation,
traffic regulations or restrictions posted via signage and any requirements
governed by the terms and provisions of a permit issued by the Superintendent.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
70.01(A) or (B) shall be fined not more than $100.
   (C)   Any person violating §§
70.01(C),
70.02, or
70.03 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500.
   (D)   Any person who violates §
70.04 shall be guilty of a Class C infraction.
   (E)   A person, company, or corporation who violates §§
70.05,
70.06,
70.07, or
70.09 shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first offense,
and in an amount not to exceed $2,500 for each subsequent offense.
(BC Ord. 1979-20, passed 12-17-79; Am. BC Ord. 1984-4, passed 2-6-84; Am. BC
Ord. 1992-24, passed 12-7-92; Am. BC Ord. 1989-6, passed 5-1-89; Am. BC Ord.
2021-27, passed 8-9-21)
CHAPTER 71: VEHICLE TAXES
Section
   
71.01   County wheel tax
   
71.02   Motor vehicle excise surtax
Cross-reference:
   Taxation generally, see
Ch. 36
§ 71.01 COUNTY WHEEL TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a county wheel tax per vehicle on the
following vehicles registered in the county on or before December 31, 2000, as
follows, all as defined in I.C. 6-3.5-5-1. (The tax does not apply to any
vehicle exempted as provided by I.C. 6-3.5-5-4.):
      (1)   Buses   $15.00
      (2)   Recreation vehicles   $25.00
      (3)   Semi trailers   $25.00
      (4)   Tractors   $30.00
      (5)   Trailers   $10.00
      (6)   Trucks   $20.00
   (B)   The tax rates for vehicles registered after December 31, 2000, shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Buses   $7.50
      (2)   Recreation vehicles   $12.50
      (3)   Semi trailers   $12.50
      (4)   Tractors   $15.00
      (5)   Trailers   $5.00
      (6)   Trucks   $10.00
   (C)   The tax shall be paid and collected in accordance with the procedures
set forth in I.C. 6-3.5-5-1 et seq.
(BC Ord. WT-1-82, passed 4-6-82; Am. CC Ord. 2000-2, passed 3-2-00)
§ 71.02 MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE SURTAX.
   (A)   There is imposed an annual license excise surtax on each motor vehicle
as defined in I.C. 6-3.5-4-1 registered in the county, on or before December
31, 2000, at the rate of 10%.
   (B)   For motor vehicles registered after December 31, 2000, the rate of the
excise surtax shall be 10%. The surtax on a vehicle shall not be less than
$7.50. The license excise tax applies to all vehicles described in I.C. 6-3.5-
4-2(b).
   (C)   The county vehicle excise surtax shall be paid and collected in
accordance with the procedures set forth in I.C. 6-3.5-4-1 et seq.
(BC Ord. ES-1-82, passed 4-6-82; Am. CC Ord. 2000-3, passed 3-2-00; Am. CC Ord.
2013-01, passed 8-1-13)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   Weight restrictions
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or move a motor vehicle
over the following county roads at a speed greater than that indicated:
Street Location Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
Street           Location         Speed Limit Ord. No.         Date Passed
Abbe Wood Drive  Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021- 13 9-13-21
                 Subdivision
Alex Court       Waterstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-2 0 11-23-20
                 Subdivision
Arbor Creek      River Ridge      20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2015-10  10-26-15
Drive            Subdivision
Arbor Lake Drive River Ridge      20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2015-10  10-26-15
                 Subdivision
Arbor Pointe     River Ridge      20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2015-10  10-26-15
Drive            Subdivision
Belmont Drive    Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-13  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
Bloomsbury Court Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-13  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
                 From State Road
Boonville        62 to the        40 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1990-28  12-26-90
Highway (S 50)   Vanderburgh
                 County line
Brandywine Drive Fieldstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-12  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
Brentford Drive  Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-13  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
Brompton Drive   Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-13  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
Brookstone Drive Brookstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2018-05  1-22-18
                 Subdivision
                 From the
                 intersection of
                 Bullocktown Road
Bullocktown Road and Old Rockport
(E 75, S 300 and Road south to    40 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1991-6   2-4-91
E 100)           approximately
                 one quarter mile
                 north of Myers
                 Road (S 400)
Camden Drive     Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-13  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
Capstone Court   Brookstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2018-05  1-22-18
                 Subdivision
Courtz Court     Waterstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-20  11-23-20
                 Subdivision
Deertrail Court  Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
                 All portions in
Deerwood Court   Ohio Township    20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2011-09  10-10-11
                 (Linwood
                 Subdivision)
                 From its
                 intersection
                 with State
East 525         Highway 161 and  35 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1992-20  7-27-92
                 State Route 62
                 to the Spencer
                 County line
                 From the
                 intersection of
                 East 1000 Road
East 1000 Road   and Lincoln      35 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1992-20  7-27-92
                 Trail Road
                 (North 600) to
                 the Spencer
                 County line
Eastwick Drive   Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-13  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
                 From the
Elberfeld Road   railroad track
(N 800)          crossing to the  40 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1991-2   1-28-91
                 Warrick County
                 line
Epworth Road     From County Road
(W 1050)         S 300 to County  45 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2009-11  6-8-09
                 Road S 200
                 All portions in
Estate Drive     Ohio Township    20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2011-09  10-10-11
                 (Linwood
                 Subdivision)
Fall Creek Drive Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Fieldwood Court  Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
Folsomville      From the
Highway (E 400,  Boonville city   40 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1990-28  12-26-90
N 650)           limits to State
                 Road 68
                 From County Road
                 W 100 (Eby Road)
                 to 1,000 feet
Folsomville Road west of County   45 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2011-09  10-10-11
                 Road N 600
                 (Lincoln Trail
                 Road)
                 From 1,000 feet
                 west of County
                 Road N 600                   BC Ord. 1989-2-  2-27-89; 10-10-
Folsomville Road (Lincoln Trail   30 m.p.h.   B; Am. BC Res.   11
                 Road) to County              2011-09
                 Road N 700
                 (Gentry Road)
                 From County Road
Folsomville Road N 700 (Gentry    45 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2011-09  10-10-11
                 Road) to State
                 Road 68
Foxmoor Drive    Fieldstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-12  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
Foxmoore Court   Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
Foxwood Court    Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
Glennbrooke      Fieldstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-12  9-13-21
Drive            Subdivision
Hannah Court     Waterstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-20  11-23-20
                 Subdivision
Hawthorne Drive  Fieldstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-12  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
                 From the
                 intersection of
                 Heim Road and
                 Inderrieden Road
Heim Road (North (West 700)       35 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1992-20  7-27-92
50)              westerly to its
                 intersection
                 with Stevenson
                 State Road (West
                 1025)
                 From State Road
Heritage Drive   66 to Martin     30 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1984-7   5-7-84
                 Road
Imperial Drive   Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Jenwood Court    Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
                 From its
                 intersection
                 with Yankeetown
Kaiser Road      Highway to its   30 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1989-8   6-5-89
                 intersection
                 with Indiana
                 State Highway 61
                 From State Road
                 61 east
                 approximately
                 one-half mile to
Kaiser Road (S   the centerline
500)             of the Southern  20 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1991-6   2-4-91
                 Railroad tracks,
                 commonly known
                 as Yankeetown
                 Dock Corporation
                 railroad tracks
                 From Yankeetown
                 Highway west
Kaiser Road      approximately
(S 500)          one-half mile to 20 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1991-6   2-4-91
                 the center lien
                 of Taylor Road
                 (W 250)
Kaiser Road      From State Road
(S 500)          61 to County     30 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2009-9   4-27-09
                 Road (W 250)
                 From its
                 beginning at
                 State Road 261
                 to its
Lakeridge Drive  intersection     25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2015-07  5-26-15
                 with Woodbridge
                 Drive in the
                 Lakeridge
                 Subdivision
Lakefield Drive  Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
Limestone Court  Brookstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2018-05  1-22-18
                 Subdivision
                 From the
Lincoln Trail    intersection of
Road             State Road 161   35 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1992-20  7-27-92
(North 600)      East to the
                 intersection of
                 East 1000 Road
Mansfield Drive  Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Marble Court     Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Marble Drive     Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
                 Brookstone
                 Subdivision,
                 that portion
Megan Drive      that lies        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2018-05  1-22-18
                 between
                 Brookstone Drive
                 and Oak Grove
                 Road
Megan Drive      Waterstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-20  11-23-20
                 Subdivision
Merimac Drive    Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Midway Drive     Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Miranda Drive    Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
                 From the
                 northern city
North Road       limits of the    40 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1995-23  12-11-95
                 Town of
                 Elberfeld to
                 State Road 68
                 From the
                 intersection of
Oak Grove Road   Libbert Road     50 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2014-08  10-13-14
                 westerly to the
                 intersection of
                 Epworth Road
                 From Bell Road
Outer Lincoln    westerly to the
Avenue           Warrick/         35 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2014-07  5-27-14
                 Vanverburgh
                 County line
Overland Drive   Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Park Boulevard   Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-13  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
                 From County Road
                 N/S 0 (Maple
Pelzer Road      Grove Road) to   40 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2011-09  10-10-11
                 County Road S
                 300 (New Hope
                 Road)
                 Where not                    BC Ord. 1985-6;
Pelzer Road      otherwise        30 m.p.h.   Am. BC Res.      2-4-85; 10-10-11
                 specified in                 2011-09
                 this schedule
Penrose Drive    Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Ridgeview Avenue Greer Township   20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2013-03  1-28-13
River Ridge      River Ridge      20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2015-10  10-26-15
Drive            Subdivision
                 That portion
                 that lies
Roeder Road      between Wethers  40 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2018-06  1-22-18
                 Road and Bridge
                 263
                 From its
                 beginning at
                 Telephone Road
                 to its
Sandal Way       intersection     20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2015-09  7-27-15
                 with Sandalwood
                 Drive in the
                 Sandals
                 Subdivision
Sandstone Court  Brookstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2018-05  1-22-18
                 Subdivision
Shilo Road       Boonville        30 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2017-11  4-10-17
Stonegarden Lane Fieldstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-12  9-13-21
                 Subdivision
                 Between Ande
Taylor Drive     Drive and Park   20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2016-03  1-25-16
                 Place Drive
Tecumseh Drive   Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
Telephone Road   From Bell Road
(S 200)          (W 850) to State 40 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1990-28  12-26-90
                 Road 62
                 From County Road
Telephone Road   (W 1050) to      50 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2009-12  6-8-09
(S 200)          County Road (W
                 900)
                 Located east of
                 Bell Road in
Terrace Drive    Newburgh,        20 m.p.h    BC Res. 2016-11  11-14-16
                 Warrick County,
                 IN
Titan Drive      Ohio Township    25 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2012-11  7-9-12
                 From the
                 intersection
                 with Vann Road
Treemont Drive   to the           20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2014-09  10-27-14
                 intersection
                 with Kingston
                 Drive
                 From the
                 intersection of
                 Vanada Road
                 (West 550) and
Vanada Road      State Highway 66
(West 550)       to the           35 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1992-20  7-27-92
                 intersection of
                 Vanada Road
                 (West 550) and
                 Ferstel Road
                 (South 600)
Waterstone Drive Waterstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-20  11-23-20
                 Subdivision
                 Between New                  B.C. Res. 2021-
Weyerbacher Road Harmony Road and 45 m.p.h.   15               10-25-21
                 Stanley Road
White Chapel     Berkshire        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2021-13  9-13-21
Drive            Subdivision
Woodfield Court  Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
Woodfield Drive  Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
Woodland Springs Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
Drive            Subdivision
Woodmore Court   Woodfield        20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-11  7-27-20
                 Subdivision
                 From County Road
Yankeetown Road  S 75 (Rudolph    45 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2011-09  10-10-11
                 Road) to State
                 Road 66
                 From the
                 Boonville city
                 limits to Red                BC Ord. 1990-28;
Yankeetown Road  Brush Road (S    40 m.p.h.   Am. BC Res.      12-26-90; 10-10-
(W 200, 250)     650) except as               2011-09          11
                 otherwise
                 specified in
                 this schedule
Yorkridge Drive                  20 m.p.h.   BC Ord. 1990-24  8-27-90
Zachary Court    Waterstone       20 m.p.h.   BC Res. 2020-20  11-23-20
                 Subdivision
 
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this schedule shall be fined in
any amount not to exceed $500.
SCHEDULE II. WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or move, or for the
owner to cause or knowingly permit to be operated on the county highways
designated below, any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a total gross
weight in excess of ten tons, or 20,000 pounds.
   (B)   When a person is apprehended operating or causing to be operated a
vehicle or combination of vehicles on the described highways with a weight in
excess of the limitation set out below, the vehicle or combination of vehicles
shall be detained until its weight is so reduced to comply with the said
limitation. The vehicle or combination of vehicles shall, while detained, be
kept in the custody of a law enforcement officer and shall be moved only as
directed by the officer having custody or by direction of the circuit or
superior court.
Road Name From To Ord. No. Date Passed
Road Name        From             To               Ord. No.         Date Passed
Ashby Lane       Ashby Road       Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Austill Road     Ellis Road       Nickens Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Baker Road       Jenner Road      State Road 261   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Barchett Road    State Road 161   County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Barnett Chapel   Stanley Road     Meinert Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Barren Fork Road Ashby Road       Folsomville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Baseline Road    St. Johns        Couny line       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Bawel Road       Tennyson Road    Dusty Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Beardsley Road   Dale Road        Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Bell Road        Telephone Road   Herr Road        BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Besing Road      State Road 68    Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Bethany Church   Yankeetown Road  Flemming Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Boner Road       Red Brush Road   Eble Road        BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Bracher Road     Decker Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Brooks Road      Dale Road        Lincoln Trail    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
Brown Chapel     Rockport Road    New Hope Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Brumley Road     Sharon Road      Lincoln Avenue   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Brush Creek Road Leslie Road      Taylorville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Bullocktown Road New Hope Road    Rockport Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Bullocktown Road County line      New Hope Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Bussing Road     Roeder Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Byers Road       State Road 161   Simpson Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Cardinal Lane    Brown Chapel     Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Carey Road       Jenkinsville     Tennyson Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Castle Garden    Jenner Road      Gardner Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road                              (cha)
Center Road      State Road 261   Dead end (south) BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Center Road      State Road 261   State Road 62    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Chinn Road       Yellow Banks     County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Trail
Clutter Road     Putnam Lane      Humphrey Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Coles Creek Road State Road 68    County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Coles Creek Road Jockey Road      Ebenezer Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Dale Road        State Road 161   County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Darlington Road  Old State Road   Frontage Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 66               Alcoa
Decker Road      State Road 62    Rockport Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Deer Run Court   Baker Road       Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Degonia Road     Boonville        Otter Creek      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Doerner Road     Petersburg Road  County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Dusty Road       Bawel Road       Two Story Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Eames Station    State Road 62    Phillips Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Eames Station    Lincoln Trail    Hadley Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road             Road (dead end)
Easley Road      State Road 161   Robinson Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Ebenezer Road    Scales Road      Coles Creek Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Eble Road        Boner Road       Pigeon Valley    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
Eby Road         Hart Road        Folsomville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Elberfeld Road   Susott Road      St. Johns Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Ellersbusch Road State Road 662   Willow Pond Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 (new)
Ellis Road       Austill Road     Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Elpers Road      Dale Road        Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Epworth Road                                     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Eskew Road       State Road 61    Boonville city   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  limits
Farley Road      State Street     Edwards Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Fehd Road        Fisherville Road New Harmony Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Flemming Road    Pelzer Road      Pigeon Valley    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
Folsomville
Degonia Road -
Shelton Road     From Degonia     To Folsomville   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
(County Road E
300, N 400, E
400)
Folsomville Road Boonville city   Old State        BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 limits north     Highway 68
Forest Lake      Polk Road        Johnson Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Drive
Fox Chase Court  York Drive       Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Franz Road       Shelton Road     State Road 62    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Friendship Road  State Road 68    Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Frog Pond Road   State Road 62    Tennyson Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Fuquay Road      County Road 50   State Road 261   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 south
Gander Road      New Harmony Road Gander Cemetery  BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
Gardner Road     State Road 261   Old Plank Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Gemlich Road     Pelzer Road      Bullocktown Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Gentry Road      Ashby Road       Ellis Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
German Church    State Road 61    Schmidt Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road                              (Pike)
Geyer Road       Rockport Road    Two Story Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Geyer Road       Two Story Road   Decker Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Geyer Road       Decker Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Geyer Road       State Road 161   Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Godeke Road      Trautvetter Road Schultz Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Gore Road        Clutter Road     State Road 61    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Greenbriar Road  State Road 61    Mottley Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Hadley Road      State Road 161   Hunt Trail Road  BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Hachmeister Road
(County Road E.  Degonia Road     Tennyson Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
150)
Heim Road        Stevenson        Vanderburgh      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Station          county line
Heritage Drive   State Road 66    Martin Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Hewins Road      McCool Road      Edwards Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Hidden Trail     Dead end         Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Court
Hidden Trail     Crowville Road   Hidden Trail     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Drive                             Court
Hiible Road      Tennyson Road    Phillips Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Hills Road       Yankeetown Road  Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Hills Access     Hills Road       State Road 66    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Hoffman Road     Vann Road        Wethers Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Holder Hill Road State Road 61    Lilly Pad Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Holland Road     State Road 68    County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Honeysuckle      Johnson Road     Forest Lake      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Drive                             Drive
Humphrey Road    Clutter Road     Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Hunt Trail Road  Taylorville Road Hadley Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Inderreiden Road From County Road Chandler town    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 C. 400 south     limits
Jenksinville     Two Story Road   Smith Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Jenner Road      Baker Road       State Road 61    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Jessica Lane     Seiler Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Jockey Road      Folsomville Road Taylorville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Johnson Road     Two Story Road   Folsomville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Kaiser Road      State Road 61    Yankeetown Road  BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 From Stevenson   Vanderburgh
Kansas Road      Station -        county line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Elberfeld Road
Kayelea Way      Seiler Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Kelly Road       State Road 61    Eby Road         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Kelly Road       Folsomville Road Old Kelly Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Kelly Road       Folsomville Road Smith Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Kelly Road       Folsomville      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Degonia Road
Kost Road        Beck Road        Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Lake Shore Drive Millersburg Road Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
North
Lerch Road       Old State Road   Red Brush Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 66
Libbert Road     Telephone Road   Warrick Trail    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Lilly Pad Road   Stanley Road     Meinert Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Lilly Pad Road   State Road 68    Newman Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Lincoln Avenue   State Road 66    State Road 61    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Lincoln Trail    East of State    Wire Road (E     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road             Highway 161      800)
Long Lake Drive  Forest Lake      Smith Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Drive
Lost Hill Road   Heim Road        Titzer Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Lost Trail Lane  Eble Road        Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Lynn Road        Eby Road         Rice School Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Madden Road      Turpin Hill Road Holder Hill Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 0.10 miles west
Manger Road      of Pigeon Valley Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Marshall Road    Taylorville Road State Road 68    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Martin Road      Lincoln Avenue   Sharon Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Marx Road        Stanley Road     Peckinpaw Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Marx Road        Newman Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Maurer Road      State Road 62    Old Tennyson     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
Maxville Road    State Road 161   Winsett Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
McClary Road     Taylorville Road State Road 161   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
McNeely Road     Scales Road      Folsomville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Meadowlark Hill  Stevenson        Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road             Station Road
Meinert Road     Lilly Pad Road   Weyerbacher Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Metzger Road     Rockport Road    Bracher Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Miller Cemetery  State Street     Weyerbacher Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Miller Road      Dale Road        Sycamore Corner  BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
Millersburgh     Boonville city   State Street     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road             limits
Mt. Pleasant     Davidson Road    Weibe Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Myers Road       Pigeon Valley    Bullocktown Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
New Harmony Road State Road 61    Vanderburgh      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  County line
New Hope Road    Lashbrook Road   Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Newman Road      Besing Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Nickens Road     Folsomville Road Kelly Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Nobles Chapel    North Road       Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
North Line Road  State Road 68    County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
North Road       Elberfeld        State Road 68    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Oak Grove Road   State Road 261   Wethers Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Oak Tree Drive   Center Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Old Plank Road                                   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Old State Road   Yankeetown Road  County limits    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
66
Parklane Drive   Tennyson Road    Degonia Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Peckinpaw Road   Marx Road        Lilly Pad Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Pelzer Road      Maple Grove Road New Hope Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Penila Drive     Bethany Church   Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Petersburg Road  Lynnville city   Schmidt Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 limits           (Pike)
Phillips Road
(County Road N.  Folsomville Road State Road 161   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
475)
Pigeon Switch    Wire Road        County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Pigeon Valley    Eble Road        New Hope Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Polk Road        Jenkinsville     Folsomville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Pollack Avenue                                   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
(S. 600, W. 975)
Red Brush Road                                   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
(S. 650)
Robinson Road    Easley Road      State Road 161   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Rockport Road    Pelzer Road      Metz Road        BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Roth Road        State Road 62    Degonia Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Rudolph Road (S. Yankeetown Road  State Highway 61 BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
75)
Russel Road      Gardner Road     Old Plank Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Sawmill Road     State Road 68    County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Scales Road      Barren Fork Road Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Schultz Road     Godeke Road      Ditney Hill Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Seiler Road      Red Brush Road   Eble Road        BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Selvin Road      County line      Ash Street       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Selvin Cemetery  State Road 68    Selvin Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Seven Hills Road County line      Lilly Pad Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Sharon Road      State Road 61    Anderson Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Shelton Road
(County Road N.  Folsomville Road Smith Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
400)
Simpson Road     Hadley Road      Byers Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Skelton Road     Tennyson Road    Lincoln Trail    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
Smith Road       Tennyson Road    Folsomville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Somerville Road  German Church    County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Spring Lake      Edwards Road     Lake Shore Drive BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Drive                             north
Spurgeon Road
(County Road N.  State Road 68    State Road 61    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
1200, W. 225, N.
1225, W. 200)
Square Deal Mine Old State Road   Crowville Road   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road             61
Squaw Creek Road Millersburg Road State Road 62    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Stanley Road     Elberfeld city   Weyerbacher Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 limits
                                  Southerly to the
                 From the         corporate limits
State Road 61    intersection of  of the city of   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 State Road 61    Boonville,
                 and Shelton Road approximately
                                  1.57 miles
State Street     Miller Cemetery  Millersburgh     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road             Road
Stevenson
Station-
Elberfeld Road
(County Road W.  Heim Road        Elberfeld        BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
1025, N. 75, W.
1075, W. 1100,
N. 450, W. 1125,
N. 625, W. 1100)
Stone Road       Beardsley Road   State Road 161   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Susott Road      Seven Hills Road Stanley Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Tanglewood Drive Telephone Road   Sandalwood Drive BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Taylorville Road McClary Road     Marshall Road    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Tecumseh Road    State Road 61    Eby Road         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Telephone Road                                   BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
(S. 200)
Tennyson Road    Boonville city   Folsomville      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 limits           Degonia Road
Trails End Road  Baker Road       Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Tuley Road       Dale Road        Stone Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Turpin Hill Road Weyerbacher Road State Road 61    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Turtle Bay Road  Bethany Church   Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Twin Lakes Drive Welte Road       Fisherville Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Two Story Road   Metzger Road     Johnson Road     BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Vincennes Road   Yellow Banks     County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Trail
Warner Road      Red Brush Road   Sharon Road      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Warricktown Road Tow Path Road    Inderrieden Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Weibe Road       Mt. Pleasant     State Road 68    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Welte Road       Twin Lakes Drive Ashbury Cemetery BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
West Baughs      Baugh Drive      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Drive
Weyerbacher Road Miller Cemetery  County line      BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Wheatonville     County line      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Road
Willow Pond      Grimm Road       Frame Road       BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Drive
Wilzbacher Road  Millersburgh     Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                 Road
Wire Road        Phillips Road    Lincoln Trail    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
                                  Road
Yankeetown       Boonville city   Little Pigeon    BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Highway (W. 200) limits           Creek
                 From its
                 intersection
                 with County Road
                 N. 1300 north to
Yellow Banks     the Pike county                  BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Trail            line which road
                 is part of the
                 road commonly
                 called Yellow
                 Banks Road
York Drive       Center Road      Dead end         BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
Zoar Church Road Kansas Road      New Harmony Road BC Ord. 2021- 27 8-9-21
 
   (C)   Any person who violates this schedule shall be fined in an amount not
to exceed $2,500 per occurrence.
   (D)   Farm machinery and grain transport vehicles are exempted from the
20,000 pounds weight limit restriction limited to that portion of Epworth Road
north of S.R. 66 and to its intersection with S.R. 62.
(Am. BC Ord. 2011-25, passed 9-12-11; Am. BC Ord. 2020-34, passed 12-28-20; Am.
BC Ord. 2021-22, passed 5-24-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021-27, passed 8-9-21)
CHAPTER 73: OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Section
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Use and operation on county roads and highways
   
73.03   Registration requirements
   
73.04   Headlights, taillights, brakes and pennant
   
73.05   Statutory restrictions on use
   
73.06   Duties in event of accident
   
73.07   Liability insurance
   
73.08   Possession of registration and certificate of insurance
   
73.09   Restriction on operation between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   
73.10   Other laws and regulations
   
73.11   Disturbance of roadway
   
73.12   Emergencies
   
73.13   Enforcement
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATV ROADS. All country roads and highways outside of any town or city,
except “Restricted Roads”.
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE.
      (1)   For purposes of I.C. 14-16-1, means a motor driven vehicle of at
least four wheels capable of cross-country travel:
         (a)   Without benefit of a road; and
         (b)   On or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland,
or other natural terrain.
      (2)   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE does not include a snowmobile, any other vehicle
properly registered by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, any watercraft that is
registered under Indiana statutes, or a golf cart vehicle.
   OPERATOR. An OPERATOR of an off-road vehicle must be at least 18 years of
age and possess a valid driver’s license pursuant to I.C. 14-16-1-20(c).
   RESTRICTED ROADS.
      (1)   Those roads and highways in the following described area of the
county: Starting the point of beginning, being a point at the southwestern
corner of Warrick County, which is a point formed by the intersection of the
Ohio River and the western boundary of the county; then running in a northernly
direction along the western border of Warrick County to State Road 62; then
running east along State Road 62 to State Road 61; then running south along
State Road 61 to State Road 66, and then directly south to the Ohio River; then
running in a westerly direction along the Ohio River to the Point of Beginning.
      (2)   Yankeetown Road from the Boonville city limits to State Road 66.
      (3)   Any road or highway posted by the Board of Commissioners or its
designee for non-use by off-road vehicles.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09)
§ 73.02 USE AND OPERATION ON COUNTY ROADS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Operators of off-road vehicles may use ATV roads, as those terms are
defined in §
73.01, subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
   (B)   Off-road vehicles may not be operated on restricted roads, except that
farmers may operate off- road vehicles, for farm production purposes, on ATV
roads or restricted roads.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-road vehicles must be registered under I.C. 14-16-1-8, as amended.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 HEADLIGHTS, TAILLIGHTS, BRAKES AND PENNANT.
   The off-road vehicle must meet those standards of headlights, taillights,
and brakes required under I.C. 14-16-1-21. In addition, the off-road vehicle
operated on a county roadway or highway pursuant to this chapter must have an
orange pennant or flag at least 12 inches but not more than 24 inches long,
affixed to a staff or pole measuring at least four feet but not more than 10
feet in height. The pole or staff height shall be measured from the top of the
seat.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 STATUTORY RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   Nothing in this chapter modifies, alters or changes the restrictions on
operation established under I.C. 14-16-1-23.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09)
§ 73.06 DUTIES IN EVENT OF ACCIDENT.
   Nothing in this chapter modifies, alters or changes the duties under I.C.
14-16-1-24 placed on the operator of an off-road vehicle in the event of an
accident.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09)
§ 73.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   An operator operating an off-road vehicle on a county highway or roadway
shall have liability insurance specifically for such off-road vehicle in
accordance with the minimum insurance required for the operation of other motor
vehicles on public highways, in the minimum amount of $25,000 per person/
$50,000 per accident.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 POSSESSION OF REGISTRATION AND CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.
   Any operator of an off-road vehicle shall carry on his or her person any
registration required under I.C. 14-16-1 and the certificate of insurance
required under this chapter for the off-road vehicle being operated.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 RESTRICTION ON OPERATION BETWEEN 10:00 P.M. AND 6:00 A.M.
   In furtherance of the restriction established under I.C. 14-16-1-23(a)(7)
prohibiting the operation of off- road vehicles within 100 feet of a dwelling
between midnight and 6:00 a.m., an off-road vehicle may not be operated on any
county roads or highways, outside the corporate limits of any town or city,
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09)
§ 73.10 OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter modifies, alters or changes the requirements of the
operation of vehicles on public roadways in Indiana, and all operators of off-
road vehicles must obey and follow all rules and regulations applicable to the
operation of vehicles on roadways in Indiana.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09)
§ 73.11 DISTURBANCE OF ROADWAY.
   No person shall operate an off-road vehicle on Warrick County highways in
such a manner which causes damage to the roadway or highway or disturbs the
surface of the roadway or highway. Any violator of this section, in addition to
such penalties set forth in §
73.99 below, shall be responsible for all costs of repair of such damage or
disturbance.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.12 EMERGENCIES.
   Any county or state law enforcement officer may prohibit operation of an
off-road vehicle on a county highway or roadway during emergencies.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09)
§ 73.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   All law enforcement officers in the county shall have the power and it shall
be their duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise
prevented by state statutes regarding the enforcement of state laws.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined pursuant to the
following schedule:
      (1)   First offense in a calendar year: $50.
      (2)   Second offense in a calendar year: $100.
      (3)   Third offense in a calendar year: $150.
   (B)   Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
(BC Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-18-09)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   ROADS AND HIGHWAYS
         
APPENDIX A:   APPLICATION TO WORK IN COUNTY ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 90: EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Section
   
90.01   Establishment of fee; state law controlling
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Monthly fee; service supplier fee
   
90.04   Remittal of fee; commencement of collection
   
90.05   Establishment of fund
   
90.06   Use of fees
   
90.07   Delinquent fee report
§ 90.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE; STATE LAW CONTROLLING.
   (A)   Under the authority of and subject to the provisions of I.C. 36-8-16
an emergency telephone system fee is hereby established for the funding of the
installation and operation of the enhanced emergency telephone system in the
county. The fee shall be collected from the telephone service users of Warrick
County, Indiana, and administered in accordance with I.C. 36-8-16 and the
following terms as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter shall be applied, construed and administered in
accordance with I.C. 36-8-16. In the event that I.C. 36-8-16 shall be amended
by the State of Indiana in such a manner as to become inconsistent and in
conflict with the provisions hereof, this chapter shall be amended to include
and adopt the amendatory provisions of I.C. 36-8-16 as if the same were fully
incorporated herein.
(CC Res. 1996-9, passed 9-5-96)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY ACCESS FACILITY. The access from a particular service user's
premises to a telephone system, which shall include an access line; a private
branch exchange (PBX) trunk; a centrex line trunk equivalent all of which are
provided by the service supplier; and a mobile telephone system access trunk,
whether the trunk is provided by a telephone system or a radio common carrier.
The term does not include a service supplier owned and operated telephone pay
station line; a wide area telecommunications service (WATS); a foreign exchange
(F) line; or an incoming only line.
   ENHANCED EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM. A telephone system that uses the three
digit 911 number to send automatic number identification and automatic location
identification for reporting police, fire, medical or other emergency
situations.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER. A person who provides exchange telephone service to a
service user.
   SERVICE USER. A person to whom exchange telephone service is provided.
(CC Res. 1996-9, passed 9-5-96)
§ 90.03 MONTHLY FEE; SERVICE SUPPLIER FEE.
   (A)   A monthly fee of $1.83 per telephone access line or other exchange
access facility shall be collected by the service supplier for each month or
part of a month an exchange access facility is in service as a part of its
normal billing process.
   (B)   Each service supplier that collects the enhanced emergency telephone
system fee on behalf of the county shall be entitled to a 3% administrative fee
as compensation for collecting the monthly fee.
(CC Res. 1996-9, passed 9-5-96)
§ 90.04 REMITTAL OF FEE; COMMENCEMENT OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Each service supplier shall remit all monthly fees collected, except
for the 3% administrative fee, to the County Treasurer, within ten days of the
last day of each calendar-year quarter. At the same time the fees are remitted,
the service supplier shall provide a fee collection report to the County
Auditor on a form approved or provided by the Auditor.
   (B)   Each service supplier shall commence collection of the enhanced
emergency telephone system fee as soon as is administratively practicable after
the effective date of this chapter.
(CC Res. 1996-9, passed 9-5-96)
§ 90.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND.
   The County Treasurer shall establish a separate fund for the deposit of
collected fees. The fund shall be known as “The Warrick County Enhanced
Emergency Telephone System Fund.” All fees remitted by the service supplier
shall be deposited in said fund. The County Treasurer may invest said money in
said fund in the same manner that other money of the county may be invested.
All income earned from such investments shall be deposited in said fund.
(CC Res. 1996-9, passed 9-5-96)
§ 90.06 USE OF FEES.
   (A)   The fees imposed in the Enhanced Emergency Telephone System Fund shall
be used only for the payment of the following:
      (1)   The lease, purchase, or maintenance of enhanced emergency telephone
equipment, including necessary computer hardware, software, and data base
provisioning;
      (2)   The rates associated with the service suppliers' enhanced emergency
telephone system network services; and
      (3)   The personnel expenses of the emergency telephone system.
   (B)   The County Council may appropriate money in the fund only for such
expenditures.
(CC Res. 1996-9, passed 9-5-96)
§ 90.07 DELINQUENT FEE REPORT.
   During January of each year, each service supplier that collects the fee for
the county shall provide the County Treasurer with a delinquent fee report. The
service supplier shall list the name and address of each service user who is
two or more months delinquent in paying the fee. The service supplier shall
also indicate the amount of delinquent fees for which each person included on
the list is liable.
(CC Res. 1996-9, passed 9-5-96)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Policy statement
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Unlawful practice
   
91.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
91.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
91.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
91.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
91.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
91.09   Equal access to housing in HUD programs
   
91.10   Exemptions
   
91.11   Administrative enforcement
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of Warrick County to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the Federal Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12- 12-16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2).
   COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-
9-1-4, et. seq. (I.C. 22-9.5-2-3).
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6 (I.C. 22-9.5-2-4).
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
91.04 through
91.08 of this chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of
such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person. The
protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status
shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of
such family being further defined above under FAMILIAL STATUS.
   HANDICAP. 
      (1)   With respect to a person means:
         (a)   Physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of such person’s major life activities,
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; and
         (e)   Any other impairment defined in 910 IAC 2-3.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802 and 910 IAC
2-3-2(14); nor does the term HANDICAP include an individual solely because that
individual is a transvestite 910 IAC 2-3-2(14).
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code, receivers, and
fiduciaries (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11).
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant (I.C. 22-
9.5-2-13).
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2012-25, passed 8-27-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2016-31, passed 12-12-16; Am. BC Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) of this §
91.09 of this chapter and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against
discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and
in §
91.04 of this chapter shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) and I.C. 22-9.5-3.
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section, nothing in
§
91.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24 month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
91.04(C) of this chapter, but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use
of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B), a person shall be deemed to be in
the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or
rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12-12- 16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   (A)   As made applicable by §
91.03 and except as exempted by §§
91.03(B) and
91.09, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.
      (3)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination.
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   That buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (7)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
         (a)   That person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (8)   For purposes of this division, discrimination includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on
the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13,1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that;
            1.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               A.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               B.   Light, switches, electrical outlets , thermostats, and
other environmental controls in accessible locations; and
               C.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (B)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for Buildings
and Facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped
people (commonly cited as “ANSI A117.1”) suffices to satisfy the requirements
of paragraph (A)(8)(c)3.C.
   (C)   Nothing in this division requires that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health of
safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12-12- 16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term residential real estate-related
transaction means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12-12- 16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the
terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12- 12-16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in
the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by §§
91.03 through
91.06 of this chapter.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12- 12-16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin and because he is or has been selling,
purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for
the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or
applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility
relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A); or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
   (C)   Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons
to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the activities,
services, organizations or facilities described in division (A), or
participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of
the opportunity to participate shall be fined according to local, state and
Federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000
or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be
subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12- 12-16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.09 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.
   Pursuant to 24 CFR Part 5.403 and 24 CFR Part 574.3 the definition of
"family" is revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived
sexual orientation, gender identity, or marital status of its members.
(BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12-12- 16; Am. BC Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, “housing for
older persons” means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or Federal program that the Secretary of
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the State Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly person (as defined in the state or Federal program); or
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12-12- 16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.11 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) hereof shall be vested in the Chief Elected Official of Warrick
County, Indiana.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, Warrick County,
Indiana, because of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under the
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
articles of this chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights Commission
for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the Chief
Elected Official of Warrick County, Indiana, shall refer all said complaints to
the Commission as provided for under division (A) to said Commission for
purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided for
under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of Warrick County, Indiana,
shall administer their departments, programs and activities relating to housing
and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the Chief Elected Official and the Commission
to further such purposes.
   (D)   The Chief Elected Official of Warrick County, Indiana, or the Chief
Elected Official's designee, shall provide information on remedies available to
any aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 2016-31, passed 12-12- 16; Am. BC
Ord. 2017-01, passed 1-23-17)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates the provisions of §
91.08 shall be fined according to local, state and federal law; and if bodily
injury or death results shall be fined not more than $2,500.
(BC Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-22-95)
CHAPTER 92: ROADS AND HIGHWAYS
Section
Road Names Index
   
92.01   Road names index adopted by reference
Restrictions for Private Drives Connection
   
92.10   Permit required; classes
   
92.11   Permit application and fees
   
92.12   Review and approval requirements
   
92.13   Required surety
   
92.14   Exception
   
92.15   Maintenance and repair
Cutting of Rights-of-Way
   
92.25   Permit required
   
92.26   Utility company exception
   
92.27   Application and fee
   
92.28   Issuance of permit
   
92.29   Security; unacceptable restoration
   
92.30   Utility company security
   
92.31   Guarding the work site
   
92.32   Minimum repair requirements
   
92.33   Inspection
Restrictions on Work within Right-of-Way
   
92.45   Permits for work within right-of-way
   
92.46   Permit bonding requirements
   
92.47   Traffic control standards
   
92.48   Guidelines for use of flaggers by utilities and contractors
   
92.49   Standard permit conditions for pole lines and underground cables and
utility lines
   
92.50   Permitted work in county right-of-way
 
   
92.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Application to Work in County Road Right-of-way
ROAD NAMES INDEX
§ 92.01 ROAD NAMES INDEX ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Official Street and Road Index for Warrick County, Indiana, adopted by
the Area Plan Commission on February 13, 1995, is hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this code the same as if set forth in full herein.
(BC Ord. passed 2-13-95; Am. BC Ord. 1995-3, passed 2-22-95; Am. BC Ord. 1997-
03, passed 1-27-97)
RESTRICTIONS FOR PRIVATE DRIVES CONNECTION
§ 92.10 PERMIT REQUIRED; CLASSES.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall construct any private entrance,
driveway, or approach connecting with any highway nor shall any curb along such
highway be cut or removed without a written permit from the County
Commissioners.
   (B)   The permit shall be in two classes. Class I shall be any driveway or
approach that serves commercial or industrial property and shall be designed in
accordance with Indiana Department of Highways Driveway Permit Handbook, 1996
Edition. Class II shall be any driveway or approach that serves residential or
agricultural property.
(BC Ord. 1997-4, passed 4-14-97; Am. BC Ord. 2002-03, passed 2-13-02)
§ 92.11 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   No application will be accepted unless accompanied with a drawing of
the layout of such driveway or approach. The drawing shall be to proper
engineer's scale. Application and drawing shall be filed in triplicate with the
County Area Plan Commission.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee made payable to the
County Area Plan Commission as follows:
      (1)   Class I   $50
      (2)   Class II   $10
   (C)   No part of any filing fee shall be returnable to the applicant.
(BC Ord. 1997-4, passed 4-14-97; Am. BC Ord. 2002-03, passed 2-13- 02)
§ 92.12 REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No permit for a Class I permit shall be issued without review and
approval of the County Highway Engineer. Any application for a Class I drive
must include a dollar amount to cover the cost of the driveway or approach
which must be approved by the County Highway Engineer.
   (B)   No Class II permit shall be issued without review and approval of the
County Highway Engineer.
(BC Ord. 1997-4, passed 4-14-97; Am. BC Ord. 2002-03, passed 2-13-02)
§ 92.13 REQUIRED SURETY.
   A performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, certified check or surety
to the Board of County Commissioners to cover the cost of the driveway or
approach shall be submitted in the amount agreed upon by the County Highway
Engineer. Should surety be required it shall not be for a time limit to exceed
one year. The driveway or approach may be constructed prior to the issuance of
the improvement location permit being issued in place of submitting surety. The
completion must be certified to by the submitting engineer/surveyor and
approved by the County Highway Engineer and County Commissioners. Upon approval
of the driveway or approach, any required funds guaranteeing the cost of the
driveway or approach shall be released upon completion. Should the Board of
County Commissioners find the driveway or approach not built in accordance to
the approved plan, the Board of County Commissioners may secure the funds.
(BC Ord. 1997-4, passed 4-14-97; Am. BC Ord. 2002-03, passed 2-13-02)
§ 92.14 EXCEPTION.
   No Class II permit will be required in the residential subdivisions with
streets with rolled type curbs. In such cases the County Area Plan Commission
shall cause to have fixed the statement “No Driveway Permits Required” to
appear on the plat which has final approval.
(BC Ord. 1997-4, passed 4-14-97; Am. BC Ord. 2002-03, passed 2-13-02)
§ 92.15 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   The owners and occupants of the abutting property shall maintain and keep in
repair all such private entrances, driveways, and approaches thereto, but no
such private entrances, driveway, and approaches shall be constructed or
maintained in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the highway, the
traffic thereon, or with any drain or ditch which has been constructed on or
which serves such highway. Said owner or occupant of the abutting property
shall remove such private entrances, driveways, and approaches at said owner’s
expense, when requested to do so by the County Highway Engineer and Board of
County Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 1997-4, passed 4-14-97; Am. BC Ord. 2002-03, passed 2-13-02)
CUTTING OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 92.25 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No street, highway or highway right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the
county shall be dug up, cut, restricted, closed or removed for any purpose
unless a permit for such action has first been obtained from the county.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91; Am. BC Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-26- 24)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.26 UTILITY COMPANY EXCEPTION.
   Section
92.25 shall not apply to any public utility company when such company is
required to take immediate action to preserve life or property, or, to make an
inspection in an emergency, or, to make an emergency repair. However, such
utility shall acquire the required permit on the first working day after such
work has commenced.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91)
§ 92.27 APPLICATION AND FEE.
   (A)   The application for a permit shall be filed on forms provided by the
county, shall be accompanied by the fee required by this chapter, and shall
designate the method proposed by the applicant to meet the security requirement
of §
92.29.
Appendix A, and the fees described therein, are hereby incorporated into this
chapter and binding on all applicants.
   (B)   There is imposed a permit fee of $250 paid to the county to defray the
cost of processing applications for permits. Each separate location sought to
be dug up, cut or removed shall require a separate application and a separate
fee.
   (C)   All fees, fines and penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall
be deposited into the County Highway Maintenance Fund, Fund 1176, and may be
used by the County Highway Engineer pursuant to all purposes and procedures for
the fund.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91; Am. BC Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-26- 24)
§ 92.28 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Upon compliance with the permit requirements of this chapter and the payment
of the fee required, the County Commissioners shall issue a permit to dig up,
cut or remove the right-of-way, highway and/or sidewalk. Such permit shall
describe the action allowed to be taken, the extent of the disturbance
permitted and the period of time within which the permit is valid. A copy of
said permit shall be retained by the County Commissioners and the permit shall
be kept at the location of the work while work is being undertaken.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91)
§ 92.29 SECURITY; UNACCEPTABLE RESTORATION.
   (A)   Each person, firm or corporation filing an application for a permit
shall provide security to the county, guaranteeing that the area sought to be
disturbed will be restored. Such security may be provided by a two-year
corporate surety bond; irrevocable letter of credit drawn on a bank or trust
company acceptable to the county, such letter of credit to be irrevocable for a
period of two years after the completion of the work; or a cash deposit.
   (B)   The security required shall be equal to the estimated cost of the work
required to restore the disturbed area as required by this subchapter, except
that cash security shall be not less than $500. If the security provided is a
cash deposit, such shall be held by the County Auditor in the street cut fund
for a period of two years after the restoration is completed; shall be
refundable upon certification that the restoration has been completed according
to the requirements of this subchapter; and, has been inspected and accepted by
the county. Such deposit shall be returned without the payment of interest on
the sum by the county.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91; Am. BC Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-26- 24)
§ 92.30 UTILITY COMPANY SECURITY.
   In lieu of the security required by §
92.29, any public utility company may file with the county a bond in the sum of
$50,000 payable so as to indemnify the county for the cost of repair or
restoration of an area, or areas, disturbed by the company.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91; Am. BC Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-26- 24)
§ 92.31 GUARDING THE WORK SITE.
   The person, firm or corporation to whom a permit has been issued, and their
agents, servants or employees working at the site, shall bear the sole
responsibility and expense of guarding the work with necessary barriers,
lights, flagmen or other safety devices which shall be maintained by the
permittee until the work has been completed. The permittee shall indemnify and
hold the county harmless from all loss and damage, including attorney fees
arising out of permittee's work in county's right-of-way.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91)
§ 92.32 MINIMUM REPAIR REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Upon completion of the work the permittee shall refill the trenches or
sub-grade areas with sand, pea-size gravel or crushed white rock of a size
numbered 53, 63 or 73; provided, however, if an area to be filled will not be
covered with street pavement or is a sidewalk, and is not an alley, then the
area shall be filled with sand or dirt. All fill material shall be free of
rubbish and vegetation and shall be compacted throughout in six-inch layers
while being installed. All streets shall, where possible, be restored, under
the pavement area, with at least six inches of concrete and above that a four-
inch final surface of concrete or asphalt. All sidewalks shall be restored with
compacted dirt or aggregate as a base and the sidewalk surface shall be of a
material and design equal to the adjoining undisturbed sidewalk.
   (B)   In all cases where fill has been placed but a final surface has not
yet been completed, the permittee shall lay a suitable temporary surface to
provide for the safe transit of the work area by the public.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91)
§ 92.33 INSPECTION.
   The County Highway Engineer may inspect the work from time to time and shall
inspect the work during filling and final restoration. Such work shall also be
inspected by the county within 30 days before the two-year security period
shall expire. Any deterioration of the repair or restoration other than that
normally anticipated by reasonable use shall be repaired by permittee before
release of the security.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91)
RESTRICTIONS ON WORK WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 92.45 PERMITS FOR WORK WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Permits to allow work within the county road right-of-way shall be
submitted to the County Highway Engineer and Board of Commissioners no later
than one week prior to the next scheduled Commissioners meeting, as posted on
the Board of Commissioners' website and in accordance with state law.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application for permit and prior to commencement
of the proposed work within the road right-of-way, all applicants shall be
required to give a minimum of 24 hours and a maximum of 72 hours notification
prior to beginning of work.
(BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 5-11-98; Am. BC Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-26- 24) Penalty,
see §
92.99
§ 92.46 PERMIT BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All bonds shall name "The Board of Commissioners of the County of
Warrick" as beneficiary of the bond and shall run for a minimum of one year. A
certificate of insurance is not acceptable for bonding purposes. The bond must
name the Board of Commissioners exclusively and not be subordinate to any other
claims against the bond. The bond amount will be set by the Board of
Commissioners. In general, the following are minimum bond amounts that will be
required by the Board of Commissioners. Where there is a higher risk to county
infrastructure, or the permitted work is much larger or more complex than
normal permitted work, the Board of Commissioners reserve the right to increase
the bond requirement after reviewing the application for permit and before
approving the permit. The minimum bonding amounts are as follows:
      (1)   Open road cut: $50,000;
      (2)   Underground construction, grading, trenching or excavation parallel
to the road: $50,000;
      (3)   Push or bore: $50,000;
      (4)   Placement/removal of poles/overhead lines: $50,000;
      (5)   Tap pit (including a directly associated push or bore): $10,000 per
tap pit;
      (6)   House moving: $30,000 per move;
      (7)   Vehicle weight restriction exemption: $40,000 per mile;
      (8)   Maintenance bonds: equal to the initial permit bond amount.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners will allow applicants who intend to file
for multiple permits to have an annual permit bond for utility work in the
county right-of-way. The minimum annual permit bond amount requirement is
currently $75,000. The annual permit bond shall be written so that it
automatically renews, unless the surety gives a written notice 60 days prior to
the annual expiration date. The written notice must be by certified mail to the
Warrick County Board of Commissioners, ATTN: County Administrator.
(BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 5-11-98; 1999-37, passed 10-25-99; Am. BC Ord. 2024-10,
passed 8-26-24) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.47 TRAFFIC CONTROL STANDARDS.
   Anyone performing work within the county road right-of-way must conform with
the requirements set out in the latest edition of the Indiana Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices or the latest edition of the Handbook for Traffic
Control in Construction and Maintenance Areas which is published by HERPICC at
Purdue University. The traffic control procedures must be followed even if a
permit is not required for work in the right-of-way. A permit holder must also
provide all traffic control as set out in the conditions of the permit. A road
must not be completely closed to traffic at any time unless it has been
requested as a part of the permit and a traffic detour plan has been approved
by the Board of Commissioners for Warrick County. When working on a low volume
road, the guidelines in §
92.48 may be used to determine if flaggers are not required on the project.
(BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 5-11-98) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.48 GUIDELINES FOR USE OF FLAGGERS BY UTILITIES AND CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   When traffic lane is fully or partially obstructed by a maintenance or
construction operation, a flagger or flaggers will not be required only when
all of the following are met:
      (1)   The ADT of the given section of road is less than 400 vehicles per
day. If the ADT is not on record at the Warrick Highway Engineering Department,
the County Highway Engineer shall determine if this criterion is met, and:
      (2)   The work zone on any road (except a local residential street) must
be more than 400 feet from an intersection. On local residential streets the
work zone must be greater than 100 feet from an intersection, and;
      (3)   Motorists in both directions can see approaching motorists from the
opposite direction with no sight obstruction. In order for a vehicle to stop,
this means that the motorists shall have an unob- structed view from “d” feet
from their end of the work zone to "d" feet from the far end of the work zone
(where "d" = length of maximum # of cars in storage + distance required for
driver to react + distance required for vehicle to stop), and:
Posted ** Speed d (feet) *
Posted ** Speed d (feet) *
20              310
25              370
30              430
35              495
40              555
45              615
50              670
55              755
 
*   These shall be increased for wet pavement, gravel or on descending grades.
**   Use 55 MPH if not posted.
***   These are guidelines based on the Handbook for Traffic Control - HERPICC,
the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices - 1988 IDOH and the
Handbook of Traffic Control Practices for Low-Volume Roads in Indiana - HERPICC
1984. These are only guidelines and as specified in the manuals, good judgment
should be used in determining when flaggers should be used but may not be
required by these guidelines.
      (4)   The work activity does not create congestion or backup of more than
five vehicles at any time.
   (B)   The work zone shall include all cones making the taper protecting the
actual work area. Traffic control devices, placement of traffic control devices
and requirements for flaggers (including clothing, procedures and locations)
shall be detailed in the HERPICC - Handbook for Traffic Control in Construction
and Maintenance Areas. A lane shall be considered partially obstructed when a
ten-foot lane for each direction of traffic can be maintained.
(BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 5-11-98) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.49 STANDARD PERMIT CONDITIONS FOR POLE LINES AND UNDERGROUND CABLES AND
UTILITY LINES.
   Due to widespread inconsistencies in the location and depth of buried
cables, buried pipes and pole lines, these provisions will be standard
condition of approval of most all utility permits where there is a right-of-way
less than the recommended county thoroughfare plan right-of-way. Plans should
reflect these requirements when submitted for permit approval. These
requirements are necessary due to the limited right-of-way along many of our
county roads and the problems associated with multiple utilities in the right-
of-way. The location of poles and guy anchors in the flowline of ditches and
the insufficient burial depth of cables and pipes has become a major problem
for the County Highway Department when maintaining ditches, shoulders,
installing signs and other safety-related items. Where sufficient right-of-way
exists, utility locations shall be as shown on the standard detail sheets
elsewhere in this manual.
   (A)   Pole lines. All poles shall be located within one foot of the edge of
right-of-way. All new pole installations and guy line locations shall be marked
and notification made to the County Engineering Department a minimum of 96
hours before construction begins. Field adjustments shall be made at the
Superintendent or County Highway Engineer's request for poles and guy lines
presenting drainage and safety problems.
   (B)   Buried cable and utility lines. All buried cables and utility lines
shall be located within two feet of the edge of the right-of-way, with all
pedestals being located a distance of two feet from the edge of right-of-way.
All cables and utility lines shall be located a minimum of 48 inches below
ground level and at least 48 inches below any drainage structure. Any variances
shall be requested in writing and have explicit written approval by the County
Highway Engineer. This requirement is needed to allow for the installation of
signs and guardrail, and the maintenance and reestablishment of roadside
ditches. If the permittee does not install his or her cables or lines at this
depth, he or she shall waive all rights to damages incurred to his or her lines
or cables made by the County Highway Department or its contractors during its
routine maintenance activities and the installation of guardrail at hazardous
locations.
   (C)   All permits. Any permittee or permittee's contractor who cuts an
underground drain tile, whether or not it appears to be abandoned, shall notify
the County Engineering Department immediately upon cutting the tile. The
permittee shall then repair the tile as directed by the inspector.
(BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 5-11-98; Am. BC Ord. 1999-37, passed 10- 25-99; Am. BC
Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-26-24) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.50 PERMITTED WORK IN COUNTY RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions apply only to this subchapter
of the Warrick County Ordinance. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY. A situation where there is an immediate need to perform repair
work on an existing utility service which has been interrupted or damaged, and
where the failure to perform such work would result in an immediate danger to
life or property.
   CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. Those items commonly used in the construction of
roads, buildings, landscaping and the like, including, but not limited to,
stone, gravel, soil, mulch, timbers, brick, block, trusses, lumber, sod and the
like.
   (B)   All persons who desire to perform construction operations or other
work within the county's right-of-way shall, prior to start of construction,
apply for and receive approval from the Board of Commissioners or its designee.
Permit application forms, supplied by the Board of Commissioners Office or the
Highway Engineering Department, and related exhibits shall be submitted to the
Highway Department, to be reviewed and approved by the appropriate agencies as
specified by the County Commissioners.
   (C)   In the event of an emergency, the repairs of a utility may be
undertaken without first receiving a permit. However, in an emergency
situation, the entity making the emergency repairs must notify the County
Engineering Department as soon as possible. In the event of an emergency during
non-work hours, a faxed notification must be made to the Board of Commissioners
or County Highway Engineer as soon as possible on a county-supplied form. A
regular permit must be filed with the Highway Engineering Department within 72
hours of the time the work is begun in an emergency situation. Any work
completed as emergency work that does not meet the definition of emergency as
set out in this section is a violation of this section; any work completed
without a permit when one is required is also a violation of this section.
   (D)   Any applicant, as required by the County Board of Commissioners, shall
provide a permit bond running to "The Board of Commissioners of Warrick County"
in an amount designated by the County Commissioners. The bond shall not expire
in less than one year. Prior to the release of any permit bond, the County
Highway Engineer will require inspections during and at the completion of
construction. The bond shall insure that the applicant on the permit will
complete all permitted work in accordance with the requirements of this section
of the County Ordinance and any other applicable sections of the County
Ordinance. In the event a permit bond expires or the bond company cancels the
permit bond and all work authorized by any permits already issued using the
permit bond have not been completed and the County Board of Commissioners has
not released the bond, then the bond shall become immediately due and payable
to the County Board of Commissioners. Applicants who desire to do so may post
an annual or continuous permit bond for utility work in an amount designated by
the County Commissioners. An annual or continuous permit bond may not be used
for drive or public road approach permits. In the event an annual or continuous
permit bond expires or the bond company cancels the annual or continuous permit
bond and all work authorized by any permits already issued using the annual or
continuous permit bond has not been completed and the County Board of
Commissioners has not released the bond, then the bond shall become immediately
due and payable to the County Board of Commissioners. At the discretion of the
Highway Engineer, a maintenance bond may be required from an applicant as a
condition of approval or as a condition of releasing the permit bond. A utility
company having a certificate of authority or franchise issued by the Indiana
Utility Regulatory Commission, and who has a continuous bond on file with the
County Board of Commissioners, may use, in lieu of the maintenance bond when
approved by the County Board of Commissioners. Permits issued for the cutting
of a road may require a three-year main-tenance bond, which cannot be canceled
prior to three years from the completion of the road cut. If the bond company
sends notice that the bond is being canceled at any time prior to three years,
the total amount of the bond shall become immediately due and payable to the
County Board of Commissioners and no additional permits will be issued to the
applicant.
   (E)   The recipient of a permit and/or anyone working within the right-of-
way of a county road shall comply with the following terms.
      (1)   Construction materials shall conform to the requirements of the
Standard Specifications of the State Department of Transportation and shall be
approved by the County Highway Engineer.
      (2)   Traffic control devices and flaggers shall be used to regulate
traffic safety if construction affects the flow of traffic as set out in the
Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and as required by the County
Highway Engineer or the County Board of Commissioners. Traffic will be
maintained at all times. If a road closing is approved in accordance with the
County's Ordinance, the permit holder will mark and maintain any detours
approved by the County Highway Engineer and notify all appropriate agencies of
the time and location of the closing a minimum of 48 hours prior to closing and
again immediately upon reopening of the roadway.
      (3)   Utility trench backfill for cuts of the roadway, flowable mortar,
shall be placed and compacted in lifts under the supervision of and to the
specification of the County Highway Engineer. The County Highway Engineer may,
at his or her discretion, permit #53 aggregate, require any additional
specifications, and/or require testing for density by an independent testing
laboratory.
      (4)   Pavement shall be restored to a smooth permanent as required by the
County Highway Engineer or County Highway Superintendent. This shall also
include any damage done to pavement markings. Temporary patches shall be
maintained in a smooth and safe condition by the permit holder until a
permanent patching is accomplished. Temporary patching shall not exceed 30
days, except during the period from November 15 through April 15 each year when
the materials are not available. During this time period, the applicant may
leave a temporary patch in place, but a routine inspection shall be made by the
applicant to insure the temporary patch is in good condition. An extension
beyond the 30-day requirement may be granted at the Highway Department's
discretion upon request with a justification by the applicant. Aggregate
surfaces shall be restored in kind and shall be stabilized to prevent loose
material, which constitutes a safety hazard.
      (5)   The filling of a curb or gutter line of the drainage system of any
road with any material or pipe is strictly prohibited. Any curb modifications
shall require a driveway permit.
      (6)   Tree-trimming operations do not require a permit to work in the
right-of-way; however, they are bound by all of the requirements of this
subchapter and are required to obtain a road obstruction permit if they desire
to close a road.
      (7)   All sod, swale, side ditches, shoulders and other improvements
within the right-of-way that are disturbed by any work or construction within
the right-of-way shall be repaired or replaced in a condition equal to or
better than they were prior to the work or construction. Materials used in the
repair of any disturbed area and the method used to make the repairs shall be
approved by the County Highway Engineer or the County Commissioners. The proof
of the condition of these items prior to work shall be the contractors or the
individual completing the work responsibility.
      (8)   Anyone who cuts or damages an underdrain tile, storm sewer pipe or
culvert pipe, whether or not it appears to be abandoned, shall notify the
County Highway Department immediately upon cutting the tile or pipe. The person
cutting the tile shall be responsible for all damages resulting from this
action. The person cutting the tile shall then repair the tile as directed by
the Superintendent or County Highway Engineer. If the tile or pipe is a
regulated drain, then immediate notification and repair approval shall also be
made to the County Surveyor or his or her designated representative.
      (9)   Loading or unloading any equipment on a county road that results in
an undue or unsafe restriction of traffic or damage to the pavement is not
allowed and is a violation of this section.
      (10)   Crossing or traveling on a county road with a tracked vehicle
directly in contact with the pavement surface is a violation of this section.
Crossing or traveling along the road will be allowed, provided suitable
protection (timbers, tires and the like) is provided for the pavement. No
damage will be allowed to the pavement, structures, grading, drainage and the
like. Failure to use adequate protection or damage to the pavement is a
violation of this section.
      (11)   Dragging or depositing mud or soil onto a county road from any
site is not allowed and is a violation of this section. Cleanup of any mud or
soil on the road due to accessing a site shall be immediately after the
material is deposited. A site having a high volume of vehicles accessing a
muddy site shall have a full-time cleanup crew or install cleaning mechanisms
in accordance with the plan approved by the County Highway Engineer or County
Highway Superintendent.
      (12)   Allowing erosion of soils from a site onto a county roadway or
into a county roadway drainage system is a violation of this section. Anyone
excavating on county right-of-way or adjacent to county right-of-way shall
protect the county right-of-way from the deposit of eroded materials in
accordance with the plan approved by the County Highway Engineer or County
Highway Superintendent.
      (13)   Depositing any construction materials or the cleaning of any
equipment directly or indirectly into any county roadway drainage system is not
allowed and is a violation of this section.
      (14)   Installation of sprinkler systems within the right-of-way is not
allowed. Any sprinkler systems installed within the right-of-way prior to the
date of this subchapter shall be relocated, at the owner's expense, within
seven calendar days when requested by the County Highway Engineer or
Superintendent for road improvement purposes or drainage problems.
      (15)   An individual or agency who has directed work to be done in the
right-of-way shall be jointly and separately liable for all actions taken by
his or her contractor or representative.
      (16)   Failure to stop work for any violation of this section of the
code, when so directed by an authorized representative of the County Highway
Department, is a violation of this section.
      (17)   Failure to provide traffic control, provide a safe work site
(safety fencing, shoring, and the like) or comply with the conditions set out
in a permit, or as directed by an authorized representative of the County
Highway Department, is a violation of this section.
      (18)   A permit is not required for surfacing or resurfacing of a
driveway, provided it does not change any drainage flows and does not expand
the width of the existing drive. The maintenance of any drive and its
associated culverts will remain the responsibility of the applicant or
subsequent property owner and must be maintained by the property owner in a
manner that does not interfere with the use of the right-of-way for its
dedicated purpose.
      (19)   Any improvements installed by permit or without a permit within
the public right-of-way are done so at the risk of the property owner or entity
installing the improvements. Whenever the County Highway Engineer or
Superintendent determines a change is required or maintenance is needed in the
improvements, the applicant, subsequent property owner or entity who owns the
improvements must make the changes upon notification and within a reasonable
time limit at the owner's expense.
      (20)   No improvements can be made by any permit applicant that obstructs
or impedes an existing farm field entrance or an existing farm field loading
area without permission from the property owner. It is the applicant's
responsibility to comply with this requirement.
   (F)   After the application is approved, the County Highway Engineer shall
issue a permit. Once work begins, the permit or a photocopy of the permit must
be on site for inspection. The County Highway Department shall be notified at
least 24 hours in advance of construction and when construction is complete, in
accordance with the procedures of the County Highway Department. An approved
permit will expire one year from the date of application or 60 days prior to
the expiration of the permit bond covering the work being applied for,
whichever comes first.
(BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 5-11-98; Am. BC Ord. 1999-37, passed 10- 25-99; Am. BC
Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-26-24) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
92.10 through
92.15 shall be fined not more than $1,000. (BC Ord. 1997-4, passed 4-14-97; Am.
BC Ord. 2002-03, passed 2-13-02)
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
92.25 through
92.33 shall, for each offense, be subject to a fine of not more than $2,500.
(BC Ord. 1991-22, passed 8-12-91)
   (C)   When the provisions and guidelines of §§
92.45 through
92.50 are not adhered to, it shall be considered a violation. When a violation
occurs, the contractor, company or individual performing the work and the owner
of the facilities being installed or constructed shall be held in violation
both jointly and separately. Each subsection violated and each day for which
the violation remains shall be a separate violation. A judgment of up to $2,500
and restitution of all damages shall be entered against a person who violates
this subchapter per violation per day. (BC Ord. 1998-4, passed 5-11-98)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION TO WORK IN COUNTY ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY
   APPLICATION TO WORK IN COUNTY ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY
   PERMIT NO. _______________
   Warrick County Commissioners   P.O. Box 749, Boonville, IN 47601
      Phone No. 812-897-6120   Fax No. 812-897-6189
1.   Road Excavation/Cuts:
   Gravel: $10,00 per linear foot, except farm subsurface drain.
   Minimum: $200
   Hard Surface: $25,00 per linear foot
   Minimum: $500
2.   Plowing in Cable or Pipe: 
   $1.00 per linear foot.
   Minimum: $100
3.   Directional Boring:
   $1.00 per linear foot
   Minimum: $100
4.   Trenching/Excavating Adjacent to Roadway:
   $1.00 per linear foot
   Minimum: $100
5.   Boring or Pushing Under Roadway:
   $150 per Bore/Push
6.   Pole Lines:
   $1,000 per mile
   Minimum: $75 per pole
7.   Setting Individual Above and Below Ground Structures (other than Poles),
including Pedestals, Splicer Box, Junction Box, and Transformers:
   $200 per structure
8.   Roadway/Lane Restrictions and Closures:
   $250/day
Check or Money Order No.                               TOTAL PERMIT FEE =
              
Bond Company:                                                            Bond
Amount: $                                 Bond #
                                       
Applicant’s Name:
                                                                                                                                                                  
Mailing Address:
                                                                                                                     
P.O. Box No.:                        
City:
                                                                               
State:                Zip Code:              Phone No.:
                              
Fax No.:                                          Contact Person:
                                                                                                              
Project Owner’s Name (if different from applicant):
                                                                Phone No.:
                                
Project Owner’s Address (if different from applicant):
                                                                                                                 
City:
                                                                                
State:                Zip Code:              Phone No.:
                              
Fax No.:                                                                 
Project Location (Must be described in reference to centerlines of streets in
feet)
                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                             
Project Purpose:
                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                             
I hereby certify that I have the authority to bind the above-named applicant
and the owner of the facilities being installed under this permit to the terms,
conditions and requirements of this permit. I certify that I, the applicant and
all persons performing the work authorized by this permit, understand all
requirements of the Ordinance adopted by the Board of Commissioners and will
abide by all of the requirements and conditions. l further certify that I, the
applicant and any persons performing work authorized by this permit, will not
make any changes in work from the approved plan and permit without receiving
written permission from the Warrick County Board of Commissioners. The
applicant and I agree to pay all attorney's fees, court costs and other damages
or costs incurred by Warrick County in enforcing the Ordinance or which are a
result of litigation incurred by the County as a result of this permit. The
applicant, the owner of the facilities being installed under this permit and I
understand that, in the event Warrick County determines that any of the
facilities installed under this permit need to be repaired, relocated or
removed from the right-of-way, the owner or any subsequent owner of the
facilities agrees to maintain, relocate or remove these facilities in a timely
manner at no cost to Warrick County or its successors. The applicant and I
agree that the commencement of work covered by this permit will serve as our
acceptance of all terms, conditions and requirements of the approved permit.
                                                                                                                                               
Date:                                     
Signature
                                                                                                                                                                                             
Printed Name                                        Title
DO NOT WRITE IN THIS SECTION-FOR DEPARTMENT USE ONLY:
County Highway Engineer:
                                                                                                         
Date:                                    
This Permit is Approved:
   As submitted.
   Subject to the attached conditions.
   Subject to the changes noted on the plans.
COMMENTS:
                                                                                                                                                                        
COMMISSIONERS MEETING DATE OF APPROVAL:
                                               
_____________________________________________________________
Commissioner Signature
_____________________________________________________________
Commissioner Signature
_____________________________________________________________
Commissioner Signature
 
   INSTRUCTIONS:
1.   Form must be completely filled out using a typewriter or printed using
black ink. Any non-applicable blanks must be marked N/A.
2.   Contact Warrick County Engineer for questions concerning this application.
3.   A clear, detailed plan sheet must accompany this application. The drawing
must show the R/W, edge of road, all construction details, driveways, field
entrances, easements and other significant features within or immediately
adjacent to the R/W. The plan must show distances to the nearest intersecting
roads, dimensions of all construction and have a legend for all symbols used.
Failure to include all of the above will result in the denial and return of
your application.
4,   The permit bond amount is based on the type and amount of work being
authorized by this permit. Contact the Warrick County Highway Engineer or Board
of County Commissioners for a specific amount. The beneficiary on the permit
bond shall be the"Board of Warrick County Commissioners, Warrick County,
Indiana".
5.   Permit fee shall be check or money order made payable to the "Warrick
County Treasurer". Cash can not be accepted. When complete, mail or hand
deliver this signed application, along with the permit fee, permit bond and
detailed plan to the above address, “Attention: County Highway Engineer”.
(Am. BC Ord. 2024-10, passed 8-26-24)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      
111.   PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
      
112.   REGULATION OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
110.01   Regulations for cable TV rates
   
110.02   Permit required for solicitation
   
110.03   Peddling and solicitation
§ 110.01 REGULATIONS FOR CABLE TV RATES.
   (A)   All regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission,
as they relate to the regulation of cable television rates, are hereby adopted
by reference in this section.
   (B)   The County Commissioners are hereby authorized to appoint a hearing
officer whose duty it shall be to conduct and hold public hearings on local
cable rate regulations, to report his or her findings to the County
Commissioners and make recommend- ations to the County Commissioners concerning
basic cable regulation.
   (C)   The hearing officer shall conduct the public cable rate hearings on
all cable rate regulation hearings in accordance with the rules and regulations
issued and promulgated by the Federal Com- munications Commission found at 47
CFR 76.
   (D)   All regulation cable rates by the county shall be undertaken in
accordance with and following the rate regulations promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission.
(BC Ord. 1994-12, passed 6-27-94)
§ 110.02 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR SOLICITATION.
   (A)   Any and all individuals, entities, and/or organizations of any type
who wish to solicit in any manner on or about any street or intersection of
streets must first obtain a permit to be issued by the County Commissioners.
   (B)   An application for such permit must be filed with the County
Commissioners Office no less than 30 days prior to the proposed solicitation
date.
   (C)   A public hearing with regard to the application shall take place at
the next regular session of the Board of County Commissioners or special
session if so called by the Commissioners.
   (D)   If the application is granted, a permit designating the specific time,
place and manner of the solicitations must be carried at all solicitation times
on the person of the individuals performing the solicitations.
   (E)   Each violation of this section may be punished by a fine not exceeding
$2,500 per violation.
   (F)   An applicant must provide a certificate of insurance proving
comprehensive general liability insurance coverage for the activities applied
for in the sum of no less than $500,000.
(BC Ord. 1999-9, passed 9-13-99; Am. BC Ord. 2014-16, passed 6-9-14)
§ 110.03 PEDDLING AND SOLICITATION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADMINISTRATOR. Administrator of the Warrick County Board of
Commissioners.
      PEDDLER. Any person or persons, firm, limited liability company,
corporation or organization,  either principal or agent, employer or employee
who engages in the business of traveling from place to place, house to house,
or in or along the streets within the county, carrying, conveying, or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature, or
for services to be performed offering and exposing them for sale, or making
sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
      PERSON. Any human being, partnership, limited liability company,
organization, association, or corporation.
      SOLICITOR. Any person or persons, firm, limited liability company,
corporation, or organization, either principal or agent, employer or employee
who engages in the business of traveling from place to place, house to house,
or in or along the streets within the county, taking or attempting to take
orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchants, or personal property of any
nature, for future delivery, or for services to be performed, whether or not
such individual carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of the
sale, or whether or not the vendor is collecting advance payment on the sales.
   (B)   Peddlers and solicitors; license required.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler or
solicitor within the county, without having an unrevoked license issued by the
county to do so, valid and in effect at the time.
      (2)   No license shall be transferable or shall authorize any person
other than the one named therein to engage in the business of peddler or
solicitor.
      (3)   Registration and licensing shall not be construed to be a permit to
enter neighborhoods, areas, properties, or premises that have conspicuously
posted non-solicitation notices.
      (4)   The peddler or solicitor shall have his stamped application in his
possession at all times while peddling and/or soliciting and shall exhibit it
upon request by any law enforcement officer or any purchaser or prospective
purchaser.
   (C)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person selling goods exclusively to retail or wholesale stores
for resale.
      (2)   Any person, or an employee or agent thereof, who has, and has had
for the preceding 12 months a regular place of business within the county.
      (3)   Any person engaged in peddling or solicitation activities on behalf
of a religious group, school, political group, or other not-for-profit entity
registered to do business in the state.
      (4)   The delivery of mail order, online, or catalog sales to residents.
      (5)   Any farmer, gardener, or fruit or vegetable grower engaged in
selling the produce of his own farm, orchard, or vineyard, located in the
county, or such a person who sells or takes orders for goods to be sold and
delivered to merchants, traders, or dealers who purchase the goods for the
purpose of resale.
      (6)   News carriers.
   (D)   Application. An applicant for permission to peddle goods or solicit
orders hereunder shall complete an application provided by the Administrator.
The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, home address, telephone number, and any local address of
the applicant.
      (2)   A physical description of the applicant, and every agent of the
applicant that will be peddling or soliciting, setting forth the age, height,
weight, and color of hair and eyes (Example: driver’s license and/or other
picture ID).
      (3)   The name and address of the person, firm, or corporation for whom
or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared, including both the main
office’s address and the address of the office or branch out of which the
applicant works.
      (4)   The nature of the goods, wares, merchandise, or services to be sold
or for which orders are to be solicited.
      (5)   Written permission from the property owner of the location where
peddler will be set up (if applicable).
      (6)   A statement as to the period during which the applicant intends to
solicit orders, which shall be no longer than until December 31 of the calendar
year during which the application is made.
      (7)   A list of all felony and/or misdemeanor convictions of the
applicant and every agent of the applicant that will be peddling or soliciting,
including the date of conviction and the city and state of all such
convictions, if any. If none, it is to be so stated on the application.
      (8)   The name, address, and telephone number of the contact person who
shall be available for a period of time of not less than 60 days following the
last date the applicant sells or offers to sell, or distributes goods, wares,
merchandise, food, services, or subscriptions in the county, who will be
responsible for consumer complaints.
      (9)   The applicant must provide the Administrator with a copy of a valid
merchant certificate issued by the Indiana Department of Revenue to applicant.
      (10)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together
with the license plate number and proof of valid insurance meeting the minimum
requirements set by state law, and a copy of a current and valid driver’s
license.
      (11)   A statement indicating the applicant has provided with the
application a certificate of insurance proving comprehensive general liability
coverage for the activities to be performed in the sum of no less than
$500,000.
      (12)   The applicant, at the time of executing the application, shall
also submit identification satisfactory to the Administrator, which shall
contain the signature and a photograph of the applicant and any agent of the
applicant that will be peddling or soliciting two inches by two inches taken
within 60 days prior to the application. The photograph must show the head and
shoulders of the applicant and any agent of the applicant that will be peddling
or soliciting.
      (13)   If the applicant will be using, handling, selling, or distributing
food, a copy of the County Health Department permit must be attached to the
application.
      (14)   Any other such information the Administrator or his designee deems
necessary.
      (15)   Verification that all of the information provided is truthful.
   (E)   Fees.
      (1)   The fee for a license which shall accompany any application shall
be as follows:
         (a)   $30 for a period not to exceed one weekend from Friday through
Sunday;
         (b)   $50 for a period not to exceed one week from Monday through
Sunday;
         (c)   $100 for a period not to exceed one month; or
         (d)   $1,000 for a period not to exceed one year.
      (2)   All licenses shall terminate on December 31, one hour before sunset
in the year of issue.
      (3)   All fees collected under this section shall be deposited in the
county’s General Fund.
   (F)   Approval. Upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this
section, the Administrator shall refer the application to the County Board of
Commissioners. The County Board of Commissioners shall either approve or deny
the application for a license at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Upon
approval by the County Board of Commissioners, the Administrator shall stamp
approval on the application submitted by the applicant and provide the approved
license to the applicant.
   (G)   Time of day permitted. No person may engage in the business of a
peddler or solicitor in the county before 9:00 a.m. and must cease all
activities one hour prior to sunset each day the license is effective.
   (H)   Revocation of license.
      (1)   A license issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the
Administrator after a hearing before the County Board of Commissioners, for any
of the following causes:
         (a)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements contained in
the application for the license.
         (b)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in
connection with the peddling or solicitation of sales of goods, wares, or
merchandise.
         (c)   Any other violation of this section.
         (d)   Conducting the business licensed under this section in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
         (e)   The conviction of the license holder of any felony or of any
misdemeanor involving a threat to the safety or general welfare of the public.
      (2)   A license shall be immediately suspended upon reasonable suspicion
by the Administrator of any of the above causes while the potential violation
is investigated or pending the arrest or filing of charges against the license
holder, or any agent thereof, alleging the commission of any felony or a
misdemeanor involving a threat to the safety or general welfare of the public.
A license holder is not entitled to a refund for the time the license is
suspended or revoked.
   (I)   Right to appeal following denial or revocation. Any license having
been denied or revoked under this section may be appealed to the County Board
of Commissioners. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Administrator a
written statement of the grounds for appeal within seven days after notice of
the denial or revocation. The County Board of Commissioners, whose decision
shall be at its sole and absolute discretion, shall grant or deny the appeal at
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
   (J)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to an ordinance violation fee as follows:
         (a)   $250 for the first offense; and
         (b)   $500 for the second and each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Each day’s continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(BC Ord. 2014-16, passed 6-9-14)
CHAPTER 111: PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required; fees
   
111.03   License application requirements
   
111.04   Bond required
   
111.05   Purchasing regulations
   
111.06   Reporting requirements
   
111.07   Resale of articles purchased
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEALER. Any person who is engaged in the business of purchasing or offering,
by advertisement or otherwise, to buy goods as part of their business
enterprise.
   ITINERANT DEALER. Any dealer as defined herein who has engaged or intends to
engage in a temporary or transient business for profit conducted from a shop,
room, hotel or motel room, or other premises for a time period of less than one
year.
   RESIDENT DEALER. Any dealer as defined herein who has engaged or intends to
engage in a permanent business for profit conducted from a fixed location in
the county, for a period of time of one year or more.
   SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS. Any article, item, or goods, including
coins, composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, diamonds, or
other precious stones or metals, and which was previously used by any person
for its manufactured purpose.
(BC Ord. 2012-16, passed 4-9-12)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   No person shall act as a secondhand precious metal and gem dealer
without first obtaining a license therefor, as provided within this chapter.
   (B)   There shall be an annual license fee of $50 imposed upon resident
dealers. Licenses for resident dealers will be dated as of January 1 and will
expire on December 31 of each year. Fees for licenses for resident dealers
issued after January 1 shall be prorated quarterly.
   (C)   There shall be a daily license fee of $50 on the first day and $25 per
day thereafter imposed on itinerant dealers, up to a maximum annual fee of
$2,500.
(BC Ord. 2012-16, passed 4-9-12)
§ 111.03 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A completed application form shall be submitted to the Sheriff’s
Department by the applicant at least five days prior to the issuance of the
license.
   (B)   Each applicant for a license shall submit the following information on
the application form:
      (1)   The name of the applicant, including any previous names or aliases;
      (2)   The name, local address, principal business address, physical
description, and recent photograph of the individual who is applying for a
license on behalf of the applicant, if the applicant is not an individual;
      (3)   The local business address and principal business address of the
applicant;
      (4)   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the
partners;
      (5)   If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company, other
recognized business entity recognized under the laws of the state or any other
state or unincorporated association, the names and addresses of the Board of
Directors, members, the registered agent and the principal officers;
      (6)   If the applicant is an individual, the applicant shall provide a
recent photograph, a physical description, and a statement as to whether the
applicant has been convicted of a crime, and if so, the nature of the offense
and the punishment assessed therefor;
      (7)   The applicant, or the applicant's representative if the applicant
is not an individual, shall allow himself to be fingerprinted and such
fingerprints shall be made a part of the application. Failure to cooperate in
the fingerprint procedure shall be cause for denial of the license;
      (8)   If the applicant has, within the last 18 months, as an owner,
operator, partner, agent, or employee, been engaged in the purchase of precious
metals or gems, the applicant shall provide the name and address of the entity
with which he was associated. If the entity with which the applicant was
associated conducted business in more than one location, the applicant shall
provide the addresses of these locations.
   (C)   If the applicant fails or refuses to provide information required in
the application form, the failure or refusal shall be sufficient cause to deny
the license.
(BC Ord. 2012-16, passed 4-9-12)
§ 111.04 BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall be issued a license under this chapter, until such
person has provided a bond payable to Warrick County in the amount of $1,000.
   (B)   Resident dealers may post a surety bond payable to Warrick County in
the amount of $1,000.
   (C)   Nonresident dealers and itinerant dealers shall provide a cash bond of
$1,000 payable to Warrick County.
(BC Ord. 2012-16, passed 4-9-12)
§ 111.05 PURCHASING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A secondhand precious metal and gem dealer shall not buy goods from a
minor (person under 18 years of age) without the written consent of a parent or
guardian.
   (B)   A secondhand precious metal and gem dealer shall require picture
identification from the seller prior to making payment to the seller. A state
driver's license, state-issued I.D., United States passport or United States
passport card shall be required.
   (C)   The secondhand precious metal and gem dealer shall, at the time of
making the purchase, require the signature and right thumbprint of the seller
on the purchase card maintained by the licensee. If the seller does not have a
right thumb, any other existing finger may be used. However, a clear print must
be obtained. A secondhand precious metal and gem dealer shall maintain the
records required in this chapter for a period of one year.
(BC Ord. 2012-16, passed 4-9-12)
§ 111.06 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A person or entity engaged in the business of secondhand precious
metal and gem dealing shall report to the Sheriff’s Department, by noon of the
next business day, the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, date of birth, race, sex, and driver's license or
state identification number of the person from whom the item is purchased;
      (2)   Date and time of the transaction;
      (3)   A full description of the item including brand name, model number,
serial number, and engravings or markings.
      (4)   A separate report shall be made for each item purchased.
   (B)   The information required above shall be reported to the Sheriff’s
Department in a digital format provided by the Sheriff’s Department. The items
must be held at least five business days from the reporting date prior to
offering the items for sale.
   (C)   The County Sheriff may, at any time, require the reporting to be done
in an online format through a provider such as Leads Online. In the event the
Sheriff elects to require reporting to be effected through Leads Online or
other similar web-based service, all persons or entities engaged in the
business of second hand precious metal and gem dealing shall comply immediately
upon receipt of written notice of such a requirement.
(BC Ord. 2012-16, passed 4-9-12)
§ 111.07 RESALE OF ARTICLES PURCHASED.
   Secondhand precious metals and gems purchased by a secondhand precious metal
dealer and gem dealer shall not be resold or removed from the place of business
of the secondhand precious metal and gem dealer for a period of five days after
a copy of the purchase report has been delivered to the office of the Sheriffs
Department.
(BC Ord. 2012-16, passed 4-9-12)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Anyone or any entity found to be in violation of any provision of this
chapter may be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,500 for each individual
violation of this section.
   (B)   In addition to any fine imposed, anyone or any entity found to have
violated any provision of this chapter shall also be responsible for filing
fees, court costs and any reasonable attorney fees incurred by the county in
pursuing an ordinance violation cause under this chapter.
   (C)   The bond posted under § 110.04 may be ordered forfeited to the county
by the court in which an action is brought for payment of any fines, costs or
fees imposed by a court finding any violation of this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2012-16, passed 4-9-12)
CHAPTER 112: REGULATION OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Compliance with state standards required
   
112.03   Inspection of mobile instruments
   
112.04   Instrument installation, repair, and numbering
   
112.05   Security and approval seals
   
112.06   Commodity regulations
   
112.07   User fee for courtesy services
   
112.08   Enforcement
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized to inspect weighing
or measuring instruments in Warrick County.
   INSTRUMENT. Any scale, weight, beam, measure, meter, or weighing or
measuring device of every kind, or parts thereof, subject to regulation by the
Division of Weights and Measures of the State Department of Health.
(BC Ord. 2020-17, passed 8-24-20)
§ 112.02 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STANDARDS REQUIRED.
   No person engaged in the business of selling, buying, exchanging goods or
commodities by weight, measurement, or volume shall use an instrument in his
or her business operations for such purpose if such instrument does not meet
the standards established by the State of Indiana or the Division of Weights
and Measures of the State Department of Health. A person who violates this
section shall be fined $50.
(BC Ord. 2020-17, passed 8-24-20)
§ 112.03 INSPECTION OF MOBILE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   If an instrument is mobile or otherwise operated at more than one
location and is not made available to be inspected by the County Inspector at a
permanent business location during regular business hours of the county, the
County Inspector shall have the authority to order the owner or operator to
present the instrument for inspection by the County Inspector at a time and
location designated by the County Inspector.
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with such orders of the County Inspector
under this section shall be fined $50.
(BC Ord. 2020-17, passed 8-24-20)
§ 112.04 INSTRUMENT INSTALLATION, REPAIR, AND NUMBERING.
   (A)   An owner or operator of an instrument shall inform the County
Inspector that an instrument has been installed or repaired and provide the
County Inspector with the location of said instrument prior to such instrument
being placed into service. The County Inspector shall thereafter certify its
accuracy and affix a security seal and/or an annual approval seal.
   (B)   A person who owns or operates more than one instrument of a particular
type at a business location shall serially number each instrument in such a
manner that each instrument shall be readily distinguishable from all other
such instruments of that type present at that location.
   (C)   A person who violates this section shall be fined $25.
(BC Ord. 2020-17, passed 8-24-20)
§ 112.05 SECURITY AND APPROVAL SEALS.
   (A)   When an instrument is security sealed by the County Inspector, such
security seal shall not be cut, severed, or removed without permission of the
County Inspector. Any instrument designed to be security sealed shall be sealed
by the County Inspector.
   (B)   Repairmen whose equipment is certified under §
112.04(A) may remove a security seal without prior approval of the County
Inspector for the sole purpose of making repairs to such equipment. Repairmen
who cut, sever, or remove a security seal shall notify the County Inspector
within 24 hours of such cutting, severance, or removal.
   (C)   If an instrument bears an annual approval seal on its exterior, such
approval seal shall not be altered, defaced, or removed.
   (D)   No security seal or annual approval seal shall be valid in Warrick
County except for that which is authorized by the County Inspector.
   (E)   No instrument shall be used in the business of selling, buying,
bartering, or exchanging of goods or commodities if the security seal has been
cut, severed, or removed until such instrument is resealed by the County
Inspector, or permission is given by the County Inspector if immediate
resealing of the instrument is impractical.
   (F)   A person who violates this section shall be fined $100.
(BC Ord. 2020-17, passed 8-24-2020)
§ 112.06 COMMODITY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any person engaged in the selling, buying, bartering, or exchanging of
goods or commodities must sell, buy, barter, or exchange such goods or
commodities using the legal method of selling, buying, bartering, or exchanging
such goods or commodities as required by the National Conference on Weights and
Measures Sale of Commodities Regulation.
   (B)   All commodities and goods offered for sale in packages or containers
shall meet all labeling requirements of the National Conference on Weights and
Measures Packaging and Labeling Regulations. A manufacturer, wholesale
distributor, or retail seller who violates this section may be fined as follows
for the number of such units at each location where they are available for
purchase:
 
1 to 25 units     $50
26 to 50 units    $100
51 to 75 units    $150
76 to 100 units   $200
101 to 200 units  $400
201 units or more $500
 
   (C)   All commodities and goods when required to be sold by weight must be
sold by net weight, and all commodities and goods required to be sold by
measure or count shall be accurate as required.
   (D)   The manufacturer, wholesale distributor, or retail seller of a
prepackaged commodity which is less than the weight, measure, or count
designated on its package may be fined as follows for the number of such units
at each location where they are available for purchase:
 
1 to 25 units     $50
26 to 50 units    $10 0
51 to 75 units    $15 0
76 to 100 units   $20 0
101 to 200 units  $40 0
201 units or more $50 0
 
(BC Ord. 2020-17, passed 8-24-20)
§ 112.07 USER FEE FOR COURTESY SERVICES.
   The County Inspector may collect a fee not to exceed $20 for inspecting or
calibrating any scale or measuring device which is not used in the business of
selling, buying, or exchanging goods or commodities, and is not subject to
regulation by the Division of Weights and Measures of the State Board of
Health. The fee shall be deposited into the dedicated, non-reverting fund which
is used for capital purchases for the Weights and Measures Department.
(BC Ord. 2020-17, passed 8-24-20)
§ 112.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A) The County Inspector may issue to a person who violates this chapter a
citation which shall be written on a citation ticket and kept on file in the
Warrick County Weights and Measures Office.
   (B)   If a person who is issued a citation for violating this chapter does
not pay the fine and/or correct the deficiency giving rise to the violation
within ten calendar days, the matter shall be referred to the Warrick County
Attorney for prosecution.
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter committed by a person that occurs within
one year of a prior violation committed by the same person shall constitute a
subsequent violation. A person who commits a subsequent violation of this
chapter shall be fined in an amount that is double the specific amount set
forth for such initial violation.
   (D)   Each day a person is in violation of this chapter constitutes a
separate violation.
   (E)   All fine amounts collected shall be deposited into a dedicated, non-
reverting fund to be used for capital purchases for the Weights and Measures
Department, subject to appropriation of funds by the Warrick County Council.
(BC Ord. 2020-17, passed 8-24-20)
TITLE XIII: PUBLIC SAFETY
   Chapter
      
130.   ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEMS
      
131.   ANIMALS
      
132.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
133.   OPEN BURNING
      
134.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
      
135.   TATTOO PARLORS
      
136.   COLLECTION, DELIVERY AND PROCESSING OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES
      
137.   SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 130:  ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEMS
Section
   
130.01   Authority
   
130.02   Definitions
   
130.03   On-site system or connection to the sanitary sewer required
   
130.04   Installer registration
   
130.05   Sewage holding tanks
   
130.06   General requirements for on-site sewage systems
   
130.07   Connection or reconnection to an existing on-site sewage system
   
130.08   Enforcement
   
130.09   Procedure for appeal
   
130.10   Remedies
   
130.11   Conflict with any other code
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Health Department fee schedule, see
Ch. 41
   Illicit discharge and connection, see
Ch. 53
§ 130.01 AUTHORITY.
   The County Health Department is hereby authorized to issue residential and
commercial on-site sewage system permits, collect permit fees and penalties,
perform inspections, hold hearings, and order or otherwise compel correction of
violations of this chapter, and is otherwise authorized to perform all actions
necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24)
§ 130.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION, NEW.
      (1)   Construction of a new home, residential outbuilding or commercial
facility where there previously was no home, outbuilding, or commercial
facility; or
      (2)   Replacing, rebuilding, or remodeling an existing home, residential
outbuilding or commercial facility when the design daily flow of the new
structure(s) exceeds what was previously at the site.
      (3)   Best judgment, as described in Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 for replacement
of failed soil absorption systems, shall not be used for new construction.
   CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR/REPLACEMENT. Repair or replacement of a residential on-
site sewage system for an existing home, residential outbuilding or commercial
facility, or the rebuilding or remodeling of an existing home, residential
outbuilding or commercial facility without an increase in the design daily flow
of the project. In accordance with Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3, the best judgment of the
County Health Department may be used, when necessary and appropriate, for the
repair or replacement of a failing, residential on-site sewage system.
   INSTALLER. Any individual who performs any work in furtherance of
construction, installation, replacement, alteration, repair or abandonment of
any residential or commercial on-site sewage system in the county.
   INVOLUNTARY. A need to modify or improve a dwelling, residential outbuilding
or commercial facility due to factors outside of the owner’s control, such as
destruction by wind, fire, flood or other natural disaster, or due to
condemnation of a dwelling.
   ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM MALFUNCTION or MALFUNCTION. A residential or
commercial on-site sewage system component that is not functioning in
accordance with this chapter or per manufacturers’ requirements. ON-SITE SEWAGE
SYSTEM MALFUNCTION does not have to meet the definition of on-site sewage
system failure, but may also be a failure. MALFUNCTION may include, but is not
limited to, one or more of the following:
      (1)   The backup of sewage into an upstream, on-site sewage system
component;
      (2)   The liquid level in a septic tank consistently above the invert of
the septic tank outlet;
      (3)   An outlet filter that is plugged sufficiently to cause backup in
the septic tank;
      (4)   The liquid level in a dosing tank above the invert of the dosing
tank inlet;
      (5)   The liquid level in a treatment unit above that recommended by the
manufacturer;
      (6)   The liquid level in a distribution box consistently above the
invert of the outlets, or a distribution box that does not provide equal
distribution;
      (7)   Structural failure of a septic tank, dosing tank, treatment unit,
distribution box or other required component;
      (8)   Electrical failure of a float, an effluent pump, alarm or other
electrical component of an on-site sewage system, or
      (9)   Removal of an outlet filter, an effluent pump, or any other system
component if that outlet filter, pump or component was required in the
construction or operating permit.
   VOLUNTARY. An owner’s intentional or deliberate action to construct, modify
or improve a dwelling or residential outbuilding, or increase the design daily
flow of a structure.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24)
§ 130.03 ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM OR CONNECTION TO THE SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED.
   (A)   All persons owning, leasing, or otherwise occupying property that has
a residence, residential outbuilding or commercial facility with plumbing not
connected to the sanitary sewer shall comply with the requirements of Rules 410
IAC 6-8.3 et. seq., 410 IAC 6-10.1 et. seq., and/or Bulletin S.E. 11, as
applicable, and the provisions of this chapter for an on-site sewage system.
   (B)   In the event of a residential or commercial on-site sewage system
failure, the residence, residential outbuilding or commercial facility shall be
required to make a direct connection to the sanitary sewer, if the sanitary
sewer is available within 300 feet of the affected property line and is
available for connection at a construction cost, and the connection fee is
estimated not to exceed 150% of the cost estimated for installing an on-site
sewage system to serve the residence, residential outbuilding or commercial
facility.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 INSTALLER REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All on-site sewage system installers in the county shall abide by all
associated requirements in state statutes, rules, and this chapter regarding
on-site sewage systems.
   (B)   An installer must register with County Health Department if they wish
to install, replace, alter, repair or abandon any residential or commercial on-
site sewage system in the county. Registration requires:
      (1)   Applying to County Health Department for registration on a form
provided by the department;
      (2)   Paying the appropriate registration fee as required in
Chapter 41, Health Department fee schedule; and
      (3)   Providing proof of certification by:
         (a)   Passing an examination offered by the County Health Department
or another entity approved by the County Health Department; or
         (b)   Providing proof of:
            1.   Current, valid registration in another Indiana county;
            2.   A certificate being issued from the Indiana Onsite Wastewater
Professional Association (IOWPA) for the type of system(s) to be installed; and
            3.   Current membership in good standing with IOWPA.
   (C)   Registration is valid from January 1 to December 31 of the same year
and must be renewed annually. Proof of continued registration in another county
and/or certification is required for renewal of registration.
   (D)   Certification must be maintained throughout the period of
registration. A lapse of certification will render the registration with County
Health Department invalid.
   (E)   A certification examination will be offered no less than monthly by
the County Health Department.
      (1)   An examination fee as required in
Chapter 41 will be due prior to examination.
      (2)   The test will consist of 50 questions, all of which will be true/
false or multiple choice.
      (3)   A score of 80% or above is considered passing.
      (4)   A retest will be allowed for anyone failing the test no more
frequently than once per week.
   (F)   A registered installer must be on-site during installation, repair,
replacement, alteration, modification or system abandonment, and shall be
deemed responsible for the work done.
   (G)   A lapse of certification and/or registration or repeated violation of
any state statute, rules or this chapter pertaining to on-site sewage systems
may result in revocation of registration or denial of registration renewal. Any
registration revocation or denial of registration renewal may be appealed to
the County Board of Health.
      (1)   The period of revocation shall be no less than 90 days or a time
period deemed appropriate by the County Health Officer; and
      (2)   The registered individual shall be advised in writing of the basis
for the revocation, the right and procedure for appeal, and the opportunity for
a hearing.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 SEWAGE HOLDING TANKS.
   (A)   A sewage holding tank is an alternative method of sewage disposal in
accordance with I.C. 16-41-25-9.
   (B)   An application for a sewage holding tank must be filed by the property
owner or property owner’s agent, including:
      (1)   An application form provided by the County Health Department;
      (2)   A construction plan of sufficient clarity to show compliance with
this chapter;
      (3)   A copy of a written contract with an operator of a septage
management vehicle providing for the removal of septage at regular intervals;
      (4)   A written statement, signed by the property owner, indicating that
copies of all receipts and other records as requested be submitted to the local
health department within 30 days of service; and
      (5)   For commercial sites where IDOH has completed plan review and
approval for a commercial holding tank, a copy of the written approval from
IDOH.
   (C)   All sewage holding tanks shall:
      (1)   Have a minimum capacity of:
         (a)   For holding tanks that are permitted as septic and/or dosing
tanks and planned to precede a soil absorption field, the minimum capacity as
determined by Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1 for septic and/or
dosing tanks;
         (b)   For permanent holding tanks, the greater of:
            1.   One thousand gallons; or
            2.   At least three times the design daily flow of the home or
commercial structure as determined by Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC 6-
10.1.
      (2)   Have a capacity of no more than 10,000 gallons.
   (D)   A sewage holding tank shall meet all separation distances required for
septic tanks in Rules 410 IAC 6-8.3 and 410 IAC 6-10.1.
   (E)   A sewage holding tank shall meet all construction requirements of
septic tanks in Rules 410 IAC 6-8.3 and 410 IAC 6-10.1.
   (F)   All sewage holding tanks shall have at least one riser to the surface
for ease in pumping the tank. A secondary childproof plug shall be installed
under a safely secured riser lid.
   (G)   A construction permit issued by the County Health Department is
required prior to the installation of the holding tank or sewer.
   (H)   A sewer, meeting the requirements for a residential sewer in Rule 410
IAC 6-8.3 or the requirements for a building sewer in Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1,
shall be used to make a direct connection between the plumbing of the structure
and the holding tank.
   (I)   All sewage holding tanks installed in the county shall have:
      (1)   An installation inspection to confirm proper installation and to
confirm that the outlet of the last tank has been appropriately sealed prior to
backfilling; and
      (2)   The alarm wired in and verified operational.
   (J)   All holding tanks shall be required to have an operating permit issued
by the County Health Department.
      (1)   The construction permit issued for the installation of the holding
tank shall also serve as the operating permit for the first two years of
service.
      (2)   An operating permit for a sewage holding tank shall be valid for a
period of two years from the date of issuance.
      (3)   Prior to operating permit renewal, a registered installer must
inspect the holding tank(s) for verification of proper operation of the tank
and alarm system. An inspection report must be provided to the County Health
Department prior to renewal.
      (4)   An operating permit shall be renewed prior to, or within ten days
of, expiration.
      (5)   An operating permit fee as stated in
Chapter 41 shall be due at the time of operating permit renewal.
      (6)   Upon sale of a property for which an operating permit is required,
the operating permit shall not transfer to the new owner but shall remain
active for 60 days after the date of sale. The new owner shall apply for an
operating permit within 60 days of the date of sale.
   (K)   All receipts from pumping and maintenance of a sewage holding tank and
other documents for repair or modification of a sewage holding tank need to be
submitted to the County Health Department within 30 days of the service
provided.
   (L)   An operating permit not renewed within 30 days of expiration, or a
sewage holding tank not operated in a safe and sanitary manner, including
receipts and other paperwork not submitted as required, is a violation of this
chapter and may be subject to penalty as described in § 130.99, permit
revocation, and/or denial of operating permit renewal.
   (M)   In the event that a sewage holding tank is not operated in a safe and
sanitary manner and in accordance with I.C. 16-41-25-9 and this chapter, the
County Health Department may require the residence, residential outbuilding, or
commercial facility to:
      (1)   Connect to the sanitary sewer if the sanitary sewer is available
within 300 feet of the affected property line, and is available for connection
at a construction cost and connection fee estimated not to exceed 150% of the
cost estimated for installing an on-site sewage system to serve the residence,
residential outbuilding or commercial facility; or
      (2)   Install an on-site sewage system with a soil absorption field in
compliance with Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1, or connect to an
existing system that has not failed.
   (N)   Upon connection to an approved soil absorption field, as part of a
full on-site sewage system, or to the sanitary sewer, the sewage holding tank
shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules, unless it will be converted
for use as a septic tank or a dosing tank in an on-site sewage system.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   An on-site sewage system construction permit issued by the County
Health Department shall be obtained prior to the installation of any component
of an on-site sewage system, or prior to the repair, replacement, alteration or
modification of any component of an on-site sewage system.
   (B)   On-site sewage system soil evaluation.
      (1)   An on-site soil evaluation is required, as described in Rule 410
IAC 6-8.3 or Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1, prior to permit issuance for all residential
and commercial sites where a soil absorption field is to be installed, expanded
or replaced, and as needed for repairs.
      (2)   A minimum of three soil profile evaluations are required to be
evaluated in the area of the soil absorption field. The soil profile
evaluations may be conducted using three soil borings, three soil pits, or any
combination of borings and pits. The County Health Department may request
additional soil borings or soil pits if deemed necessary by the County Health
Officer.
      (3)   If the on-site soil evaluation report created from the evaluation
of the soil profile is to be used for obtaining an on-site sewage system
construction permit, the report must be signed by the professional soil
scientist, who must submit it directly to the County Health Department.
   (C)   All lots platted after the effective date of this chapter that will
utilize an on-site sewage system shall consist of at least one acre of land.
   (D)   All distribution boxes shall be stabilized so as to prevent movement
during installation and operation.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 CONNECTION OR RECONNECTION TO AN EXISTING ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   An existing residential or commercial on-site sewage system may be
considered for connection or reconnection to a new or replacement dwelling,
residential outbuilding or commercial facility if:
      (1)   The system is inspected by an installer registered with the County
Health Department or a qualified inspector and found to consist minimally of a
septic tank and a soil absorption field that has not failed or malfunctioned;
      (2)   Either:
         (a)   The original system installation was permitted through the
County Health Department; or
         (b)   The original system was not permitted through the County Health
Department, but a registered installer develops a plan of the site and system
showing compliance with the rules and this chapter; and
      (3) The existing system is appropriately sized for the structure to be
served.
         (a)   If the connection or reconnection is due to involuntary events,
the County Health Department may utilize their best judgment for the soil
absorption field when approving a connection or reconnection to an existing
system.
         (b)   If the connection or reconnection is due to voluntary events,
the system being connected to must meet the requirements of the appropriate
rule, unless the site meets the requirements of the definition of repair or
replacement construction in this chapter.
   (B)   All commercial facilities wanting to connect or reconnect to an
existing on-site sewage system must have written approval from the Indiana
Department of Health.
   (C)   A construction permit for connection or reconnection to an existing
on-site sewage system shall be obtained prior to the start of construction of
the residence, residential outbuilding or commercial facility.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer determines there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of this chapter, Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3 or
Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1, the County Health Officer, or his or her designee, shall
issue a notice of violation to the person or persons responsible, as hereafter
provided. The notice shall:
      (1)   Indicate the date and location of the violation;
      (2)   Clearly indicate the nature of the violation and the related
ordinance, statute, and/or rule citation;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of necessary
remediation;
      (4)   Be properly served upon the person(s) responsible. Proper service
shall include any of the following:
         (a)   Sent to the person directly via first class mail;
         (b)   Sent by certified mail to the last known mailing address of the
person;
         (c)   Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the property affected
by the notice; or
         (d)   Other method of service authorized or required under the laws of
this state.
   (B)   After receiving an order in writing from the County Health Officer, or
his or her designee, the owner of the property shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter and/or rule as set forth in the order and within the time limit
specified therein. The order shall be served on the owner but may be served on
any person who, by contract with the owner, has assumed the duty of complying
with the provisions of an order. Failure to comply with the order shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and the violator shall be subject to the
penalties as prescribed in §
130.99.
   (C)   The County Health Officer, or his or her designee, may compel an
immediate stop work order of work completed, in progress or planned that is in
violation of any provision(s) of this chapter. The stop work order shall:
      (1)   Result in the immediate suspension of all work at the worksite; and
      (2)   Be posted at the construction site and confirmed by written notice
to the owner or occupant of the premises, and any person engaged in the
performance of the work or causing the work to be performed.
      (3)   Failure to comply with the stop work order shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and the violator shall be subject to the penalties as
prescribed in §
130.99.
   (D)   Whenever he or she finds that an emergency exists that requires
immediate action to protect public health, the County Health Officer, or his or
her designee, may, without notice or hearing, issue an emergency order
declaring the existence of an emergency and require that action be taken as the
Health Officer deems necessary. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
chapter, Rule 410 IAC 6-8.3, Rule 410 IAC 6-10.1, and Bulletin S.E. 11, the
order shall be effective immediately.
   (E)   Any person to whom an emergency order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but upon petition to the County Health Officer, shall be
afforded a hearing, as soon as possible in the manner provided in §
130.09.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24)
§ 130.09 PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL.
   (A)   Appeals may be filed with the County Board of Health for any of the
following decisions or actions taken by the County Health Officer, or his or
her designee:
      (1)   Denial of a permit to install, construct, reconnect, replace, alter
or repair an on-site sewage system, holding tank or sanitary vault privy;
      (2)   Revocation of a permit;
      (3)   The issuance of a notice of violation, a stop work order, or an
emergency order as prescribed in §
130.08;
      (4)   Registration revocation, or duration of revocation, or denial of
registration renewal as prescribed in §
130.04; or
      (5)   A penalty as prescribed in §
130.99.
   (B)   Any person(s) filing an appeal shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the County Health Board. The request shall be in writing and
received at the office of the County Health Department within ten calendar days
of receipt of the notice. If a request for hearing is not received within the
ten calendar days, the decision or action shall stand.
   (C)   The request shall briefly state the reasons for the requested hearing.
Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the County Health Officer shall
arrange a time and a place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof.
   (D)   The hearing shall be held as soon as practical after receipt of the
request in compliance with I.C. 5-14-1.5-5 (Open Door Law).
   (E)   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given the opportunity to be
heard and to show evidence as to why the decision or action should be modified
or withdrawn. Additionally, the Health Officer, and/or his or her designee,
shall be given time to explain the circumstances of the decision and/or action.
   (F)   The proceedings at the hearing, including the findings and decision of
the County Health Board, shall be summarized in the minutes of the hearing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the County Health
Department. In addition, all pertinent information, including, but not limited
to, permit application and written correspondence, shall be included in the
public record. Any person may seek relief thereof from any court of competent
jurisdiction as provided by the law of the state.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24)
§ 130.10 REMEDIES.
   Upon refusal or neglect of any person to correct an unlawful or unsanitary
condition when the abatement of the condition has been ordered in writing by
the Health Officer, or an appeal against the decision and/or action has been
sustained by the Health Board, the Health Officer may, through the office of
the County Attorney, institute proceedings in the County Superior or Circuit
Court for enforcement by prohibitory or mandatory injunction to restrain any
person from violating the provisions of this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24)
§ 130.11 CONFLICT WITH ANY OTHER CODE.
    In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any county code existing on the effective date of this
chapter, the provision that establishes the higher standard for the promotion
and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. Any
provision of any other county code, existing on the effective date of this
chapter, which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the people, is hereby declared to be repealed to the
extent that it may be found in conflict with this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or entity found to be in violation of any provision
of this chapter and/or rule shall be fined not more than $2,500. Each day after
the expiration of the time limit for abating unsanitary conditions and
completing improvements to abate such conditions, as ordered by the County
Health Department, shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (B)   The County Health Department shall also be entitled to seek any other
legal remedy available against any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter and/or rule.
   (C)   The County Health Department shall be entitled to seek all legal fees
incurred during enforcement of this chapter and/or rule.
   (D)   The penalties provided in this section shall be cumulative, and not
exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law.
(BC Ord. 2024-17, passed 10-9-24)
CHAPTER 131: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Definitions
Control and Care of Animals
   
131.10   Animals running at large
   
131.11   Animal nuisance
   
131.12   Dangerous dogs
   
131.13   Shelter requirements
   
131.14   Housing requirements
   
131.15   Food and water
   
131.16   Medical care
   
131.17   Exercise
   
131.18   Minimum age requirement
   
131.19   Animals not to be offered as novelties or prizes
   
131.20   Restraint, hitching, or tying
   
131.21   Cruelty
   
131.22   Abandonment
   
131.23   Animals in vehicles
   
131.24   Poisonous bait; traps
   
131.25   Animals in heat
   
131.26   Kennel enclosures; inspections
   
131.27   Identification
Impoundment and Relinquishment
   
131.30   Impoundment of animals
   
131.31   Records; notice of impoundment
   
131.32   Redemption of animal
   
131.33   Disposition of unclaimed animals
   
131.34   Relinquishment of animals
Rabies Control
   
131.40   Rabies vaccine required
   
131.41   Knowledge of rabies or animal bite to be reported to officials
   
131.42   Bite reports
Administration
   
131.50   Funds deposited in County Health Fund
   
131.51   Rules and regulations for animal control facility
   
131.52   Enforcement and performance of duties
   
131.53   Violations
   
131.54   Subsequent violations
   
131.55   Payments by bank card and credit card
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT. An animal over six months of age.
   ANIMAL. Any living domestic animal, including fowl, mammals, and reptiles,
except human beings.
   ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT. The department established and overseen by the
Board of Commissioners of Warrick County that is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter as set forth herein.
   ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY. Any premises designated and operated by the Board
of Commissioners of Warrick County, or its designee, for the purposes of
impounding and caring for animals as described in this chapter.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The officer appointed by the Board of Commissioners
of Warrick County to enforce this chapter. The term shall also refer to the
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER's deputies, assistants, and employees, as well as
Warrick County Sheriff’s Department deputies, or any other person designated by
the Board of Commissioners of Warrick County.
   ANIMAL WELFARE ORGANIZATION. Any nonprofit organization given tax exempt
status under 26 USCA 501(c)(3) for the purpose of prevention of cruelty or
neglect to animals and incorporated under the laws of Indiana.
   AT LARGE. Any animal being loose and free roaming off the owner's real
property, and not being on a leash under the control of a competent person.
   DANGEROUS DOG.
      (1)   Any dog that, according to the records of the Animal Control
Officer:
         (a)   Inflicts severe injury on a human, without provocation, on
public or private property;
         (b)   Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of a human
or any other animal, without provocation, after the dog has been classified as
a potentially dangerous animal and the owner of the dog has been notified of
such classification; or
         (c)   Has at any time been trained, owned, or harbored for the
purpose, primarily or in part, to engage in animal fighting, even when such dog
has not been classified previously as a potentially dangerous animal.
      (2)   A dog that is defending itself, or its owner's home, is not a
DANGEROUS DOG if:
         (a)   The dog is kept primarily to guard and protect the owner and/or
the owner's premises; and
         (b)   The owner has posted appropriate signage along the perimeter of
the owner's property that reasonably notifies other individuals as to the dog's
presence, according to the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any tame animal associated with family life or accustomed
to life in, or near, the habitation of humans or such as to contribute to the
support of a family, including, without limitation, a dog, cat, horse, cattle
(bovine), sheep, goat, rabbit, mouse, rat, donkey, guinea pig, hamster, gerbil,
pigeon, chicken, turkey, goose, duck, llama, pig, bison, chinchilla, mink, or
ferret.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any animal whose native habitat is not indigenous to the
continental United States of America except for fish, fur-bearing animals that
are commercially bred for the furrier trade, and birds protected under federal
laws and regulations.
   GROOMING SHOP. A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped,
plucked, or otherwise groomed.
   KENNEL. A facility maintained in a single location utilized for breeding,
boarding, training, or sale of dogs and/or cats.
   LIVESTOCK. Certain domestic animals, including, without limitation, cattle
(bovine), sheep, pigs, goats, bison, llamas, horses, mules, and donkeys.
LIVESTOCK does not include aquatic animals, fish, dogs, cats, rabbits, mice,
rats, guinea pigs, gerbils, chinchillas, minks, ferrets, poultry, and/or other
birds.
   MAJOR KENNEL. A kennel consisting of 15 or more dogs and/or cats.
   MICROCHIP. A computer chip implanted underneath the skin and between the
scapula of an animal which contains information relating to said animal.
   MINOR KENNEL. A kennel consisting of less than 15 dogs and/or cats.
   NUISANCE.
      (1)   An animal is considered a NUISANCE if it:
         (a)   Interferes with or molests passersby or passing vehicles;
         (b)   Attacks another animal or person;
         (c)   Is at large;
         (d)   Damages private or public property;
         (e)   Causes frequent, persistent loud noises or other sounds common
to its species which disrupt the comfort or repose of any person in the
immediate neighborhood or in any residential area, unless said animal is kept
in the operation of a boarding kennel, kennel, training facilities, or for the
practice of animal husbandry;
         (f)   Damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on any public right-of-
way;
         (g)   Trespasses on, soils, defiles, defecates on, or damages private
or public property, including, but not limited to, the leaving of waste
material; or
         (h)   Is allowed to create any condition which poses a substantial
risk of harm to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment.
      (2)   An animal that is defending itself, or its owner's home, is not a
NUISANCE if:
         (a)   The animal is kept primarily to guard and protect the owner and/
or the owner's property; and
         (b)   The owner has posted appropriate signage along the perimeter of
the owner's property that reasonably notifies other individuals as to the
animal's presence, according to the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.
   OWNER. Any person having the right of property in, the charge, control, or
custody of, or who otherwise harbors, an animal.
   PERSON. An individual of the age of 18 years or older, firm, limited
liability company, association, partnership, corporation, nonprofit, or other
legal entity recognized under the laws of the State of Indiana.
   POCKET PETS. Certain domestic animals, including hamsters, gerbils, mice,
rats, chinchillas, guinea pigs, sugar gliders, and hedgehogs.
   PRIMARY ENCLOSURE. A structure that meets the following requirements:
      (1)   Suitable to prevent the entry of children younger than 12 years of
age into the structure and to prevent the animal from escaping the structure;
      (2)   Consists of secure sides and a secure top that are sufficient in
height to prevent the animal from escaping over the sides of the structure; and
      (3)   Provides the animal appropriate protection from adverse weather
conditions.
   STRAY. Any animal that is not within the real property limits of its owner
and is not under  restraint or is unattended.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23)
CONTROL AND CARE OF ANIMALS
§ 131.10 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No owner of any animal shall allow said animal to stray beyond the
owner's property or premises unless the animal is maintained on a leash or is
engaged in lawful hunting and accompanied by the owner.
   (B)   No owner of any animal, except for an animal which is hereinabove
provided, shall allow said animal to stray beyond the owner's property or
premises, unless the animal is under the reasonable control of some person.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally kill any
domestic animal running at large on his or her property without the consent of
the owner of the domestic animal, unless the person reasonably believes the
conduct is necessary to:
      (1)   Prevent injury to the person or another person;
      (2)   Protect the property of the person from destruction or substantial
damage; or
      (3)   Prevent a seriously injured vertebrate animal from prolonged
suffering.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.11 ANIMAL NUISANCE.
   (A)   No owner shall own, keep, possess, or otherwise harbor any animal that
is a nuisance.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer, in his or her sole discretion, shall
determine whether an animal is considered a nuisance as defined in this
chapter.
   (C)   An owner of an animal determined to be a nuisance shall be subject to
a fine for violating this chapter. The Animal Control Officer may impound an
animal determined to be a nuisance according to §§
131.30 through
131.34.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27- 21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.12 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   No owner shall own, keep, possess, or otherwise harbor a dangerous
dog.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer, in his or her sole discretion, shall
determine whether a dog is considered a dangerous dog as defined in this
chapter.
   (C)   An owner of a dog determined to be a dangerous dog shall be subject to
a fine for violating this chapter. The Animal Control Officer shall impound a
dog determined to be a dangerous dog according to §§
131.30 through
131.34.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2018-34, passed 12-10-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-19, passed 4-26-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021- 35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord.
2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.13 SHELTER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An owner shall provide adequate shelter for all domestic animals as
required herein:
      (1)   Shelter for a domestic animal shall consist of a structure with a
bottom, top, and three sides that is of sufficient size for the age, breed, and
size of the domestic animal.
      (2)   When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort to a
domestic animal, the owner shall provide sufficient shade to allow all domestic
animals that are kept outdoors to protect themselves from direct sunlight.
      (3)   The owner shall provide access to shelter with a windbreak and
watershed to protect domestic animals that are kept outdoors from weather
conditions which would constitute a health hazard to domestic animals.
   (B)   Appropriate shelter for livestock shall consist of a windbreak and
watershed to protect the livestock from weather conditions which would
constitute a health hazard to said livestock.
   (C)   All animals shall be kept in a sanitary manner. The owner of any
animal shall maintain said animal's areas, or any areas of animal contact, so
as to prevent odor or the maintenance of said animal in an unsanitary
environment. An animal's areas shall be kept free from accumulation of
excrement, water, and mud.
   (D)   The owner of any livestock shall maintain any areas where livestock is
located in a sanitary manner and ensure that said livestock area is free from
materials and debris that may cause injury to the livestock, including, without
limitation, barbed wire, exposed glass, and an accumulation of trash or waste
material.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.14 HOUSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Animals must have access to sufficient ventilation at all times as to
provide for the health and well-being of the animal and to minimize odors,
drafts, ammonia levels, and moisture condensation. Ventilation shall be
provided by windows and/or vents, such as fans or air-conditioning units.
   (B)   Housing of animals kept inside a crate or floor cage must allow said
animal to stand up, turn around, and lie down comfortably. The enclosed areas
of said crate or floor cage shall be free of feces and urine.
   (C)   An owner shall not cause an animal to be kept inside a crate or floor
cage continuously, according to the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.
   (D)   Livestock must be housed or kept in an area that is free from
materials and debris that may cause injury to the livestock, including, without
limitation, barbed wire, exposed glass, and an accumulation of trash or waste
material.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.15 FOOD AND WATER.
   No owner of an animal shall fail to supply such animal with potable drinking
water and adequate food that is nutritional for the age and species in adequate
amounts to maintain good health. An emaciated condition of any animal, or an
unnatural and excessive craving for food and/or drink exhibited by any animal,
shall be prima facie evidence of the owner's failure to properly feed and/or
provide water to such animal as is required herein.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.16 MEDICAL CARE.
   All animals shall be provided with reasonable and necessary medical care in
addition to any required vaccinations. Livestock shall be provided with
reasonable and necessary medical care, including, but not limited to, farrier
and dental care. Grooming of an animal that normally requires it shall be free
of excessive matting so as to allow the animal to move freely without
complication or pain.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.17 EXERCISE.
   (A)   No owner of an animal shall fail to supply such animal with adequate
exercise opportunities and area. Any domesticated dog or cat shall have the
minimum open exercise area commensurate with their size as follows:
      (1)   Forty square feet per dog that weighs less than 40 lbs;
      (2) Sixty square feet per dog that weighs between 40 lbs. and 80 lbs;
      (3)   Eighty square feet per dog that weighs more than 80 lbs; or
      (4)   Twelve square feet per cat.
   (B)   No enclosure shall house more than three adult dogs or cats per
enclosure.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.18 MINIMUM AGE REQUIREMENT.
   Unless a dog or cat is at least eight weeks of age and has been weaned, no
dog or cat shall be delivered by any person to any carrier or intermediate
handler for transportation in commerce, or transported in commerce by any
person, except those approved by the USDA Animal Welfare Act.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.19 ANIMALS NOT TO BE OFFERED AS NOVELTIES OR PRIZES.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this section for a person to sell, offer to
sell, trade, barter, or give away, in Warrick County, any live animal,
including birds and/or reptiles, for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   As a novelty or prize;
      (2)   As an inducement to enter a place of amusement;
      (3)   As an incentive to enter any business establishment; or
      (4)   As an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the
offer was made for the purpose of attracting trade or business, other than
business establishments selling animals as their primary business.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to transport
into Warrick County any live animal, including birds and/or reptiles, for any
purpose prohibited in division (A) above.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this section for a person to sell, offer to
sell, or otherwise dispose of any animals whose appearance has been
artificially or chemically colored, sprayed, or painted.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.20 RESTRAINT, HITCHING OR TYING.
   (A)   Animals must be confined to the owner's real property and not
permitted to run loose. While on the owner's real property, but not under the
owner's direct control, animals must be secured without means of escape by a
leash, or otherwise be confined to a pen, fenced (either physical or
electronic) enclosure, corral, cage, house, or other secure enclosure. In
agriculturally zoned areas, however, cats may be allowed to run at large on the
owner's property when not under the owner's direct control.
   (B)   No animal shall be hitched, tied, or fastened by any rope, chain,
cord, or other similar material that is directly attached to the animal's neck.
Animals that are tied, hitched, or fastened shall wear a properly fitted collar
or harness, other than a choker-type collar. This section does not prohibit the
use of a choker-type collar in the training of animals or in the leading of the
same.
   (C)   An owner shall not permit prong-type collars to remain on an animal
when the animal is not in training. In no instance shall a prong-type collar be
permitted by an owner to remain on an animal for a continuous period of 24
hours or more.
   (D)   A tether or tie-out for a dog shall be at least three times the length
of the dog as measured from the tip of said dog's nose to the tip of its tail.
The tether or tie-out shall be of adequate strength for the breed, weight,
size, and age of the dog in order to keep the dog secure.
   (E)   No person shall permit an animal to access a roof or overhang by any
means, including, without limitation, through an open window.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.21 CRUELTY.
   No person shall beat, cruelly treat, neglect, torment, overload, overwork,
or otherwise abuse any animal, or otherwise cause, instigate, permit, or
promote combat between animals, including fowl. The definitions set forth in
I.C. 35-46-3 et seq. are incorporated herein by reference.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92: Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.22 ABANDONMENT.
   No person shall abandon, or cause to be abandoned, any animal anywhere
within Warrick County. The definitions set forth in I.C. 35-46-3 et seq. are
incorporated herein by reference.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.23 ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.
   (A)   No animal shall be left unattended in a vehicle when the conditions in
said vehicle would constitute a health hazard to the animal.
   (B)   Transportation of animals.
      (1)   Any animal transported in the open bed of a truck while the vehicle
is in motion:
         (a)   Shall be tethered by a halter to the two sides of the corners of
the bed of the truck closest to the cab, so long as such halter is not secured
to said animal's neck; or
         (b)   Shall be contained in a secured travel container so as to
prevent injury to the animal.
      (2)   The tailgate of any vehicle transporting an animal in accordance
with this section shall be in a secured, closed position.
   (C)   No animal shall be transported in the open bed of a truck during
inclement weather. Weather temperatures below 20° Fahrenheit and above 90°
Fahrenheit, as well as any other weather condition that would constitute a
health hazard to domestic animals, shall be considered "inclement weather" for
purposes of this section.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2018-34, passed 12-10-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord.
2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.24 POISONOUS BAIT; TRAPS.
   (A)   Poisonous bait. No person shall set out any kind of poisonous
substance or bait with the intent to do any harm to any domestic animal.
   (B)   Traps.
      (1)   No live-animal traps shall be set during inclement weather or in a
location which exposes the trap(s) to direct sunlight. Weather temperatures
measuring below 32° Fahrenheit, including wind chill, and above 90° Fahrenheit,
including heat index, shall be considered "inclement weather" for the purposes
of this section.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for a person to use, place, set, or cause to
be used, placed, or set, any snare, net, or other devise for the purposes of
trapping or capturing any animal upon any land or waters located in Warrick
County in any manner that does not result in said animal being captured
painlessly or killed instantly.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a person, having placed a lawful trap,
snare, or similar device in Warrick County, to fail to inspect and empty said
trap, snare, or device at least once during every 24 hour period in which the
trap, snare, or device is in place.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2018-34, passed 12-10-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord.
2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.25 ANIMALS IN HEAT.
   An animal in heat shall be confined in a secure building, enclosure, or
kennel so as to prevent the animal from being a nuisance, except during
instances of planned breeding.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.26 KENNEL ENCLOSURES; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The primary enclosures for dogs and cats in kennels shall be
constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each dog
and/or cat to turn about freely and easily, to stand, and to sit and lie down
in a comfortable, normal position. No more than three adult dogs or cats shall
be housed in the same primary enclosure. All primary enclosures shall provide
appropriate exercise floor space as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer shall have the right to inspect all
permanent or mobile kennels, pet shops, grooming shops, and animal welfare
organizations, including, without limitation, shelters, rescues, and foster
homes, and/or riding schools or stables at any time during normal business
hours.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23)
§ 131.27 IDENTIFICATION.
   An owner shall maintain permanent identification for any domestic animal
kept as a pet that states the owner's first and last name and a phone number to
contact the owner. Said identification may be in the form of one or more of the
following:
   (A)   An identification tag affixed to a collar or harness that is securely
worn around the animal's neck;
   (B)   A collar with an engraved plate that is securely worn around the
animal's neck;
   (C)   A collar that states the necessary information required under this
section that is legibly written in permanent marker and which is securely worn
around the animal's neck; or
   (D)   A microchip.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
IMPOUNDMENT AND RELINQUISHMENT
§ 131.30 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
   The Animal Control Officer, upon reasonable belief that an animal classified
as a domestic animal or livestock, as defined herein, is not being provided
with adequate food, water, exercise, ventilation, and/or sanitary shelter, or
is otherwise being cruelly treated, shall impound the animal and proceed as is
provided in §§
131.30 through
131.34.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23)
§ 131.31 RECORDS; NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Immediately after impounding any animal as a result of a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer
to enter upon the records of the animal control facility that are kept by the
Animal Control Officer for such purposes the date of impounding and a
description of the animal impounded. Public notice of the impounding of all
animals shall be given by posting one copy of such notice at the animal control
facility.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC 2016-10, passed 6-13-16; Am. BC Ord.
2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-
27, passed 12-27-23)
§ 131.32 REDEMPTION OF ANIMAL.
   (A)   Redemption period. Any animal, including livestock, that is not
redeemed by its owner within six days after the posting of such notice shall
immediately become the property of Warrick County Animal Control and be subject
to disposition by the Warrick County Animal Control, or its designee, in
accordance with §
131.33 below.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, the owner of any impounded animal,
including livestock, may redeem said impounded animal prior to the expiration
of the redemption period by meeting the following requirements:
      (1)   The owner must be 18 years or older;
      (2)   Paying the sum of $15 for each day said animal has been impounded,
up to and including the day of redemption. Impoundment fees may be modified by
Warrick County Animal Control, from time to time, according to its discretion;
      (3)   Paying to vaccinate the animal for rabies, if needed;
      (4)   Paying any expenses associated with the implantation of a microchip
in any animal, excluding pocket pets or livestock; and
      (5)   Paying any expenses provided to the animal for adequate housing,
food, medicine, and/or reasonable and necessary veterinary care.
   (C)   After an animal's third impoundment, excluding pocket pets and
livestock, owner of said animal shall pay any expenses to spay or neuter said
animal. Fees and expenses payable for the spaying and neutering of an animal
under this section are determinable by Warrick County Animal Control and may be
modified from time to time.
   (D)   Upon an animal's fourth impoundment, or upon the impoundment of an
animal belonging to the same owner who, in the aggregate, has had one or more
animals impounded by Warrick County Animal Control no less than three times
during the immediately preceding two years, said impounded animal becomes the
property of Warrick County Animal Control and shall not be redeemable by the
owner. By way of example only, if, within a two year period, one animal
belonging to an owner is impounded three times, and a second animal belonging
to the same owner is subsequently impounded within two years of the initial
impoundment of the first animal, then upon the second animal's impoundment,
said animal becomes the property of Warrick County Animal Control and shall not
be redeemable by the owner.
   (E)   An owner's attempted sale or other disposition of an animal that is
impounded at the animal control facility does not affect the application of
this chapter.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, prior to Warrick
County Animal Control releasing an animal to a person under this chapter,
Warrick County Animal Control, in its sole and absolute discretion, may require
said animal to be implanted with a microchip at the expense of the person
seeking the animal's release. Fees and costs associated with implanting a
microchip in an animal for purposes of identification are to be determined by
Warrick County Animal Control and may be modified from time to time, according
to its discretion.
   (G)   An owner in violation of this chapter shall not be permitted to redeem
a dog determined to be a dangerous dog pursuant to §
131.12.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2003-15, passed 7-16- 03; Am. BC
Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2018-34, 12-10-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-
19, passed 4-26-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021- 35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27,
passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.33 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any domestic animal not reclaimed by its owner within six days of the
posting of notice of impoundment at the animal control facility shall be
eligible for either adoption, rescue, or euthanasia, whichever is necessary, in
the discretion of Warrick County Animal Control, to carry out the intent of
this chapter.
   (B)   Adoption. Adoption of an unclaimed animal from Warrick County Animal
Control requires the following:
      (1)   The adopting party to pay for a rabies vaccination of said animal,
if the animal is one requiring rabies vaccination under the laws of the State
of Indiana or by this chapter;
      (2)   By paying a fee of $10 for any animal six months of age or older,
or a fee of $5 for any animal under the age of six months. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the cost of an animal that is already spayed or neutered at the time
of adoption is $25. The Animal Control Officer shall be charged with the
responsibility of determining the species and age of the adopted animal.
Adoption fees may be modified by Warrick County Animal Control from time to
time, according to its discretion; and
      (3)   In the event the animal to be adopted has not been spayed or
neutered, the animal shall be spayed or neutered prior to finalization of the
adoption. The person seeking adoption shall make arrangements with a licensed
veterinarian in Warrick County to perform the necessary surgery to spay or
neuter the animal. The Animal Control Officer shall deliver the animal to the
veterinarian's office for such surgery.
   (C)   Rescue. Rescue of an unclaimed animal from Warrick County Animal
Control requires the following:
      (1)   The rescuing party pay a fee of:
         (a)   Five dollars for an animal less than six months of age;
         (b)   Ten dollars for an animal six months of age or older; or
         (c)   Fifteen dollars for a litter of offspring and the litter's
mother.
         (d)   Rescue fees may be modified by Warrick County Animal Control,
from time to time, according to its discretion.
      (2)   Each rescuing party be approved by Warrick County Animal Control
for the rescue of the unclaimed animal and have a completed rescue application
on file at the Warrick County Animal Control office. Rescue applications are
available at the Warrick County Animal Control office.
   (D)   Euthanasia. The decision to euthanize an unclaimed animal shall be
made at the sole discretion of Warrick County Animal Control.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2003-15, passed 7-16- 03; Am. BC
Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2018-34, passed 12-10-18; Am. BC Ord.
2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23)
§ 131.34 RELINQUISHMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Only those animals that have been found in Warrick County may be
surrendered to Warrick County Animal Control.
   (B)   A person must complete and sign an intake card provided by Warrick
County Animal Control before surrendering an animal to Warrick County Animal
Control.
   (C)   Animals that are surrendered to Warrick County Animal Control shall
immediately become the property of Warrick County and placed for disposition.
   (D)   In its sole discretion, Warrick County Animal Control may provide
euthanasia services of animals upon request, following the completion of a
euthanasia request form provided to the requesting party by Warrick County
Animal Control. Warrick County Animal Control shall require the party
requesting said service to pay any costs associated therewith. The decision to
euthanize an animal pursuant to this section shall be made at the sole
discretion of Warrick County Animal Control.
   (E)   Stray animals shall be impounded for six days, commencing the day the
animal is impounded, as long as space allows and the animal, in Warrick County
Animal Control's discretion, is in good health. If Warrick County Animal
Control determines the animal is sick, contagious, suffering, or extremely
dangerous, the animal may be humanely euthanized in accordance with Warrick
County Animal Control procedure.
   (F)   Animals that pose a danger to Warrick County Animal Control employees
and staff and that are without a means of identification may be euthanized at
the discretion of Warrick County Animal Control.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2018-34, passed 12-10-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-19, passed 4-26-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021- 35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord.
2023-27, passed 12-27-23)
RABIES CONTROL
§ 131.40 RABIES VACCINE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No owner shall possess within Warrick County any animal three months
of age or older that is required by law to have a rabies vaccination, unless
such animal has been immunized by a licensed veterinarian with a rabies vaccine
of a type approved by the State Board of Health. In accordance with Indiana
state law, one-year and three-year vaccines may be used according to approved
label directions.
   (B)   In no case shall more than the period prescribed on the vaccine label,
whether one year or three years, lapse between an animal's rabies vaccination.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2003-15, passed 7-16- 03; Am. BC
Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord.
2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.41 KNOWLEDGE OF RABIES OR ANIMAL BITE TO BE REPORTED TO OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Any person who has knowledge or a reasonable belief that an animal is
afflicted with rabies shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer, the
Warrick County Sheriff’s Department, or the Warrick County Health Department.
   (B)   Whenever an animal bites a person or another animal, the owner of said
biting animal shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.42 BITE REPORTS.
   (A)   Following receipt of an animal bite report, the Animal Control Officer
shall determine if the animal accused of biting is likely to have caused
serious injury to the alleged victim, and if the accused animal has been
properly inoculated with a rabies vaccine.
   (B)   After investigation, if the Animal Control Officer concludes the
victim has been seriously injured and the alleged animal is likely to have
caused the injury, then the owner of the animal accused of biting shall
surrender the animal to the Animal Control Officer for quarantine. In the
alternative, the owner of the animal accused of biting the victim may surrender
the animal to a licensed veterinary physician office located in Warrick County
or other contiguous Indiana county for quarantine. An owner of an animal who
refuses to surrender the animal to the Animal Control Officer or a licensed
veterinary physician for quarantine upon request violates this chapter and
shall be subject to the specific penalty provisions of §
131.99(D).
   (C)   Upon receipt of an animal bite report, the Animal Control Officer may
enter upon private property, excluding closed buildings, if he or she has
reasonable grounds to believe that a biting animal is located on said property.
   (D)   Upon taking possession of a biting animal, or an animal accused of
biting, the Animal Control Officer shall order the animal to be held in
quarantine for a period of ten days. In the absence of evidence of a rabies
immunization, the animal shall be held in quarantine at the animal control
facility or a licensed veterinary facility. If the Animal Control Officer
determines that the animal accused of biting has been properly inoculated with
a rabies vaccine, the animal may, at the discretion of the Animal Control
Officer, be quarantined in the home of the owner or other responsible person if
the owner of the animal agrees in writing to comply with all of the provisions
of the Home Quarantine Guidelines issued by the State of Indiana. The Home
Quarantine Guidelines shall include, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   The Warrick County Animal Control Officer shall appoint a licensed
veterinarian to examine the animal at the end of a ten-day quarantine period.
The owner of the animal accused of biting shall be responsible for the costs
incurred in examining the animal, as well as a boarding fee of $15 per day,
which costs shall be paid prior to the release of the animal at the end of the
quarantine period. If the animal is quarantined at a veterinary facility of the
owner's choice, the owner shall be solely responsible for the costs and care of
the animal in said facility.
      (2)   If, at the end of the ten-day quarantine period, the veterinarian
appointed by the Warrick County Animal Control Officer reasonably believes that
the animal is not afflicted with rabies, said animal shall be released from
quarantine contingent upon the following:
         (a)   Compliance with the payment requirements set forth in §
131.33;
         (b)   Compliance with the inoculation requirements set forth in this
section; and
         (c)   Payment of veterinary expenses for examination during quarantine
required under this section.
      (3)   If an animal dies at any time during a ten-day quarantine period,
the animal's head shall be sent to the Indiana State Department of Health for
examination. Any costs incurred by Warrick County in connection with such
examination shall be the responsibility of the owner of the animal and paid
upon notice thereof.
      (4)   No animal shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of at any point
during the ten-day period in which the animal is quarantined without the
express permission of the Warrick County Animal Control Officer.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2003-15, passed 7-16- 03; Am. BC
Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2018-34, passed 12-10-18; Am. BC Ord.
2021-19, passed 4-26-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-
27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
ADMINISTRATION
§ 131.50 FUNDS DEPOSITED IN COUNTY HEALTH FUND.
   All funds collected by Warrick County Animal Control shall be deposited in
the Warrick County General Fund Animal Control Revenue Line.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23)
Cross-reference:
   Funds, see
Ch. 37
§ 131.51 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY.
   (A)   The Warrick County Board of Commissioners is authorized to expend
annually in the construction, maintenance, and supervision of the Warrick
County animal control facility, and in the payment of salaries and expenses
incurred in the administration of this chapter, or so much as may be necessary,
from the sums which may hereafter annually be appropriated for such purpose.
   (B)   The administration of the animal control facility and all employees
thereof, and those engaged in its maintenance, shall be under the jurisdiction
of the Warrick County Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners are
authorized to enforce the rules and regulations adopted by it for the
administration thereof and to adopt such rules and regulations necessary in the
discretion of the Board of Commissioners for the accomplishment of the intent
and purposes of this chapter.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23)
§ 131.52 ENFORCEMENT AND PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Animal Control
Officer, their employee(s) or designee(s), and the Warrick County Sheriff’s
Office.
   (B)   No person shall interfere in the performance of the duties under this
chapter by the Animal Control Officer, Warrick County Sheriff’s Office, and/or
their
employee(s) or designee(s).
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.53 VIOLATIONS.
   The Animal Control Officer may issue a written notice of violation to
persons believed to be in violation of this chapter, setting forth the nature
of the offense.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23)
§ 131.54 SUBSEQUENT VIOLATIONS.
   A violation committed by a person more than two years after the most recent
violation committed by the same person shall constitute a first violation for
purposes of this chapter. Any violation committed by a person that occurs
within two years of a prior violation committed by the same person shall
constitute a subsequent violation for purposes of this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2018-34, passed 12-10-18; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-27, passed 12-27-23) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.55 PAYMENTS BY BANK CARD AND CREDIT CARD.
   (A)   Warrick County Animal Control ("WCAC") is authorized to accept bank
and credit cards for any payment to WCAC.
   (B)   WCAC is authorized and directed to charge and collect:
      (1)   A sum equal to the amount of the charge from the person who uses
the bank card or credit card;
      (2)   An official fee that may not exceed the transaction charge or
discount fee charged to WCAC by any bank or credit card vendor; and
      (3)   The convenience fee of $3 for any payment to WCAC by bank card or
credit card.
(CC Res. 2024-07, passed 6-6-24)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The Warrick County Board of Commissioners, or its designees, shall
have the authority to set a reasonable fine for any violation of this chapter.
A copy of the current fee schedule shall be posted at the animal control
facility at all times.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, the penalty for a first offense of
violation of this chapter shall be a fine not to exceed $100.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above, the penalty for any subsequent violation of
this chapter shall be a fine not to exceed $500.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the above, the penalty for the failure of an owner to
surrender an animal accused of biting to the Animal Control Officer for
quarantine in accordance with §
131.42(B) shall be a fine not to exceed $500.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the above, any person found in violation of this
chapter shall be responsible for filing fees incurred and attorney fees of up
to $750 in the event the violation committed by the person is the subject of
litigation.
(BC Ord. 1992-2, passed 2-10-92; Am. BC 2016-10, passed 6-13-16; Am. BC Ord.
2018-26, passed 9-24-18; Am. BC Ord. 2018-34, passed 12-10-18; Am. BC Ord.
2021-19, passed 4-26-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021-35, passed 9-27-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-
27, passed 12-27-23)
CHAPTER 132: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
   
132.01   Fee for flu shots
   
132.02   Fee for TB testing
   
132.03   Fee for pneumonia inoculation
   
132.04   Fee for vaccine administration
   
132.05   Fee for privately purchased immunizations
   
132.06   Physician, abortion provider, hospital; requirement for admitting
privileges
   
132.07   Fee for pregnancy testing
§ 132.01 FEE FOR FLU SHOTS.
   (A)   There shall be a fee charged and collected for the service of
influenza inoculation provided by the County Department of Health, as set out
in division (B), unless the fee is waived under division (C).
   (B)   The fee for each flu shot shall be as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (B), the Department of Health may waive the
fee imposed herein:
      (1)   For those persons who have no private or public insurance program
available that will pay the fee on their, or their dependent's, behalf; and
      (2)   Where such person has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Department, pursuant to standards adopted by the Department, that the person
does not have the ability to pay the fee for the person or a dependent.
   (D)   The fee imposed by division (B) shall be deposited in the Local Health
Maintenance Fund to be used for the purposes for which the fund exists.
(BC Ord. 1994-14, passed 6-27-94; Am. BC Ord. 2000-5, passed 2-28- 00; Am. BC
Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
§ 132.02 FEE FOR TB TESTING.
   (A)   There shall be a fee charged and collected for the service of Mantoux
(TB) provided by the County Department of Health, as set out in division (B),
unless the fee is waived under division (C).
   (B)   The fee for Mantoux (TB) testing shall be as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   The Public Health Nurse may give TB certification class to any
interested party. The cost of the certification shall be as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
   (D)   The Department of Health may waive the fee imposed herein:
      (1)   For those persons who have no private or public insurance program
available that will pay the fee on their, or their dependent's, behalf; and
      (2)   Where such person has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Department, pursuant to standards adopted by the Department, that the person
does not have the ability to pay the fee for the person or a dependent.
   (E)   The fee imposed by division (B) shall be deposited in the Local Health
Maintenance Fund to be used for the purposes for which the fund exists.
(BC Ord. 1994-15, passed 6-27-94; Am. BC Ord. 1997-14, passed 9-8-97; Am. BC
Ord. 2003-04, passed 2-19-03; Am. BC Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
§ 132.03 FEE FOR PNEUMONIA INOCULATION.
   (A)   There shall be a fee charged and collected for the service of
pneumonia inoculation provided by the County Department of Health and Animal
Control, as set out in division (B), unless the fee is waived under division
(C).
   (B)   The fee for each pneumonia shot shall be the actual cost of the
inoculation plus a $1 inoculation fee; or
   (C)   The Department of Health and Animal Control may waive the fee imposed
herein:
      (1)   For those persons who have no private or public insurance program
available that will pay the fee on their, or their dependents behalf;
      (2)   Where such person has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Department, pursuant to standards adopted by the Department, that the person
does not have the ability to pay the fee for the person or a dependent.
   (D)   The fee imposed by division (B) shall be deposited in the local Health
Maintenance Fund to used for the purposes for which the fund exists.
(BC Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-19-03)
§ 132.04 FEE FOR VACCINE ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)    There shall be a fee charged and collected for the service of vaccine
administration provided by the County Department of Health (hereinafter
“Department”), as set out in division (B), unless the fee is waived under
division (C).
   (B)   The fee for vaccine administration shall be as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   The Department may waive the fee imposed herein:
      (1)   For those persons who have no private or public insurance program
available that will pay the fee on their, or their dependent’s behalf; and
      (2)   Where such person has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Department, pursuant to standards adopted by the Department, that the person
does not have the ability to pay the fee for the person or dependent.
   (D)   The fee imposed by division (B) shall be deposited in the Health Fund
to be used for the purposes for which the fund was created and exists.
(BC Ord. 2004-15, passed 11-17- 04; Am. BC Ord. 2012-28, passed 9-10-12; Am. BC
Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
§ 132.05 FEE FOR PRIVATELY PURCHASED IMMUNIZATIONS.
   (A)   There shall be a fee charged and collected for the service of
providing privately purchased immunizations provided by the County Department
of Health, as set out in division (B), unless the fee is waived under division
(C).
   (B)   The fee for each immunization shall be the actual cost as described in
§
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   The Department of Health may waive the fee imposed herein:
      (1)   For those persons who have no private or public insurance program
available that will pay the fee on their, or their dependent’s, behalf; and
      (2)   Where such person has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Department, pursuant to standards adopted by the Department, that the person
does not have the ability to pay the fee for the person or a dependent.
   (D)   The fee imposed by division (B) shall be deposited in the Local Health
Maintenance Fund to be used for the purposes for which the purposes for which
the fund exists.
(BC Ord. 2005-12, passed 6-15-05; Am. BC Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
§ 132.06 PHYSICIAN, ABORTION PROVIDER, HOSPITAL; REQUIREMENT FOR ADMITTING
PRIVILEGES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PHYSICIAN. As defined in I.C. 16-18-2-282.
      ABORTION PROVIDER. A physician which performs abortions.
      HOSPITAL. As defined in I.C. 16-18-2-179(b).
   (B)   An abortion provider may not perform an abortion in the county unless
the physician has admitting privileges at a hospital located:
      (1)   In the county; or
      (2)   In an Indiana county adjacent to this county.
   (C)   An abortion provider who performs an abortion in the county shall
notify the patient of the location of the hospital at which the physician has
admitting privileges and where the patient may receive follow-up care by the
physician if complications arise.
   (D)   No hospital within the county shall allow an abortion to be performed
within its facility unless the procedure is performed by a physician who has
admitting privileges at said hospital or a hospital in an Indiana county
adjacent to this county.
(BC Ord. 2011-04, passed 2-14-11)
§ 132.07 FEE FOR PREGNANCY TESTING.
   (A)   There shall be a fee charged and collected for the service of
pregnancy testing provided by the County Department of Health (hereinafter
“Department”), as set out in division (B), unless the fee is waived under
division (C).
   (B)   The fee for pregnancy testing shall be the actual cost of the testing
plus a fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   The Department may waive the fee imposed herein:
      (1)   For those persons who have no private or public insurance program
available that will pay the fee on their, or their dependent’s behalf; and
      (2)   Where the person has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Department, pursuant to standards adopted by the Department, that the person
does not have the ability to pay the fee for the person or a dependent.
   (D)   The fee imposed by division (B) above shall be deposited in the Health
Fund to be used for the purposes for which the fund was created and exists.
(BC Ord. 2012-28, passed 9-10-12; Am. BC Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
CHAPTER 133: OPEN BURNING
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Allowance of open burning by state law
   
133.03   Open burning prohibited
   
133.04   Exceptions
   
133.05   General requirements
   
133.06   Enforcement
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY. All unincorporated areas of Warrick County, Indiana.
   OPEN BURN. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants resulting
from combustion are emitted directly into the air, without passing through a
stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, society
or other entity.
   WOOD PRODUCTS. Material consisting of, or wholly derived from, wood or
vegetation.
(BC Ord. 2008-10, passed 12-17-08)
§ 133.02 ALLOWANCE OF OPEN BURNING BY STATE LAW.
   I.C. 13-17-9 and 326 IAC 4-1-3, as amended from time to time, allow various
types of open burning, and this chapter supplements, but does not replace, the
state statutes and state regulations on open burning.
(BC Ord. 2008-10, passed 12-17-08)
§ 133.03 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person may openly burn in the county, except as allowed by this
chapter or otherwise allowed by state law or regulation.
   (B)   After giving all notice required by state law, the Board of
Commissioners may act to protect the public safety and welfare by declaring an
open burn emergency.
      (1)   The declaration of open burn emergency may contain an expiration
date or be continued until revoked by the Board.
      (2)   The restrictions imposed by the emergency may be limited to
specific portions of the county, or may be limited to particular times of the
day.
      (3)   Subject to Indiana and federal law, no person shall set, start, or
attempt to set or start, an open burn within the county during the duration of
a declared emergency, unless a permit has first been obtained from a local fire
department within the county, and the permit is within the possession of the
person or entity attempting to set or start such open burn.
(BC Ord. 2008-10, passed 12-17-08) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Open burning of wood products, except for leaves, shall be allowed for
the following:
      (1)    School pep rallies;
      (2)   Fires used for cooking purposes;
      (3)   Fires used in scouting activities;
      (4)   Any allowed open burning of wood products as provided for by state
law and state regulation; and
      (5)   Upon permit from a local fire department within the county.
   (B)   Except as allowed by state law and regulation, open burning of non-
wood products shall be allowed pursuant to a permit issued by the Indiana Air
Pollution Control Board, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management,
and a permit by the Board of Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2008-10, passed 12-17-08)
§ 133.05 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All allowable open burning shall conform to this section, unless exempted by
the Board of Commissioners, state law or federal law:
   (A)    A person who open burns any material shall extinguish the fire if it
creates a nuisance or fire hazard.
   (B)   Burning may not be conducted during unfavorable meteorological
conditions such as high winds, temperature inversions, or air stagnation.
   (C)   All fires must be attended at all times during burning until
completely extinguished.
   (D)   All asbestos-containing materials must be removed before the burning
of a structure.
   (E)   Asbestos-containing materials may not be burned.
   (F)   All burning must comply with state and federal laws.
(BC Ord. 2008-10, passed 12-17-08) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   The county may bring an action for an injunction, as prescribed by state
law, to obtain an order restraining or enjoining continuing violations of this
chapter.
(BC Ord. 2008-10, passed 12-17-08)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this order shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined pursuant to the
following schedule:
      (1)   First offense in a calendar year: $50;
      (2)   Second offense in a calendar year: $100; and
      (3)   Third offense in a calendar year: $150.
   (B)   Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
(BC Ord. 2008-10, passed 12-17-08)
CHAPTER 134: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Permits and permit fees
   
134.03   Minimum sanitation requirements for food establishments
   
134.04   Sale, examination, and condemnation of unwholesome, adulterated, or
misbranded food
   
134.05   Inspection of food establishments
   
134.06   Disease control
   
134.07   Approval of plans
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions as stated in the Indiana State Board of Health
Regulations 410 IAC 7-24, Sanitary Standards for the Operation of Retail Food
Establishments, and 21 CFR 100.1 et seq., shall be used to enforce this
chapter. At least two copies of the Indiana State Board of Health Regulations
410 IAC 7-24 and 21 CFR 100.1 et seq. shall be on file in the Warrick County
Auditor's office.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COUNTY. Those rural and urban areas of Warrick County which are under the
jurisdiction of the Health Officer.
      FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.
         (a)   Any establishment that stores, prepares, packages, serves,
vends, or otherwise provides food or beverages for human consumption.
         (b)   The term FOOD ESTABLISHMENT includes mobile food vendor for
purposes of §
134.03 et seq.
      HEALTH OFFICER. The Warrick County Health Officer, or its duly authorized
representative.
      HOME BASED VENDOR. A person who prepares and sells food products in
accordance with I.C. 16-42-5.3 et seq.
      MICRO MARKET. An unstaffed, self-checkout retail food establishment that
satisfies all requirements of I.C. 16-42-5-32.
      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR.
         (a)   A food establishment that is:
            1.   Wheeled;
            2.   On skids;
            3.   Mounted on a vehicle;
            4.   A marine vessel; or
            5.    Otherwise readily moveable.
            Such as a pushcart or trailer.
         (b)   The term MOBILE FOOD VENDOR includes a food establishment that
is a wheeled vehicle or trailer that is readily moveable and designed for the
service of food from the interior of the unit; and that is intended to
physically report to and operate from a commissary for supplies, servicing
operations, and cleaning each operating day.
      PERSON. Without limitation, any individual, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation, trust, or any commercial association or
venture, however defined.
      TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food establishment that operates at a
fixed location for a period of time, not to exceed 14 consecutive days, in
conjunction with a single event or celebration. The term TEMPORARY FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT does not include private events that are serviced by a licensed
caterer, such as private parties, weddings, or banquets.
      VENDING MACHINE UNIT. One or more vending machines for potentially
hazardous foods and beverages which are located in the same group.
(BC Ord. 1984-5, passed 2-27-84; Am. BC Ord. 1986-11, passed 11-14-86; Am. BC
Ord. 2013-19, passed 7-22-13; Am. BC Ord. 2023-09, passed 4-24-23)
§ 134.02 PERMITS AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Permits.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment
in the county without a valid permit issued by the Health Officer. Only persons
who comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter shall be entitled
to receive and retain such permit. Food establishments operating without a
valid permit issued by the Health Officer shall be subject to immediate closure
of the food establishment.
      (2)   A separate permit shall be required for each food establishment
operated or to be operated by any person. A permit issued under this chapter is
not transferable from person to person or location to location.
      (3)   In the event that during a period in which a food establishment is
operating under a permit validly issued pursuant to this chapter the legal
ownership of said food establishment is altered, changed, or otherwise
transferred to person(s) who are not listed as owner(s) of said food
establishment on the permit application which was approved and under which said
food establishment is currently operating, then such person(s) are required to
submit a new permit application in accordance with division (B) below in order
to continue operating the food establishment in compliance with this chapter,
as well as pay any applicable fees that are required.
      (4)   The Warrick County Health Department reserves the right to require
renovations, alterations, or other construction improvements be made, in
addition to any other requirements pursuant to this chapter, in order for a
permit to be issued under this chapter.
      (5)   No permit or renewal thereof shall be denied or revoked on
arbitrary or capricious grounds.
   (B)   Permit application. A person desiring to operate a food establishment
shall submit to the Warrick County Health Department a written application for
a permit. The application shall include:
      (1)   The name, mailing address, telephone number, and original signature
of the person applying for the permit, and the name, mailing address, and
location of the food establishment;
      (2)   Information specifying whether the food establishment is owned by
an association, corporation, individual, partnership, or other legal entity;
      (3)   The name, title, address, and telephone number of the operator,
supervisor, or person-in-charge who is directly responsible for the day-to-day
operation of the food establishment;
      (4)   The name, title, address, and telephone number of:
         (a)   The person(s) comprising the legal ownership, including the
owners and operators; and
         (b)   The local resident agent if one is required, based on the type
of legal ownership;
      (5)   A statement signed by the applicant that:
         (a)   Attests to the accuracy of the information provided in the
application; and
         (b)   Affirms the applicant will:
            1.   Comply with this chapter; and
            2.   Allow Warrick County Health Department access to the food
establishment and records as specified in 410 IAC 7-15.5 and 410 IAC 7-24;
      (6)   A copy of the applicant's retail merchant certificate as issued by
the Indiana Department of Revenue;
      (7)   A copy of the applicant's certified food handler certificate(s)
duly issued by an issuer that is accredited by the American National Standards
Institute and the Conference for Food Protection;
      (8)   A copy of any and all certificates, permits, or approvals validly
issued by the county, Indiana Building Commission, state or local Fire Marshal,
and the applicable local sewer department;
      (9)   A full copy of any and all facility and operating plans and
specifications as required under 410 IAC 7-24-110 and 7-24-111, including,
without limitation, detailed floor layout, equipment specifications, and
intended menu, and any additional information as may be requested by the
Warrick County Health Department. An applicant's failure to submit such
facility and operating plans and specifications in accordance with this
division (B)(9) shall result in such application being rejected; and
      (10)   Any and all additional information as may be required by the
Warrick County Health Department in its sole discretion.
   (C)   Application and permit fees.
      (1)   Application fees. Any person applying for a permit under this
chapter shall be required to tender, in addition to any permit fees required
under division (C)(2) below, the following fees, as may be applicable, to the
Warrick County Health Department at the time the application is submitted:
         (a)   A plan review fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances shall be required for the review
of plans and specifications of the food establishment submitted pursuant to
division (B)(9), above.
         (b)   A fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances shall be required in the event
that there is a change of ownership of a food establishment operating under a
permit validly issued under this chapter as described in division (A)(3) above.
         (c)   A fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances shall be required in the event
that, during a period in which a food establishment is operating under a permit
validly issued under this chapter, the food establishment intends to undergo
renovation, alteration, or other construction such that the documents submitted
by the food establishment described in division (B)(9) above as part of the
permit application under which the food establishment is currently operating
would not accurately describe the facility and its operating plans and
specifications following the intended renovation, alteration, or other
construction. A person shall not commence any such proposed renovation,
alteration, or other construction unless and until the updated facility and its
operating plans and specifications have been duly submitted to, and approved
by, the Warrick County Health Department in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   Permit fees. The following fee structures apply with respect to
permits issued under this chapter and are in addition to any application fees
required under division (C)(1) above:
         (a)   Food establishment permit fees. An applicant for a food
establishment permit shall be required to pay a fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances for the issuance of such permit.
         (b)   Temporary event food vendor permit fee. An applicant for a
temporary event food vendor permit shall be required to pay a fee as described
in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
         (c)   Vending machine unit permit fee. An applicant for a vending
machine unit permit shall be required to pay a fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
         (d)   Micro market permit fee. An applicant for a micro market permit
fee shall be required to pay a fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed so as to contradict or supersede I.C. 16-42-5-32.
         (e)   Late fees. An applicant who fails to pay a permit fee under this
chapter, as applicable, by the specified due date shall be required to pay a
late fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
         (f)   Collection of permit fees. All permit fees required under this
chapter shall be collected by the Health Officer and shall become a part of the
County Health Fund.
         (g)   Permit fee exception. Not-for-profit organizations, including
charitable, religious, or educational organizations, that do not operate as a
food establishment for more than 15 days per year shall not be required to pay
a permit fee under this chapter. However, all not-for-profit organizations that
operate as food establishments in Warrick County are subject to the Indiana
Retail Food Sanitation Requirements under 410 IAC 7-24 and shall comply with
the provisions of §
134.03.
   (D)   Permit duration. An applicant for a permit issued under this chapter
may apply for the following permit types:
      (1)   Food establishment permit. A food establishment permit shall be
valid for a period beginning on the date it is validly issued and expiring on
December 31 of the same year, and may be renewed annually for periods beginning
on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the same year.
      (2)   Temporary event food vendor permit. A temporary event food vendor
permit is available to a food establishment that operates at a fixed location
for a period of time, not to exceed 14 days, in conjunction with a single event
or celebration; such permit shall be valid for a period of 24 hours from the
time of its issuance and may be renewed no more than three times in a 14-day
consecutive period.
      (3)   Vending machine unit permit. A vending machine unit permit shall be
valid for a term of one year, beginning on January 1 and expiring on December
31 of the same year, and may be renewed annually.
      (4)   Micro market permit. A micro market permit shall be valid for a
period beginning on the date it is validly issued and expiring on December 31
of the same year, and may be renewed annually for periods beginning on January
1 and expiring on December 31 of the same year.
   (E)   Responsibilities of permit holder/operator. Upon acceptance of a
permit issued by the Warrick County Health Department, and in order to be
permitted to operate under the permit, the operator shall at all times:
      (1)   Comply with the provisions of this chapter, and all laws and rules
adopted by reference herein, and the conditions of any variances granted by the
Indiana State Department of Health;
      (2)   Immediately discontinue operations and notify the Warrick County
Health Department if an imminent health hazard, as defined in 410 IAC 7-24-4-7,
may exist;
      (3)   Allow Warrick County Health Department and their representatives or
agents access to the food establishment at all reasonable times;
      (4)   Comply with all directives and orders of the Warrick County Health
Department, including, without limitation, time frames for corrective actions
specified in inspection reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other
directives issued by Warrick County Health Department regarding the operator's
food establishment, or in response to community emergencies;
      (5)   Accept notices issued and served by the Warrick County Health
Department;
      (6)   Be subject to the administrative, civil, injunctive, and criminal
remedies authorized in law for failure to comply with this chapter or a
directive of the Warrick County Health Department; and
      (7)   Post the permit validly issued under this chapter in a location in
the food establishment that is conspicuous to consumers.
      (8)   Ensure that every person who is employed in, or is about to be
employed in a food establishment, is familiar with the requirements of 410 IAC
7-24, as amended. A copy of the 410 IAC 7-24, and as amended hereafter, shall
be kept on the food establishment premises at all times.
         (a)   All personnel employed by a food establishment may be required
to attend a food safety education program given or facilitated by the Warrick
County Health Department for any of the following reasons:
            1.   If the food establishment is subjected to immediate closure by
the Health Officer and the education program is deemed necessary by the Health
Officer;
            2.   If the food establishment is cited with three or more critical
violations on two out of three consecutive regular inspections, whether or not
the critical violations are the same on each inspection; and/or
            3.   If the Health Officer determines the necessity of a food
safety education program as a result of a hearing dealing with violations of
this chapter.
         (b)   A food establishment shall pay the fee as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances to the Warrick County Health
Department for attending the food safety education program, regardless of
whether or not the Health Officer deems attendance is voluntary or involuntary.
      (9)   Refrain from reselling, or purchasing with the intent to resell,
any food products prepared and sold by a home-based vendor.
   (F)   Permits for mobile food vendor.
      (1)   A mobile food vendor desiring to change its menu shall obtain prior
approval from the Warrick County Health Department before changing its menu.
      (2)   A mobile food vendor shall operate from a commissary, as defined
under 410 IAC 7-24-16, which shall comply at all times with all applicable
requirements of a retail food establishment under 410 IAC 7-24 and this
chapter.
      (3)   Under no circumstances shall any operations of a mobile food vendor
be allowed to take place in a private home, residence, or living quarters.
      (4)   If a mobile food vendor is operating from a food establishment that
is not owned by the owner or operator of the mobile food unit, prior to
commencing operations such mobile food vendor operator shall provide the
Warrick County Health Department with a signed commissary agreement with the
owner of the food establishment from which the mobile food vendor is operating,
which confirms the permission of the mobile food vendor to use and operate from
the food establishment.
      (5)   A mobile food vendor shall prepare all foods served or offered by
the mobile food vendor on-site at the commissary as described in divisions (F)
(2) and (4), as applicable.
   (G)   Certifications for home-based vendors. A home-based vendor shall
provide to the Warrick County Health Department a copy of the food handler
certificate duly issued to the home-based vendor, as is required under I.C. 16-
42-5.3-7(c).
   (H)   Notification of micro market operation. In accordance with I.C. 16-42-
5-32(e), an owner or operator of a micro market shall notify the Warrick County
Health Department no later than ten business days after the installation of the
micro market.
(BC Ord. 1984-5, passed 2-27-84; Am. BC Ord. 1986-11, passed 11-14-86; Am. BC
Ord. 1991-15, passed 7-22-91; Am. BC Ord. 2013- 19, passed 7-22-13; Am. BC Ord.
2023-09, passed 4-24-23; Am. BC Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
§ 134.03 MINIMUM SANITATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   In addition to all other requirements under this chapter, including those
described under §
134.02(E)(8), all food establishments shall comply with the minimum
requirements specified by the Indiana State Board of Health, as provided under
410 IAC 7-24 and 21 CFR 100.1 et seq., or as the same may be hereafter changed
or amended. Such regulations promulgated are by reference incorporated herein
and made a part hereof, two copies of which are on file in the office of the
Warrick County Auditor for public inspection.
(BC Ord. 1984-5, passed 2-27-84; Am. BC Ord. 1986-11, passed 11-14-86; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-09, passed 4-24-23)
§ 134.04 SALE, EXAMINATION, AND CONDEMNATION OF UNWHOLESOME, ADULTERATED, OR
MISBRANDED FOOD.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell through any food establishment
any food which is unwholesome, adulterated, or misbranded.
   (B)   The Health Officer may take and examine samples of food from any food
establishment as often as may be necessary, in the Health Officer's sole and
absolute discretion, to determine that such food is free from contamination,
adulteration, or misbranding. The Health Officer may remove, impound, and/or
forbid the sale of any food determined by the Health Officer to be unwholesome,
adulterated, or misbranded, or which the Health Officer has probable cause to
believe is unfit for human consumption, unwholesome, adulterated, or
misbranded. However, in the event of misbranding of food which the Health
Officer determines to be correctable by proper labeling, such food may be
released to the operator of the food establishment for correct labeling under
the supervision of the Health Officer. The Health Officer may also cause to be
removed or destroyed any dairy product, meat, meat product, seafood, poultry,
poultry product, confectionery, bakery product, vegetable, fruit, or other
perishable articles which the Health Officer, in its sole and absolute
discretion, determines to be unsound or contain any filthy, decomposed, or
putrid substance, or that may be poisonous or deleterious to health or
otherwise be unsafe.
(BC Ord. 2023-09, passed 4-24-23)
§ 134.05 INSPECTION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   No fewer than two times each calendar year, the Health Officer shall
inspect each food establishment and vending machine unit for which a permit is
required under this chapter.
   (B)   A permit issued under this chapter may be temporarily suspended by the
Health Officer upon violation by a permit holder of any of the terms of this
chapter.
   (C)   A permit holder whose permit has been suspended pursuant to division
(B) above may appeal such revocation to the Warrick County Board of Health if
written notice of the appeal is submitted to the Warrick County Board of Health
within ten business days from such revocation.
   (D)   The Warrick County Board of Health shall hear any timely requested
appeal of a revocation of a permit pursuant to division (C) above within 30
calendar days following receipt of such written notice, and shall thereafter
promptly issue a decision granting or denying, in whole or in part, the appeal.
(BC Ord. 1984-5, passed 2-27-84; Am. BC Ord. 2023-09, passed 4-24-23)
§ 134.06 DISEASE CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall be permitted to work in a food establishment who does
not satisfy the health requirements specified by the Indiana State Board of
Health as provided in Regulations 410 IAC 7-24 and 21 CFR 100.1 et seq.
   (B)   If a food establishment believes, or has reason to believe, that any
employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a
carrier of such disease, the food establishment shall immediately notify the
Health Officer.
(BC Ord. 1984-5, passed 2-27-84; Am. BC Ord. 1986-11, passed 11-14-86; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-09, passed 4-24-23)
§ 134.07 APPROVAL OF PLANS.
   All food establishments which are hereafter constructed or altered shall
conform with the applicable requirements set forth in §
134.03. An applicant or permit holder shall submit properly prepared plans and
specifications to the Health Officer prior to the commencement of any
construction or alteration of a food establishment. An applicant or permit
holder may only commence construction or alteration of a food establishment
after obtaining the approval of properly prepared plans and specifications for
such construction or alteration by the Health Officer.
(BC Ord. 1984-5, passed 2-27-84; Am. BC Ord. 2023-09, passed 4-24-23)
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who
refuses to comply with any lawful orders, rules, or regulations issued and/or
enforced by the Health Officer, as provided in this chapter, shall incur a
penalty as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Each day in which a person operates a food establishment or vending
machine unit while m violation of this chapter shall constitute a distinct and
separate offense.
(BC Ord. 1984-5, passed 2-27-84; Am. BC Ord. 2023-09, passed 4-24-23; Am. BC
Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
CHAPTER 135: TATTOO PARLORS
Section
   
135.01   Sanitary operation of tattoo parlors
   
135.02   Definitions
   
135.03   Tattoo operator training responsibilities
   
135.04   Tattoo operator responsibilities
   
135.05   Tattoo operator policies
   
135.06   Tattoo artist minimum training and certification requirements
   
135.07   Patron records
   
135.08   Illness
   
135.09   Handwashing
   
135.10   Personal protective equipment
   
135.11   Tattooing equipment
   
135.12   Needles
   
135.13   Reusable equipment
   
135.14   Dyes or pigments
   
135.15   Work environment
   
135.16   Infectious waste containment
   
135.17   Treatment and transport of infectious waste
   
135.18   Permits
   
135.19   Inspections
   
135.20   Revocation of permit
 
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 SANITARY OPERATION OF TATTOO PARLORS.
   All places, individuals and businesses that offer to affix any type of
permanent tattoo to a person shall be regulated by this chapter and shall
maintain the premises in which tattoos are performed and equipment used in the
tattoo process in a sanitary manner.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOOD. Human blood.
   BLOOD BORNE PATHOGENS. Pathogenic microorganisms that are present in human
blood and can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include, but are not
limited to, the following:
   (1)   HBC.
   (2)   HCV.
   (3)   HIV.
   CLEANED. Removal of all visible dust, soil, or any other foreign material.
   CONTAMINATED. The presence or reasonably anticipated presence of blood or
OPIM on an item or surface.
   DECONTAMINATED. The use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate,
or destroy blood borne pathogens on a surface or item which does not require
sterilization to the point where they are no longer capable of transmitting
infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling,
use, or disposal.
   DEPARTMENT. The Warrick County Health Department. The Warrick County Board
of Health shall be considered part of the Department except for the purpose of
conducting any type of administrative hearing for the appeal of any decision of
the Department or Health Officer.
   HBV. The hepatitis B virus.
   HCV. The hepatitis C virus.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The duly appointed Health Officer as set forth in IC 16-20-
2-16. The County Health Officer or designee shall be designated as the official
in charge of enforcing this chapter. The Health Officer may designate someone
in the health department to perform those duties and responsibilities of the
Health Officer.
   HIV. The human immunodeficiency virus.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE. Waste that epidemiologic evidence indicates is capable of
transmitting a dangerous communicable disease. Infectious waste includes, but
is not limited to, the following:
   (1)   Contaminated sharps or contaminated objects that could potentially
become contaminated sharps.
   (2)   Infectious biological cultures, infectious associated biologicals, and
infectious agent stock.
   (3)   Pathological waste.
   (4)   Blood and blood products in liquid and semiliquid form.
   (5)   Carcasses, body parts, blood, and body fluids in liquid and semiliquid
form, and bedding of laboratory animals.
   (6)   Other waste that has been intermingled with infectious waste.
   OTHER POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIALS or OPIM.
   (1)   Human body fluids as follows:
      (a)   Semen.
      (b)   Vaginal secretions.
      (c)   Cerebrospinal fluid.
      (d)   Synovial fluid.
      (e)   Pleural fluid.
      (f)   Pericardial fluid.
      (g)   Peritoneal fluid.
      (h)   Amniotic fluid.
      (i)   Saliva in dental procedures.
      (j)   Any body fluid that is visibly contaminated with blood.
      (k)   All body fluids where it is difficult or impossible to
differentiate between body fluids.
   (2)   Any unfixed tissue or organ, other than intact skin, from a human,
living or dead.
   (3)   HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, and HIV or HBV-containing
culture medium or other solutions; and blood, organs, or other tissues from
experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV.
   PARENTERAL. Piercing the mucous membranes or the skin barrier through such
events as needlesticks, human bites, cuts or abrasions.
   PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT. Specialized clothing or equipment worn for
protection against contact with blood or OPIM.
   SECURE AREA. An area that is designated and maintained to prevent the entry
of unauthorized persons.
   SEMILIQUID BLOOD, BLOOD PRODUCTS. Blood, blood products that have
intermediate fluid properties and are capable of flowing in a manner similar to
liquid.
   STERILIZE. The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
   STORE. The containment of infectious waste in such a manner as not to
constitute collection, treatment, transport, or disposal.
   TATTOO.
   (1)   Any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol, or other mark
placed with the aid of needles or other instruments; or
   (2)   Any design, letter, scroll, figure or symbol done by scarring; upon or
under the skin.
   (3)   Any piercing of the mucous membranes or the skin through which needles
or other items are inserted for temporary or permanent placement upon a person.
   TATTOO ARTIST. Any person who provides a tattoo to an individual or who
performs any type of piercing the mucous membranes or the skin through which
needles or other objects are inserted for temporary or permanent placement.
   TATTOO OPERATOR. A person who controls, operates, conducts, manages, or owns
any tattoo parlor.
   TATTOO PARLOR. Any room or space where tattooing is provided or where the
business of tattooing is conducted.
   UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS. An approach to infection control in which all human
blood and certain human body fluids are treated as if known to be infectious
for HIV, HBV, HCV, and other blood borne pathogens.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.03 TATTOO OPERATOR TRAINING RESPONSIBILITIES.
   An individual or entity that is a tattoo operator shall comply with the
following training responsibilities:
   (A)   Ensure that the training described in the Indiana occupational safety
and health administration's blood borne pathogens standard (as found in 29 CFR
1910.1030) is provided to all tattoo artists, anyone employed by the tattoo
parlor, or anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo parlor who has a reasonably
anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with
blood or OPIM.
   (B)   Ensure that training on the handling of infectious waste is provided
to all tattoo artists, anyone employed by the tattoo parlor, or anyone acting
on behalf of the tattoo parlor who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin,
eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM.
   (C)   Ensure that a record of training described in division (A) is
maintained, as required under the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health
Administration's blood borne pathogens standard (as found in 29 CFR 1910.1030)
of an individual's participation in the training that is provided. The record
shall be made available to the department for inspection upon request.
   (D)   Ensure that a record of training described in division (B) is
maintained.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.04 TATTOO OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The tattoo operator shall ensure that tattoo artists, anyone employed
by the tattoo parlor, or anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo parlor who has a
reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral
contact with blood are provided personal protective equipment and expendables
needed to implement the precautions required by this chapter and the Indiana
occupational safety and health administration's blood borne pathogens standard
(as found in 29 CFR 1910.1030).
   (B)   The tattoo operator shall require tattoo artists, anyone employed by
the tattoo parlor, or anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo parlor who has a
reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral
contact with blood to provide evidence of compliance with the universal
precautions education requirements contained in §
135.06.
   (C)   The tattoo operator shall display a description of compliance with the
requirements contained in division D.
   (D)   The tattoo operator shall display written materials prepared or
approved by the department explaining universal precautions and patrons' rights
under this chapter. These materials shall include information on how to report
violations of universal precautions and shall include information regarding the
department's duties to investigate.
   (E)   The tattoo operator shall insure that no elicit drugs or alcohol are
consumed or permitted in the tattoo parlor.
   (F)   The tattoo operator shall insure that no tattoo shall be affixed to
any person that is intoxicated.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.05 TATTOO OPERATOR POLICIES.
   The tattoo operator shall develop a written policy in compliance with this
chapter and the requirements of the Indiana occupational safety and health
administration's blood borne pathogen standard (as found in 29 CFR 1910.1030)
that:
   (A)   Required the use of universal precautions when performing tattooing
and any activity or duty that includes any reasonably anticipated skin, eye,
mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM;
   (B)   Includes the safe handling of infectious waste; and
   (C)   Provides sanctions, including discipline and dismissal, if warranted,
for failure to use universal precautions and/or handle infectious waste safely.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.06 TATTOO ARTIST MINIMUM TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All tattoo artists, anyone employed by the tattoo parlor, and anyone
acting on behalf of the tattoo parlor who has a reasonably anticipated risk for
skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM shall
complete the training program that is required under the requirements of the
Indiana occupational safety and health administration's blood borne pathogen
standard (as found in 29 CFR 1910.1030). The programs under this section shall
be as follows:
      (1)   A blood borne pathogen training session provided by the tattoo
operator meeting the requirements under the Indiana Occupational Safety and
Health Administration's blood borne pathogens standard (as found in 29 CFR
1910.1030).
   (B)   All tattoo artists, anyone employed by the tattoo parlor, and anyone
acting on behalf of the tattoo parlor who has a reasonably anticipated risk for
skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM must be
trained in the tattoo parlor's policies on the handling of infectious waste.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.07 PATRON RECORDS.
   Records of each patron shall be maintained for two years. The record shall
include the following:
   (A)   Patron's name.
   (B)   Address.
   (C)   Age. Age must be verified by two items of identification, one of which
must be a valid government issued identification.
   (D)   Date tattooed.
   (E)   Design of the tattoo.
   (F)   Location of the tattoo on the patron's body.
   (G)   The name of the tattoo artist who performed the work.
   (H)   Parental consent must be in writing when performed on any minor as
permitted by law.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.08 ILLNESS.
   Tattoo artists who are experiencing symptoms of acute disease that include,
but are not limited to, the following shall refrain from providing tattoos:
   (A)   Diarrhea;
   (B)   Vomiting;
   (C)   Fever;
   (D)   Rash;
   (E)   Productive cough;
   (F)   Jaundice; or
   (G)   Draining (or open) skin infections, boils, impetigo, or scabies.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.09 HANDWASHING.
   (A)   Handwashing facilities shall be readily accessible in the same room
where tattooing is provided.
   (B)   Hands shall be washed with soap and running water immediately before
putting on gloves and after removal of gloves or other personal protective
equipment.
   (C)   Only single use towels shall be used.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.10 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT.
   Appropriate personal protective equipment shall be worn as follows:
   (A)   A clean protective clothing layer shall be worn whenever there is a
reasonably anticipated risk of contamination of clothing by blood or OPIM.
   (B)   Masks in combination with eye protection devices, such as goggles or
glasses with solid side shield, or chin length face shield, shall be worn
whenever splashes, spray, splatter, or droplets of blood or OPIM may be
generated and eye, nose, or mouth contamination can be reasonably anticipated.
   (C)   Disposable gloves shall be worn during the tattooing process. Gloves
shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in
the application of the tattoo, when the gloves become torn or punctured, or
whenever the ability to function as a barrier is compromised. Disposable gloves
shall not be reused.
   (D)   Gloves shall be worn when decontaminating environmental surfaces and
equipment.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.11 TATTOOING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Only single use razors shall be used to shave the area to be tattooed.
   (B)   All stencils shall be properly disposed of after a single use.
   (C)   If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied
with a single use article only.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.12 NEEDLES.
   (A)   Needles shall be individually packaged and sterilized prior to use.
   (B)   Needles shall be single use only.
   (C)   Needles shall be discarded in sharps containers immediately after use.
   (D)   Contaminated needles shall not be bent or broken or otherwise
manipulated by hand.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.13 REUSABLE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Heating procedures capable of sterilization must be used when heat
stable, nondisposable equipment is sterilized.
   (B)   Records must be maintained to document the following:
      (1)   Duration of sterilization technique.
      (2)   Determination of effective sterility, such as use of a biological
indicator, is performed monthly.
      (3)   Equipment is maintained as recommended by the owner's manual and
proof is available that the owner's manual recommendations are reviewed
monthly.
   (C)   Reusable contaminated equipment shall not be stored or processed in a
manner that requires any person to reach by hand into the containers where
these sharp items have been placed.
   (D)   Reusable contaminated equipment shall be:
      (1)   Placed in puncture-resistant containers;
      (2)   Labeled with the biohazard symbol;
      (3)   Leakproof on both sides and bottom; and
      (4)   Stored in a manner that does not require reaching by hand into the
container where the equipment is stored until cleaning prior to sterilization.
   (E)   Contaminated reusable equipment shall be effectively cleaned prior to
sterilization.
   (F)   Reusable tubes shall be effectively cleaned and sterilized before
reuse.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.14 DYES OR PIGMENTS.
   (A)   All dyes or pigments in tattooing shall be from professional suppliers
specifically providing dyes or pigments for the tattooing of human skin.
   (B)   In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by tattoo artists, only
nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single use or individual portions of
dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized containers shall be used from each
patron.
   (C)   After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in single use or
individual containers shall be discarded along with the container.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.15 WORK ENVIRONMENT.
   (A)   No tattooing shall be conducted in any room used as living quarters or
in any room that opens directly into living or sleeping quarters.
   (B)   Live animals shall be excluded from areas where tattooing is being
conducted. This exclusion does not apply to the following:
      (1)   Patrol dogs accompanying security or police officers.
      (2)   Guide dogs accompanying the following:
         (a)   Blind persons.
         (b)   Partially blind persons.
         (c)   Physically disabled persons.
         (d)   Guide dog trainers.
         (e)   Persons with impaired hearing.
   (C)   Eating, drinking, smoking, or applying cosmetics shall not be allowed
in work areas where there is a likelihood of exposure to blood or OPIM.
   (D)   Food and drink shall not be kept in areas where there is a reasonably
anticipated risk of exposure to blood or OPIM.
   (E)   All equipment and environmental surfaces shall be cleaned and
decontaminated after contact with blood or OPIM.
   (F)   Environmental surfaces and equipment not requiring sterilization that
have been contaminated by blood shall be cleaned and decontaminated.
   (G)   All work surfaces shall be nonabsorbent, easily cleanable, smooth, and
free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits, and similar imperfections.
   (H)   Disinfectant solutions shall be:
      (1)   A hospital grade, tuberculocidal Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) registered disinfectant; or
      (2)   Sodium hypochlorite, 0.5% concentration, by volume (common
household bleach is 10% concentration in water); the solution shall be dated
and shall not be used if it is more than 24 hours old.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.16 INFECTIOUS WASTE CONTAINMENT.
   (A)   Contaminated disposable needles or instruments shall be:
      (1)   Stored in leak-resistant, puncture- resistant containers, tightly
sealed to prevent expulsion, labeled with the biohazard symbol, and effectively
treated in accordance with this chapter prior to being stored in an unsecured
area and sent for final disposal.
   (B)   Infectious wastes that are contaminated sharps or objects that could
potentially become contaminated sharps shall be placed in containers that meet
the following requirements:
      (1)   Impervious to moisture.
      (2)   Sufficient strength and thickness to prevent expulsion.
      (3)   Secured to prevent leakage expulsion.
      (4)   Labeled with the biohazard symbol.
      (5)   Effectively treated in accordance with this chapter prior to being
placed in an unsecured area and sent for final disposal.
   (C)   If infectious waste is stored prior to final disposal, all persons
subject to this chapter shall store infectious waste in a secure area that:
      (1)   Is locked or otherwise secured to eliminate access by or exposure
to the general public;
      (2)   Affords protection from adverse environmental conditions and
vermin; and
      (3)   Has a prominently displayed biohazard symbol.
   (D)   Infectious waste shall be stored in a manner that preserves the
integrity of the container, and is not conducive to rapid microbial growth and
putrefaction.
   (E)   Disinfect reusable containers for infectious waste each time that they
are emptied unless the surfaces of the reusable containers have been protected
from contamination by disposable liners, bags, or other devices that are
removed with the infectious waste.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.17 TREATMENT AND TRANSPORT OF INFECTIOUS WASTE.
   (A)   All tattoo operators shall ensure that infectious waste is either
treated on-site in accordance with this chapter or transported off-site for
treatment in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   A treatment is effective if it reduces the pathogenic qualities of
infectious waste for safe handling, is designed for the specific waste
involved, and is carried out in a manner consistent with this chapter.
Effective treatment may include:
      (1)   Incineration in an incinerator designed to accommodate infectious
waste;
      (2)   Steam sterilization;
      (3)   Chemical disinfection under circumstances where safe handling of
the waste is assured;
      (4)   Thermal inactivation;
      (5)   Irradiation; or
      (6)   Discharge in a sanitary sewer or septic system that is properly
installed and operating in accordance with state and local laws.
   (C)   All persons subject to this chapter shall:
      (1)   Transport infectious waste in a manner that reasonably protects
waste haulers and the public from contracting a dangerous communicable disease;
and
      (2)   Effectively treat infectious waste in accordance with this chapter
before it is compacted.
   (D)   The tattoo operator shall ensure that infectious waste, effectively
treated or not, is transported off-site in compliance with 410 IAC 103.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.18 PERMITS.
   (A)   Business. Each tattoo parlor operation shall obtain a permit from the
County Health Department. The permit shall provide the name and address of the
owner of the business and the name and address of each and every tattoo artist
located at each location. The cost for this permit shall be as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances. The permit expires on December
31 of each year. Any holder of a permit shall be subject to inspection as set
forth herein. The County Health Department shall provide the appropriate forms
for this permit. The permit shall be posted at the tattoo parlor in the place
where the tattoos are performed and shall be clearly visible to the public.
   (B)   Tattoo artist. Every person that desires to perform any tattoo shall
obtain a "Tattoo Artist Permit" from the County Health Department. This permit
must be obtained before any tattoos are affixed to any person and after the
requisite training. The applicant must satisfy the minimum requirements as set
forth herein in §
135.06. The cost of the permit shall be as described in §
41.02 of the Warrick County Code of Ordinances, and shall not be transferable.
The permit expires on December 31 of each year. Any holder of a permit shall be
subject to inspection as set forth herein. The County Health Department shall
provide the appropriate forms for this permit. The permits shall be posted at
the tattoo parlor in the place where the tattoos are performed and clearly
visible to the public.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98; Am. BC Ord. 2013-25, passed 10- 15-13; Am. BC
Ord. 2024-11, passed 8-26-24)
§ 135.19 INSPECTIONS.
      The County Health Department shall conduct inspections of each and every
tattoo parlor located in Warrick County, Indiana. The Health Department shall
conduct a minimum of three inspections per year. Additional inspections may be
conducted by the Health Department as they determine and/or in response to
complaints submitted. The results of the inspections shall be provided to each
operator. Violations noted by the Health Department shall be corrected
immediately. The Department shall conduct follow up inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.20 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Health Officer may suspend or revoke the permit of any tattoo artist or
operator for any period of time for any violation of this chapter, state or
federal regulations concerning blood borne pathogens, tattoos or work place
regulations (OSHA). The operator or artist may have the permit reinstated upon
compliance with this chapter, state or federal regulations concerning blood
borne pathogens, tattoos or work place regulations (OSHA) and to the
satisfaction of the Health Officer. Appeals of orders of revocation shall be
conducted pursuant to IC 4-21.5-3-1 et seq. The Board of Health shall conduct
administrative hearings concerning the suspension or revocation of any permit
issued herein as set forth in IC 4-21.5-3 et seq.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If a tattoo artist or operator shall fail to obtain a permit prior to
the conduct of their business or at any time after one has been issued, but has
expired, the tattoo artist and/or operator may be subject to a fine of not more
than $2,500. Each day the tattoo artist and/or operator shall be in violation
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The Health Officer may bring an action in the Circuit or Superior
Court to enforce this chapter. The Health Officer shall be entitled to recover
all costs and expenses associated with any action for enforcement of this
chapter including reasonable attorney fees.
(BC Ord. 1998-3, passed 4-27-98)
CHAPTER 136: COLLECTION, DELIVERY AND PROCESSING
OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES
Section
Acceptable Waste
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Delivery of acceptable waste
Enforcement of Curbside Collection Program
   
136.10   Definitions
 
   
136.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Solid waste, see
Ch. 50
ACCEPTABLE WASTE
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCEPTABLE WASTE. All “solid waste” as defined in I.C. 36-9-33-2 as may be
amended from time to time, including all putrescible and nonputrescible solid
and semisolid wastes and recyclables generated by residences, institutions, and
commercial businesses situated within the county, other than prohibited waste.
ACCEPTABLE WASTE expressly includes garbage, rubbish, household appliances,
yard waste, demolition and construction debris, and inert fill.
   COUNTY. Warrick County, Indiana.
   DESIGNATED FACILITY. The transfer station located at 1111 S. Pelzer Road,
Boonville, Indiana, to be owned, operated and managed by the District, or such
other facility as might be designated from time to time by the District.
   DISTRICT. The Warrick County Solid Waste Management District created by
Warrick County.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. December 1, 2015, which may be extended by a period not to
exceed 30 days in the event the facility and/or designated facility are not yet
operational and the Board of Commissioners determines it to be in the county’s
best interest, provided notice is given of the change in EFFECTIVE DATE.
   PERSON. Any individual, group, business, association, proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity.
   PROHIBITED WASTE.
      (1)   Human excreta, including septic tank sludge;
      (2)   Hazardous waste as defined by the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management from time to time;
      (3)   Industrial waste;
      (4)   Agricultural waste;
      (5)   Biomedical waste;
      (6)   Dead animals;
      (7)   Asphalt;
      (8)   Automobiles and other vehicles; and
      (9)   Other items specified by the District and/or designated facility
from time to time.
(BC Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-28-15)
§ 136.02 DELIVERY OF ACCEPTABLE WASTE.
   (A)   Beginning on the effective date, and at all times thereafter, any
person may dispose of acceptable waste by delivering or causing the delivery of
such acceptable waste to the District at its designated facility in accordance
with this chapter and any applicable laws, rules, procedures, and instructions
promulgated by the County Board of Commissioners or the District.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, yard waste may be accumulated on
residential property for composting purposes in a manner which will not create
odor, harbor rodents, or become a public nuisance. Yard waste may be collected
commercially as provided by the District’s curbside waste and recycling pickup
program.
(BC Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-28-15)
ENFORCEMENT OF CURBSIDE
COLLECTION PROGRAM
§ 136.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL HAULERS. Any person or business, other than the approved hauler
selected by the District for the program, providing curbside pickup and
disposal of solid wastes and recyclable materials from covered participants
located within Warrick County.
   COVERED PARTICIPANTS. The same meaning as adopted from time to time by the
District in the program, which initially includes the following participants
within the boundaries of the county exclusive of incorporated municipalities:
      (1)   Single-family, residential zoned properties;
      (2)   Multi-family, residential zoned properties that are able to utilize
the containers provided by the program;
      (3)   Embedded commercial zoned properties, defined as those businesses
embedded within residential areas and also able to utilize the containers
described below; and
      (4)   County and municipal government properties able to utilize the
containers provided by the program.
   COUNTY. Warrick County, Indiana.
   DISTRICT. The Warrick County Solid Waste Management District created by the
county.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. December 1, 2015.
   PERSON. Any individual, group, business, association, proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity.
   PROGRAM. The Curbside Collection and Disposal Program adopted by the
District and administered by it as of the effective date, which program may be
amended from time to time by the District.
(BC Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-23-15)   
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine as set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Beginning on the effective date, and at all times thereafter,
any commercial hauler who shall collect curbside waste or recyclable materials
from covered participants in violation of the program shall be subject to a
civil penalty, payable to the county, of $1,000 for the first violation and
$2,500 for each additional violation. Each collection of curbside waste or
recyclable materials from any covered participant after the effective date that
occurs in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   Revenues from assessed and collected penalties shall be deposited
into the county’s General Fund in an account as may be identified from time to
time.
(BC Ord. 2015-29, passed 11-23-15)
CHAPTER 137: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
137.01   Purpose
   
137.02   Definitions
   
137.03   Permits
 
   
137.99   Penalty
§ 137.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain events or gatherings in
Warrick County at which food or beverage will be served or offered.
(BC Ord. 2023-10, passed 5-8-23)
§ 137.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings unless otherwise designated.
   EVENT ORGANIZER. A person, party, or entity that oversees, supervises, or
organizes a special event and/or that has submitted an application for the
registration of a special event under this chapter.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any food establishment as that term is defined under §
134.01 of the Warrick County, IN Code of Ordinances.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Warrick County Health Department.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Warrick County Health Officer, or its duly authorized
representative.
   HOME BASED VENDOR. Any person who prepares and sells food products in
accordance with I.C. 16-42-5.3 et seq.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any mobile food vendor as that term is defined under §
134.01 of the Warrick County, IN Code of Ordinances.
   PERSON. Without limitation, any individual, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, non-profit organization, charitable organization,
religious or educational institution, trust, or any commercial association or
venture, however defined.
   SPECIAL EVENT. An event or gathering, including farmers' markets, that
involves the sale or distribution of food or beverages on streets, sidewalks,
alleys, or other public places or public property, or on private property where
otherwise prohibited by law.
   TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.  A temporary food establishment as that term
is defined under § 134.01 of the Warrick County, IN Code of Ordinances.
(BC Ord. 2023-10, passed 5-8-23)
§ 137.03 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, host, or organize a
special event without registering with, and having a valid permit issued by,
the Health Officer. Special events organized without a valid permit issued by
the Health Officer shall be subject to immediate closure.
      (2)   Any person intending to organize or host a special event shall
register the special event with the Health Department by completing and
submitting the required application on the forms provided by the Health
Department.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   A person desiring to organize, conduct, or host a special event
shall register said special event by completing and submitting an application
to the Health Department at least 30 days prior to the start of the special
event.
      (2)   In addition to any other information sought by the application
forms provided by the Health Department, a person shall include:
         (a)   A comprehensive list of all food establishments, home based
vendors, mobile food vendors, and/or temporary food establishments who will be
present at the special event and selling or distributing food or beverages.
         (b)   A site plan drawn to scale with existing streets, sidewalks, and
buildings identified, showing the location of the special event and identifying
where any food establishments, home based vendors, mobile food vendors, or
temporary food establishments will be located during the special event.
   (C)   No permit fee. There shall be no fee charged to an event organizer for
the submission of an application for a special event permit nor the issuance of
a special event permit from the Health Officer.
   (D)   Permit duration. A special event permit validly issued under this
chapter shall be valid only for the duration of the special event as identified
on the application, except as otherwise may be determined by the Health
Officer.
   (E)   Responsibilities; event organizer. For the duration of a special event
permit validly issued under this chapter, an event organizer shall:
      (1)   Comply with the provisions of this chapter and all laws and rules
adopted by reference herein;
      (2)   Display a special event permit validly issued under this chapter in
a conspicuous location at the special event site;
      (3)   Immediately notify the Health Department if an imminent health
hazard, as defined in 410 I.A.C. 7-24-47, may exist;
      (4)   Immediately notify the Health Department if there any changes or
alterations concerning the special event from what was submitted on the event
organizer's application for a permit under this chapter;
      (5)   Allow the Health Department and their representatives or agents
access to the special event at all reasonable times; and
      (6)   Accept notices issued and served by the Health Department.
(BC Ord. 2023-10, passed 5-8-23)
§ 137.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who
refuses to comply with any lawful orders, rules, or regulations issued and/or
enforced by the Health Officer, as provided in this chapter, shall incur a
penalty as follows:
      (1)   For a first offense, a fine not to exceed $1,000; and
      (2)   For a second and any subsequent offense, a fine not to exceed
$2,250.
   (B)   Each day in which a person organizes, conducts, or hosts a special
event while in violation of this chapter shall constitute a distinct and
separate offense.
(BC Ord. 2023-10, passed 5-8-23)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODE
      
151.   ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREAS
      
152.   LEASING OF REAL PROPERTY
      
153.   PLANNING
      
154.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL
         
 APPENDIX A:   STREET SIGN SPECIFICATIONS
          
APPENDIX B:   WARRICK COUNTY ROADWAY SPECIFICATIONS
          
APPENDIX C:   CHECKLIST FOR PARCELIZATION
      
155.   ZONING
      
156.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND PREMISES
      
157.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
158.   NOISE
         
APPENDIX A:   SCIENTIFIC DEFINITIONS
         
APPENDIX B:   OCTAVE BAND BREAKDOWNS OF dBA LIMITS
      
159. MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
General Requirements
   
150.01   Title
   
150.02   Purpose
   
150.03   Definitions
   
150.04   Scope
   
150.05   Authority
Building Permits
   
150.15   Building permit required
   
150.16   Application for building permit
   
150.17   Fee schedule
   
150.18   Exemptions
   
150.19   Written authority
   
150.20   Contractor listing
   
150.21   Issuance of building permit
   
150.22   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.23   Expiration of building permit
nvestigation and Inspections of Construction Activities
   
150.30   General authority to make inspections and investigations
   
150.31   Inspections by Fire Department
Minimum Construction Standards
   
150.40   Adoption of rules by reference
   
150.41   Lifting devices located within a private residence
   
150.42   Harmful gases control methods
Enforcement
   
150.50   Withhold issuance of permits
   
150.51   Permit revocation
   
150.52   Stop-work order
   
150.53   Right to appeal
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.01 TITLE. 
   This chapter and all material included herein by reference shall be known as
the Building Code of Warrick County, Indiana.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the life, public safety, health
and general welfare of the citizens of the county and shall be construed in
such a manner to effectuate this purpose.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03)
§ 150.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise clearly indicated by its context, the words and terms
defined in this section shall have the specified meanings.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER.  Includes individuals employed by the Building
Department that are authorized to represent the Building Commissioner.
   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-4, has the following definition:
      (1)   CLASS 1 STRUCTURE.  Any part of the following:
         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to be or is occupied or
otherwise used in any part by any of the following:
            1.   The public.
            2.   Three or more tenants.
            3.   One or more persons who act as the employees of another.
         (b)   A site improvement affecting access by persons with physical
disabilities to a building or structure described in division (a).
         (c)   Any class of buildings or structures that the commission
determines by rules to affect a building or structure described in division
(a), except buildings or structures described in divisions (3) through (5).
      (2)   Division (1)(a) includes a structure that contains three or more
condominium units (defined in I.C. 32-25-2-9) or other units that:
         (a)   Are intended to be or are used or leased by the owner of the
unit: and
         (b)   Are not completely separated from each other by an unimproved
space.
      (3)   Division (1)(a) does not include a building or structure that:
         (a)   Is intended to be or is used only for an agricultural purpose on
the land where it is located; and
         (b)   Is not used for retail trade or is a stand used for retail sales
of farm produce for eight or less consecutive months in a calendar year.
      (4)   Division (1)(a) does not include a Class 2 structure.
      (5)   Division (1)(a) does not include a vehicular bridge.
      (6)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, structure includes swimming pool.
   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-5, has the following
definition:
      (1)   CLASS 2 STRUCTURE.  Any part of the following:
         (a)   A building or structure that is intended to contain or contains
only one dwelling unit or two dwelling units unless any part of the building or
structure is regularly used as a Class 1 structure.
         (b)   An outbuilding for a structure described in division (a), such
as a garage, barn, or family swimming pool, unless any part of the outbuilding
is regularly used as a Class 1 structure.
      (2)   Division (1) does not include a vehicular bridge.
      (3)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-24, structure includes swimming pool.
   CONSTRUCTION.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-7, means any of the following:
      (1)   Fabrication of any part of an industrialized building system or
mobile structure for use at another site.
      (2)   Erection or assembly of any part of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure
at the site where it will be used.
      (3)   Installation of any part of the permanent heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, electrical, plumbing, sanitary, emergency detection, emergency
communication, or fire or explosion suppression systems for a Class 1 or Class
2 structure at the site where it will be used.
      (4)   Work undertaken to alter, remodel, rehabilitate, or add to any part
of a Class 1 or Class 2 structure.
      (5)   Work undertaken to relocate any part of a Class 1 or Class 2
structure, except a mobile structure.
   GENERAL CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business
of or holding  themselves out to the public as engaged in the business of
constructing, installing, repairing, remodeling, or servicing any structural
part or non-structural part of any one and two family or multi-family
residential, commercial, or industrial building.
   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING SYSTEM. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-14, means any part
of a building or other structure that is in whole or in substantial part
fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly
at the building site as part of a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure, or
another building or structure. However, the term does not include a mobile
structure or a system that is capable of inspection at the building site.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-16, has the meaning set forth in
42 U.S.C. 5402 as it existed on January 1, 1984. This definition is as follows:
MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body
feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any
structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and
complies with the standards established under this 42 U.S.C. 5402.
   MOBILE STRUCTURE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-17, has the following
definition:
      (1)   MOBILE STRUCTURE. Any part of a fabricated unit that is designed to
be:
         (a)   Towed on its own chassis; and
         (b)   Connected to utilities for year-round occupancy or use as a
Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure, or another structure.
      (2)   The term includes the following:
         (a) Two or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes
and subsequently expanded for additional capacity.
         (b) Two or more units that are separately towable but designed to be
joined into one integral unit.
   PERSON. Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-18, means an individual, corporation,
limited liability company, partnership, unincorporated association, or
governmental entity.
   STRUCTURE.  Both Class 1 and Class 2 structures, unless specifically stated
otherwise.
   VEHICULAR BRIDGE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-26, means any bridge that is
neither:
      (1)   A pedestrian walkway; nor
      (2)   A passageway for light vehicles; suspended between two or more
parts of a building or between two or more buildings.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03)
§ 150.04 SCOPE.
   (A)   All construction shall be accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-6, this chapter shall not apply to
industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C. 22-
15-4; however, the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission do apply to any construction
related to an industrialized building system or mobile structure not certified
under I.C. 22-15-4.
   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-9, this chapter is not applicable to
regulated amusement devices, regulated boilers, regulated pressure vessels, or
regulated lifting devices.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03)
§ 150.05 AUTHORITY.
   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce the following:
   (A)   All of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Variances granted in accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-11.
   (C)   Orders issued under I.C. 22-12-7.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03)
BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150.15 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Construction is prohibited unless in conformity with a valid building permit
obtained from the Building Commission prior to commencement of construction. A
permit shall be required before beginning any new construction of any building
or structure or before beginning any structural improvement to any building or
structure not hereinafter exempted, the cost of which construction or
improvements exceeds $2,500; or is more than 120 square feet; or before
beginning construction of any improvement to any building or structure
involving modification, changing or new installation of any electrical,
plumbing or mechanical improvement, the cost of which exceeds $750, including
installation of any furnace, hot water heater, new meter base, meter base
relocation, panel upgrade; load control device or before electrical meter is
installed following a fire; an in-ground swimming pool, an above ground
swimming pool deeper than three and one-half feet, hot tubs, spas, demolition
of any structure over 120 square, feet tanks, communication towers and co-
locates on existing towers, and signs. (See §
150.17 for more specific definitions). However, a person desiring to make an
improvement which would be exempt from permit requirements under this chapter,
either by cost or square footage, may voluntarily apply for a permit, pay the
required fee, and secure the inspection(s) provided for under this chapter. All
permits shall be issued by the Building Commissioner and all fees provided for
herein shall be paid to the County Building Commission Fund. Check or cash
payments may be made at the Building Commissioner’s office, or may be made
online pursuant to a vendor of the Building Commissioner’s choosing. Online
credit card payments may include additional processing fees or other fees as
charged by the vendor which shall be paid by the permit applicant.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03; Am. BC Ord. 2010-19, passed 12-20-10; Am. BC
Ord. 2016-01, passed 1-25-16) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.16 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person required to have a building permit shall submit a complete
application to the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   This application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the Building
Commissioner and shall contain the following:
      (1)   Information that the Building Commissioner determines to be
necessary to locate and contact the applicant.
      (2)   A clear and understandable copy of detailed plans and
specifications drawn to scale which indicate in a precise manner the nature and
location of all work to be accomplished.
      (3)   A plot plan drawn to scale. This plot plan shall reflect the
location of the structure in relation to existing property lines and show
streets, curbs and sidewalks and proposed changes or additions to such streets,
curbs and sidewalks.
      (4)   If required by Indiana law or any rule of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, a copy of a Design Release for the work to be done
that has been issued by the State Building Commissioner and the State Fire
Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3.
      (5)   Any additional information that the Building Commissioner finds to
be necessary to determine that the construction will conform to all applicable
building laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.17 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The fee schedule established by the County Building Commission and approved
by the County Commissioners, at their regularly scheduled meeting on March 19,
2003 and effective April 7, 2003:
BUILDING/STRUCTURE TYPE DESCRIPTION FEES
BUILDING/STRUCTURE TYPE   DESCRIPTION                FEES
Residential Uses:
                          Including manufactured
Single Family Dwelling    housing                    $.08 per square foot or
                          Includes mechanics and     minimum of $200
                          certificate of occupancy
                          Includes mechanics and     $.08 per square foot or
Two-Family Dwelling       certificate of occupancy   minimum of $200 plus
                                                     $25.00 per unit
Multi-Family Dwelling                                $.08 per square foot or
(rental/apartments,       Includes mechanics and     minimum of $200, plus 2 to
condominiums, and the     certificate of occupancy   10 units, $25 per unit.
like)                                                Over 10 units, $20 per
                                                     unit
Mobile Homes                                         $100
Accessory Uses:
Garages, Pole Barns,      Less than 200 square feet: $.05 per square foot or
Storage Structures on a   no charge                  minimum of $50
permanent foundation
Additions                 Additional square feet     $.05 per square foot or
                                                     minimum of $50
Interior remodeling                                  $.05 per square foot or
                                                     minimum of $50
                          Re-roofing, windows,
Exterior remodeling       siding, doors, guttering,  $30
                          foundations and the like
Swimming pool (in-ground)                            $100
Swimming pool (above      Deeper than 3 1/2 feet     $50
ground)
                          Any electrical, plumbing
                          or mechanical improvement,
                          the cost of which exceeds
                          $750; including
Electrical, Plumbing or   installation of any
Heating Ventilation and   furnace, hot water heater, $30
Air Conditioning          spa, hot tub, new meter
                          base, meter base
                          relocation, panel upgrade;
                          load control device, or
                          before electrical meter is
                          installed following a fire
Demolition                Any structure over 200     $25
                          square feet
                          Re-inspection fees are
                          assessed when an
                          additional inspection is
                          required, which deviates
Re-inspection fee (each   from the normal sequence   $25
additional inspection)    of inspections
                          All fees for permits and
                          inspections shall be paid
                          to the County Building
                          Commission.
Commercial Uses:
                          includes mechanics and
                          certificate of occupancy;
                          hotels, motels, business,
Principal Use             commercial, public         $.10 per square foot or a
                          buildings, educational,    minimum of $250
                          churches, industrial,
                          institutional, warehouse
                          and bulk storage building
Accessory Uses:
Storage, Garage or other
structure on a permanent                             $.10 per square foot or
foundation                                           minimum of $150
Additions                 Additional square feet      
Interior Remodeling       No additional square feet

                          Re-roofing, windows,
Exterior Remodeling:      siding, doors, guttering,  $100
                          foundations, and the like
Swimming pool (in-ground)                            $200
                          Any electrical, plumbing
                          or mechanical improvement,
                          the cost which exceeds
                          $750 or installation of
Electrical, plumbing or   any furnace, hot water
heating, ventilation and  heater, new meter base,    $ 50
air-conditioning          meter base relocation,
                          panel upgrade; load
                          control device, or before
                          electrical meter is
                          installed following a fire
Demolition                Any structure over 200     $ 50
                          square feet
Tanks                                                $100
Communication towers and
co-locates on existing                               $200
towers
Signs: Temporary or                                  $50
portable signs
                          6 to 100 square feet    $50
Permanent Signs:          101 to 300 square feet  �$200
                          301 to 1,001 square feet   $500
                          and up
Billboards and signs                                 Charged for each face
(Multi- faced)
 
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03; Am. BC Ord. 2010-19, passed 12-20-10)
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.18 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Signs. The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
      (1)   Signs not exceeding two square feet in area which identify the
names and occupants but do not denote commercial activity.
      (2)   Flags and insignias of a governmental unit, church, organization or
political entity except in connection with a commercial promotion.
      (3)   Legal notices, identification, informational, warning, trespassing,
or directional or architectural features of buildings.
      (4)   Memorial plaques and historical markers.
      (5)   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings.
      (6)   One real estate sign for each frontage, not exceeding six square
feet, indicating the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
      (7)   Traffic or directional signs placed by a municipality or state. An
exempt sign may be illuminated but may not be flashing or animated.
   (B)   Temporary, portable, or moving signs. Issuance of the permit shall be
for a maximum of 90 days. A portable sign may not be placed in a street or
highway right-of-way or sidewalk or where it blocks traffic vision. All
temporary signs must conform to the requirements of this chapter and are
subject to the inspection, removal, and penalties provided by this chapter.
   (C)   Agricultural uses. 
      (1)   All structures located on 20+ acres that are used for agricultural
purposes are exempt from permit fees.
      (2)   All taxpayers that file an Agricultural Section F with their taxes
are exempt from permit fees.
      (3)   All structures located on 20+ acres that are used for personal/
residential storage require a building permit as per the residential accessory
permit fees.
      (4)   All electrical services for agricultural structures require a
building permit as per the residential electric permit fee.
   (D)   Governmental uses. All structures constructed for the county, or for
any town, city, township, school corporation, or public library, or any
department and agency thereof, located within the county and funded at least
75% by county taxes, are exempt from permit fees.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03; Am. BC Ord. 2006-11, passed 7-26-06)
§ 150.19 WRITTEN AUTHORITY.
   Application for a building permit shall be made by the person entitled to
obtain the permit or by an employee or agent of that person. The Building
Commissioner may require that such an employee or agent provide written
authority to apply for a permit.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.20 CONTRACTOR LISTING.
   Contractors working in the jurisdiction of the County Building Department,
who wish to be able to apply for building permits must be listed by the county.
In order to obtain a listing the following must be provided:
   (A)   A completed Contractor Listing Application form, containing the
following information:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Address;
      (3)   Phone number;
      (4)   Individuals authorized to secure permits under this listing; and
      (5)   Legal business status of the listed contractor.
   (B)   Proof of a public liability and property damage insurance policy
insuring the listed contractor and naming the Board of County Commissioners as
"additional insured" in an amount of not less than $500,000. (A 15-day
notification of cancellation).
   (C)   Property owners' exception. A private property owner shall be able to
obtain a permit to perform work in or about his/her own property for a new or
remodeled building or structure without the insurance. Any contractors hired
shall provide all insurance and the property owner shall have proof of public
liability insurance and property damage insurance in hand and available to
responsible officials of the county and/or the County Building Department. All
work shall be permitted and inspected the same as other permits, and shall
adhere to all other state and local requirements.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.21 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.
   The Building Commissioner shall issue a building permit to a person after
the person has submitted a complete application, including any applicable fee,
provided that the proposed construction will conform to all applicable building
laws and will not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.22 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure shall be issued
unless such building or structure was constructed in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to occupy any such building or
structure unless a full or conditional certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the Building Commissioner. A conditional certificate of occupancy is issued
only in cases where yard work cannot be completed because of weather
conditions. Anyone occupying any such building or structure prior to securing a
full or conditional certificate of occupancy as hereinabove set forth shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to a penalty as set
forth in §
150.99.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.23 EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   If the work described in a building permit application has not been
started within six months from the date it was issued, the permit shall expire
and written notice thereof shall be given to the person submitting the permit
application.
   (B)   If the work described in any building permit application has not been
substantially completed within two years of the date it was issued, the permit
shall expire. Written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected,
together with notice that all work shall cease until a new permit has been
obtained.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
§ 150.30 GENERAL AUTHORITY TO MAKE INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   All construction shall be subject to periodic inspections by the
Building Commissioner irrespective of whether a building permit has been or is
required to be obtained.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner, subject to the provisions of this chapter
or to the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, at any
reasonable time go in, upon, around or about the premises where any structure
is located for the purposes of inspection and investigation of such structure.
Such inspections and investigations may be made before, during and/or after
construction on the project is completed for the purposes of determining
whether the structure meets building standards and procedures, and ascertaining
whether the construction and procedures have been accomplished in a manner
consistent with this chapter and the rules of the Fire Prevention And Building
Safety Commission. The Building Commissioner may notify the general contractor
and/or any other person or persons or entities who may be the owner or entitled
to the lawful possession of such building or structure of a schedule of
inspections to be performed by the Building Inspector; and require the general
contractor and/or the owner or any other person or persons or entities who may
be the owner or entitled to the lawful possession of such building or structure
of a duty to report to the Building Commissioner or whoever he designates;
certain stages of completion of the building or structure after which time the
Building Inspector may conduct his or her periodic inspections.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.31 INSPECTIONS BY FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Department shall work cooperatively
to conduct inspections and investigations to promote compliance with fire
safety laws (The Fire Department has independent authority to conduct
inspections and take enforcement actions under I.C. 36-8-17).
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03)
MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 150.40 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b) , the rules of the Indiana Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in the following Articles
of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated by
reference in this code and shall include any later amendments to those rules.
      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes
         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards.
         (b)   Indiana Building Code.
      (2)   Article 14 - Indiana Residential Code
      (3)   Article 16 - Indiana Plumbing Code
      (4)   Article 17 - Indiana Electrical Code
      (5)   Article 18 - Indiana Mechanical Code
      (6)   Article 19 - Indiana Energy Conser- vation Code
      (7)   Article 20 - Indiana Swimming Pool Code
      (8)   Article 22 - Indiana Fire Code
   (B)   Two copies of the above building rules incorporated by reference are
on file in the office of the clerk for the legislative body for public
inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner and the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission may grant a variance to the fire safety laws and building laws
adopted in this chapter. Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-7(b), a variance granted by
the Building Commissioner is not effective until it has been approved by Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03)
§ 150.41 LIFTING DEVICES LOCATED WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices, such as elevators
and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence are not regulated
lifting devices. Therefore, the following standards applicable to lifting
devices located within a private residence are incorporated by reference:
      (1)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety
Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
      (2)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators, ANSI/ASME
A17.12000, Safety Codes for Elevators and Escalators published by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
      (3)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts, ASME A18.1a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016
      (4)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts, ASME A18.la,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
      (5) Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1 a, 2001
(Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway Chair
Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park
Avenue, New York, New York, 10016.
   (B)   Two copies of the above lifting device standards incorporated by
reference are on file in the office of the clerk for the legislative body for
public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.42 HARMFUL GASES CONTROL METHODS.
   (A)   General. The following construction techniques are intended to resist
the entry of harmful gases and prepare the building for post-construction
harmful gases mitigation, if necessary. These techniques are required only in
MINE RECLAMATION SITES, which are defined as land that has been mined using
surface mining methods or underground mining methods, specifically and
primarily for the removal of coal, and land that is contiguous to land that has
been mined using surface or underground mining methods.
   (B)   Subfloor preparation. A layer of gas-permeable material shall be
placed under all concrete slabs and other floor systems that directly contact
the ground and are within the walls of the living spaces of the building, to
facilitate future installation of a subslab depressurization system, if needed.
The gas-permeable layer shall consist of one of the following:
      (1)   A uniform layer of clean aggregate, not less than four inches (102
mm) thick. The aggregate shall consist of material that will pass through a
two-inch (51-mm) sieve and be retained by a quarter-inch (6.4 mm) sieve.
      (2)   A uniform layer of sand (native or fill), not less than four inches
(102 mm) thick, overlain by a layer or strips of geotextile drainage matting
designed to allow the lateral flow of soil gasses.
      (3)   Other materials, systems or floor designs with demonstrated
capability to permit depressurization across the entire subfloor area.
   (C)   Soil-gas retarder. A minimum six-mil (0.15 mm) [or three-mil (0.075
mm) cross-laminated] polyethylene or equivalent flexible sheeting material
shall be placed on top of the gas-permeable layer prior to casting the slab or
placing the floor assembly to serve as a soil-gas retarder by bridging any
cracks that develop in the slab or floor assembly, and to prevent concrete from
entering the void spaces in the aggregate base material. The sheeting shall
cover the entire floor area with separate sections of sheeting lapped not less
than 12 inches (305 mm). The sheeting shall fit closely around any pipe, wire
or other penetrations of the material. Punctures or tears in the material shall
be sealed or covered with additional sheeting.
   (D)   Entry routes. Potential harmful gases entry routes shall be closed in
accordance with divisions (E) through (N) herein.
   (E)   Floor openings.  Openings around bathtubs, showers, water closets,
pipes, wires or other objects that penetrate concrete slabs, or other floor
assemblies, shall be filled with a polyurethane caulk or equivalent sealant
applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
   (F)   Concrete joints.  Control joints, isolation joints, construction
joints, and any other joints in concrete slabs or between slabs and foundation
walls shall be sealed with a caulk or sealant. Gaps and joints shall be cleared
of loose material and filled with polyurethane caulk or other elastomeric
sealant applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
   (G)   Condensate drains.  Condensate drains shall be trapped or routed
through nonperforated pipe to daylight.
   (H)   Sumps. Sump pits open to soil or serving as the termination point for
subslab or exterior drain tile loops shall be covered with a gasketed or
otherwise sealed lid. Sumps used as the suction point in a subslab
depressurization system shall have a lid designed to accommodate the vent pipe.
Sumps used as a floor drain shall have a lid equipped with a trapped inlet.
   (I)   Foundation walls.  Hollow block-masonry foundation walls shall be
constructed with either a continuous course of solid masonry, one course of
masonry grouted solid, or a solid concrete beam at or above the finished ground
surface to prevent the passage of air from the interior of the wall into the
living space. Where a brick veneer or other masonry ledge is installed, the
course immediately below that ledge shall be sealed. Joints, cracks or other
openings around all penetrations of both exterior and interior surfaces of
masonry block or wood foundation walls below the ground surface shall be filled
with polyurethane caulk or equivalent sealant. Penetrations of concrete walls
shall be filled.
   (J)   Dampproofing.  The exterior surfaces of portions of concrete and
masonry block walls below the ground surface shall be dampproofed.
   (K)   Air-handling units.  
      (1)   Air-handling units in crawl spaces shall be sealed to prevent air
from being drawn into the unit.
      (2)   Exception. Units with gasketed seams or units that are otherwise
sealed by the manufacturer to prevent leakage.
   (L)   Ducts. Ductwork passing through or beneath a slab shall be of seamless
material unless the air-handling system is designed to maintain continuous
positive pressure within such ducting.
      (1)   Joints in such ductwork shall be sealed to prevent air leakage.
      (2)   Ductwork located in crawl spaces shall have seams and joints sealed
by closure systems.
   (M)   Crawl-space floors. Openings around all penetrations through floors
above crawl spaces shall be caulked or otherwise filled to prevent air leakage.
   (N)   Crawl-space access. Access doors and other openings or penetrations
between basements and adjoining crawl spaces shall be closed, gasketed or
otherwise filled to prevent air leakage.
   (O)   Passive submembrane depressurization system. In buildings with crawl-
space foundations, the following components of a passive submembrane
depressurization system shall be installed during construction:
      (1)   Ventilation.  Crawl spaces shall be provided with vents to the
exterior of the building. The minimum net area of ventilation openings shall
comply with the 2020 Indiana Residential Code.
      (2)   Soil-gas retarder. The soil in crawl spaces shall be covered with a
continuous layer of six-mil (0.15 mm) polyethylene soil-gas retarder. The
ground cover shall be lapped not less than 12 inches (305 mm) at joints and
shall extend to all foundation walls enclosing the crawl space area.
      (3)   Vent pipe. A plumbing tee or other approved connection shall be
inserted horizontally beneath the sheeting and connected to a three- or four-
inch-diameter (76- or 102-mm-diameter) fitting with a vertical pipe installed
through the sheeting. The vent pipe shall be extended up through the building
floors, and terminate not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the roof in a
location not less than ten feet (3,048 mm) away from any window or other
opening into the conditioned spaces of the building that is less than two feet
(610 mm) below the exhaust point, and ten feet (3,048 mm) from any window or
other opening in adjoining or adjacent buildings.
   (P)   Passive subslab depressurization system. In basements or slab-on-grade
buildings, the following components of a passive subslab depressurization
system shall be installed during construction.
      (1)   Vent pipe. A minimum-three-inch-diameter (76 mm) ABS, PVC or
equivalent gas-tight pipe shall be embedded vertically into the subslab
aggregate or other permeable material before the slab is case.
         (a)   A “T fitting or equivalent method shall be used to ensure that
the pipe opening remains within the subslab-permeable material.
         (b)    Alternatively, the three-inch (76-mm) pipe shall be inserted
directly into an interior perimeter drain tile loop or through a sealed sump
cover where the sump is exposed to the subslab aggregate or connected to it
through a drainage system.
         (c)   The pipe shall be extended up through the building floors, and
terminate not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the surface of the roof in a
location not less than ten feet (3,028 mm) away from any window or other
opening into the conditioned spaces of the building that is less than two feet
(610 mm) below the exhaust point, and ten feet (3,048 mm) from any window or
other opening in adjoining or adjacent buildings.
      (2)   Multiple vent pipes.  In buildings where interior footings or other
barriers separate the subslab aggregate or other gas-permeable material, each
area shall be fitted with an individual vent pipe. Vent pipes shall connect to
a single vent that terminates above the roof or each individual vent pipe shall
terminate separately above the roof.
   (Q)   Vent-pipe drainage. Components of the harmful gases vent pipe system
shall be installed to provide positive drainage to the ground beneath the slab
or soil-gas retarder.
   (R)   Vent-pipe accessibility.  
      (1)   Harmful gases vent pipes shall be accessible for future fan
installation through an attic or other area outside the habitable space.
      (2)   Exception. The harmful gases vent pipe need not be accessible in an
attic space where an approved roof-top electrical supple is provided for future
use.
   (S)   Vent-pipe identification. Exposed and visible interior harmful gases
vent pipes shall be identified with not less than one label on each floor and
in accessible attics. The label shall read: “Harmful Gases Reduction System.”
   (T)   Combination foundations. Combination basement/crawl-space or slab-on-
grade/crawl-space foundations shall have separate, harmful-gases vent pipes
installed in each type of foundation area. Each harmful-gases vent pipe shall
terminate above the roof or shall be connected to a single vent that terminates
above the roof.
   (U)   Power source. To provide for future installation of an active
submembrane or subslab depressurization system, an electrical circuit
terminated in an approved box shall be installed during construction in the
attic or other anticipated location of vent pipe fans. An electrical supply
shall be accessible in anticipated locations of system failure alarms.
   (V)   In the event of any conflict between this §
150.42 and the 2020 Indiana Residential Code, as amended, then the 2020 Indiana
Residential Code shall control.
(Ord. 2024-21, passed 11-13-24)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.50 WITHHOLD ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Whenever a person which is either an applicant for a building permit
or an obtainer of a building permit owes fees (including checks returned for
insufficient funds, or permit fees owed pursuant to the County Building
Commission) the Building Commissioner may withhold the issuance of subsequently
requested permits until such time that the debt is satisfied.
   (B)   Whenever a person applies for a building permit for a structure that
is not being used or constructed in conformance with applicable provisions of
an applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinance relating to land use, the
Building Commissioner is authorized to withhold the issuance of requested
permits until such time that the property is brought into conformance with
applicable ordinances.
   (C)   Wherever a person applies for a building permit for any structure
pursuant to this chapter, the owner of the real estate upon which said
structure is to be constructed and the general contractor, if said structure is
being constructed by someone other than the owner shall agree in writing in the
application for building permit that the said owner and contractor, if there is
a contractor, shall hold the county, its County Commissioners and its other
agents, servants or employees harmless and indemnify the above from any damages
which may result from or because by the construction of the aforesaid building
upon said real estate, including, but not limited to subsidence or sinkage of
the earth upon which the building or structure is placed.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.51 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The Building Commissioner may revoke a building permit when any of the
following are applicable:
   (A)   The application, plans or supporting documents contain a false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact.
   (B)   The application, plans or supporting documents reflect a lack of
compliance with building standards and procedures.
   (C)   There is failure to comply with this chapter.
   (D)   The structure for which the building permit has been issued is not
being used or constructed in conformance with an applicable zoning ordinance or
other ordinance relating to land use.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§
150.52 STOP-WORK ORDER.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner may issue an order requiring suspension of
the pertinent construction (stop-work order) in accordance with this section.
   (B)   The stop-work order shall:
      (1)   Be in writing.
      (2)   State with specificity the construction to which it is applicable
and the reason for its issuance.
      (3)   Be posted on the property in a conspicuous place.
      (4)   If practicable, be given to:
         (a)   The person doing the construction; and
         (b)   To the owner of the property or the owner's agent.
      (5)   The stop-work order shall state the conditions under which
construction may be resumed.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner may issued a stop-work order if:
      (1)   Construction is proceeding in an unsafe manner, including, but not
limited to, in violation of any standard set forth in this chapter or any state
law pertaining to safety during construction.
      (2)   Construction is occurring in violation of this Building Ordinance
or in such a manner that if construction is allowed to proceed, there is a
reasonable probability that it will substantially be difficult to correct the
violation.
      (3)   Construction for which a building permit is required is proceeding
without a building permit being in force.
   (D)   The issuance of a stop-work order shall in no way limit the operation
of penalties provided elsewhere in this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.53 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued under this chapter shall have the
right to petition for review of any order of the Building Commissioner. Such a
person may file a petition using either, or both, of the following procedures:
   (A)   Appeal to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
      (1)   A person aggrieved by an order issued under this chapter may submit
a petition for review to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, in
accordance with I.C. 22-13-2-7.
      (2)   The Commission may modify or reverse any order that covers a
subject governed by I.C. 22-12, I.C. 22-13, I.C. 22-14, I.C. 22-15, a fire
safety rule, or a building rule.
      (3)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission must review
orders that concern a Class 2 Structure if the person aggrieved by the order
petitions for review under I.C. 4-21.5-3-7 within 30 days after the issuance of
the order.
      (4)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission may review all
other orders issued under this chapter that cover a subject governed by I.C.
22-12, I.C. 22-13, I.C. 22-14, I.C. 22-15, a fire safety rule, or a building
rule.
      (5)   The review of an order by the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission does not suspend the running of the time period under any statute in
which a person must petition a court for judicial review of the order.
   (B)   Appeal to an established local administrative body or court. Pursuant
to I.C. 36-7-8-9, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Department
may appeal as in other civil actions. The appellant must, by registered mail,
give the county executive a 15-day written notice of his or her intention to
appeal. This notice must concisely state the appellant’s grievance. If,
pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-9, the county has established by ordinance to hear
appeals of orders issued under ordinances, then a person aggrieved by an order
may petition for review with this administrative body in accordance with said
ordinances. if no such administrative body exists, then the person may petition
a court for judicial review of the order.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to a
fine in any sum not exceeding $2,500. The assessment of a monetary penalty
shall in no way limit the operation of the penalties provided elsewhere in this
chapter.
   (B)   If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter, or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall fail to
perform any duty lawfully required within the time prescribed by the Building
Commissioner, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given
by the Building Commissioner in connection with the provisions of this
ordinance for each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm or
corporation shall be fined a sum as hereinafter set forth.
      (1)   The sum of $250 for failure to correct such violation after such
person, firm or corporation shall have been given written notice of such
violation which notice shall state the items to be corrected, and that said
correction shall be completed within ten days following delivery of notice to
such person, firm or corporation.
      (2)   The sum of $500 in addition to the initial sum of $250 as
hereinabove set forth if such correction is not made within 20 days following
the receipt of such initial notice.
      (3)   The sum of $750 in addition to the aforesaid $250 and $500 if said
correction is not made within 30 days following the receipt of such initial
notice.
      (4)   The Building Commissioner may, for good cause, extend the above
ten-day, 20-day, and 30-day periods for achieving such corrections, but in no
event shall the time be shortened for making such corrections which shall
subject the person, firm or corporation to the aforesaid civil fines.
   (C)   In addition to the above fines, the Commissioners and/or the Building
Commissioner may maintain a civil action in a Court of competent jurisdiction
to seek a Court Order removing any person or persons from occupying any
building or structure contrary to this chapter to stop work upon any building
or structure which is proceeding in violation of this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2003-14, passed 7-15-03)
CHAPTER 151: ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREAS
Section
   
151.01   General standards and requirements
   
151.02   Application process
Cross-reference:
   Specific areas designated, see
T.S.O. III
§ 151.01 GENERAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application for designation as an economic revitalization area shall
meet at least one of the following criteria:
      (1)   The property is or has become undesirable for, or impossible of,
normal development and occupancy because of lack of development, cessation of
growth, deterioration of improvements or character of occupancy, age,
obsolescence, substandard buildings or other factors which have impaired the
values or prevent a normal development of property or use of property.
      (2)   The property includes a facility or group of facilities that are
technologically, economically, or energy obsolete and where said obsolescence
may lead to a decline in employment and tax revenues.
   (B)   Applications shall also address at least one of the following
development objectives for real property development:
      (1)   The generation of use of vacant or under-utilized land;
      (2)   The rehabilitation or replacement of obsolete, deteriorated, vacant
or under-utilized buildings;
      (3)   The retention or expansion of job opportunities; or
      (4)   The preservation of historically or architecturally significant
property.
   (C)   Tax abatement may be allowed for projects in the following categories:
      (1)   Manufacturing: property consisting of new, improved, or expanded
building or structure but not including land.
      (2)   Warehousing as a part of the renovation of vacant manufacturing
structures or the construction of a new facility.
      (3)   New research and/or high technology facilities.
      (4)   Renovation of vacant manufacturing structures.
   (D)   Tax abatement shall not be available to retail businesses.
   (E)   Tax abatement may be granted for new manufacturing equipment as
defined in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 and as described in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5. Tax
abatement for new manufacturing equipment may be granted for a period of ten
years which:
      (1)   Is used in the direct production, manufacture, fabrication,
assembly, extraction, mining, processing, refining, or finishing of other
tangible personal property;
      (2)   Was acquired by its owner for the use described under division (E)
(1), above, and was never before used by its owner for any purpose in Indiana;
and
      (3)   Is installed in an economic revitalization area.
   (F)   Tax abatement will not be granted for a project that does not meet the
qualifications of I.C. 6-1.1-12.1.
   (G)   The project must begin within 12 months of the date of passage of the
tax abatement resolution.
   (H)   The value of real estate improvements or new manufacturing equipment
must be at least $50,000.
   (I)   Date relating to current taxes, projected taxes with and without tax
abatement, and the tax deferral shall be provided as a part of the application.
   (J)   For a real property tax abatement application, a site plan must be
submitted with the application. For new manufacturing equipment tax abatement,
the application must include information concerning the new manufacturing
equipment specific enough to allow the equipment to be identified.
(CC Res. 1994-5, passed 6-2-94)
§ 151.02 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   An application seeking designation of an area as an economic
revitalization area shall be filed with the County Auditor on forms furnished
by the County Department of Economic Development. Such application must contain
supporting documentation relative to the matter set forth in §
151.01.
   (B)   The application for tax abatement shall also contain all information
as required by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1.
   (C)   The County Auditor, upon receipt of application, shall forward it to
the Department of Economic Development which shall review the application for
completeness and accuracy, gather and provide additional information needed by
the County Council to make an appropriate informed decision, analyze the
application and supplemental material and submit such comments and
recommendation on the acceptability or unacceptability of the request for
economic revitalization area designation.
(CC Res. 1994-5, passed 6-2-94)
CHAPTER 152: LEASING OF REAL PROPERTY
Section
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Terms and conditions of lease
   
152.03   Prohibited use of property
   
152.04   Termination of lease
   
152.05   Compliance with zoning regulations required
   
152.06   Application for lease
   
152.07   Renewal of lease
   
152.08   Buildings or improvements to be approved prior to construction
Cross-reference:
   County policies generally, see
Ch. 39
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DELIVERY OF NOTICE. In all cases where notice, other than published notice
is required to be given, it shall be given either by personal delivery to the
effected party or by United States Mail, return receipt requested.
   INSURANCE. A comprehensive general liability insurance policy, or other
insuring agreement, providing coverage for bodily injury and property damage in
such amount as may be fixed by the lease, and, where appropriate, such other
insurance as is necessary to indemnify for loss by fire of a building and its
contents and other customarily insured against perils.
   LESSOR BODY. Either the Board of County Commissioners, if the real property
at issue is administered by that Board or is held in the name of the county by
the Board of County Commissioners,  or a department or board of the county, if
the real property at issue is held in the name of, or is administered by, that
department or board.
   LONG TERM LEASE. Any written agreement between the county or its
departments, and a qualified lessee, which leases real property for a period of
time fixed in excess of six months.
   PROOF OF STATUS. Proof by such corporation of its qualified status shall be
such documentation as shall be adequate to establish that it meets the
definition of a qualified lessee.
   PUBLISHED NOTICE. In all cases requiring published notice of any event, such
publication shall be in a local newspaper of general circulation in the county
seat, which notice shall contain a description, by common location, of the
property proposed to be leased; a recitation of the proposed use to which the
property will be put; the name of the proposed lessee; and, fixing a date for a
hearing on the proposed lease together with the last date for filing competing
lease applications on the same property.
   QUALIFIED LESSEE. A qualified lessee shall mean any Indiana not-for-profit
corporation organized under any Indiana not-for-profit corporation act, which
is in good standing and exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to Section
501 of the Internal Revenue Code, being 29 USC 501.
(BC Ord. 1994-13, passed 6-27-94)
§ 152.02 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF LEASE.
   (A)   The Commissioners, or a department or board, may lease to a qualified
lessee, such real property as may be leased and as deemed expedient by the
particular body. Such lease may be either, for a fee or at no consideration,
except that all leases shall require the lessee to insure, at its cost, the
leased property. In all cases, the county and where appropriate, a department
or board, shall be named as insureds on such policy or policies of insurance or
other insuring agreement. Before execution of any such lease, the
Commissioners, or other lessor body shall conduct a public hearing on the
application to lease and determine whether the proposed lease is in the best
interest of the county or lessor body.
   (B)   The lessor body to whom the lease is proposed shall determine the
terms and conditions of any lease under this chapter. Such lease may include an
option or options to renew upon such terms and conditions as the lessor body
shall determine are in the best interest of the public.
(BC Ord. 1994-13, passed 6-27-94)
§ 152.03 PROHIBITED USE OF PROPERTY.
   No lessee shall use such leased property for any purpose prohibited by law,
its corporate charter, in violation of any valid restrictive covenants running
with the land or in violation of any ordinance of the county. Upon proof of any
such prohibited use, the lessor body shall give notice to the lessee of such
violation, and conduct a hearing to determine if the lease should be
terminated. In the event that such lease is terminated, possession of the
leased property shall immediately revert to the lessor body.
(BC Ord. 1994-13, passed 6-27-94)
§ 152.04 TERMINATION OF LEASE.
   In the event that a lessee ceases to be a qualified lessee during the term
of the lease, upon notice from the lessor body, the lease shall terminate and
possession of such property shall revert to the lessor body, unless, within 30
days after notice to such lessee of such termination, under this section, it
produces adequate proof that is has regained its qualified status.
(BC Ord. 1994-13, passed 6-27-94)
§ 152.05 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   In the event that the use for which the lessee proposes to acquire the
property is prohibited by any zoning ordinance, such lease may be executed upon
condition that the lessee shall, within 120 days thereafter, take the necessary
steps to acquire proper variances, use exceptions or rezoning. In the event
that such variance, use exception or rezoning is not acquired by the lessee by
the end of such period, the lease shall terminate. During such period lessee
shall do no act in violation of such ordinance. Where necessary the lessor body
may be a co-petitioner for such variance, use exception or rezoning, however,
all costs, fees or expenses therefor shall be borne by the lessee.
(BC Ord. 1994-13, passed 6-27-94)
§ 152.06 APPLICATION FOR LEASE.
   (A)   Any corporation seeking to lease real property under this chapter
shall:
      (1)   File an application for lease, on forms provided by the Auditor,
with the County Auditor.
      (2)   Provide all documentation necessary to establish its qualified
status.
      (3)   Pay to the Auditor a fee of $50, as a processing fee and for the
cost of publication of the notice required by this chapter.
      (4)   Attend the public hearing on its application for a lease.
   (B)   Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, the Auditor
shall publish the notice required by this chapter and set the application for a
public hearing on the agenda of the appropriate lessor body. However, such
public hearing may not be set less than ten days after publication of the first
notice, and, in the event there are competing applications, shall be on the
date as set by the presiding officer of the lessor body.
   (C)   No competing application may be considered by the lessor body unless
it was filed on or before the date set out in the published notice regarding
the original application or any renewal thereof. In the event a competing
application is filed timely, such application shall be heard at the same time
as the original application for the lease or any request for renewal thereof.
(BC Ord. 1994-13, passed 6-27-94)
§ 152.07 RENEWAL OF LEASE.
   In the event that any lease executed by a lessor body shall provide for a
period, or periods, of renewal, published notice of a public hearing regarding
such renewal shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of a public
hearing to consider such renewal. The cost of such notice shall be borne by the
lessee.
(BC Ord. 1994-13, passed 6-27-94)
§ 152.08 BUILDINGS OR IMPROVEMENTS TO BE APPROVED PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.
   Any building proposed to be erected by the lessee or improvements to the
real property, shall be first approved by the lessor body, and, in addition
thereto, all such plans and specifications for such building or improvement
must be approved by all necessary state and county agencies prior to
construction thereof. Copies of “as built” drawings, blueprints and other like
documents shall be provided to the lessor body upon completion of such
construction.
(BC Ord. 1994-13, passed 6-27-94)
CHAPTER 153: PLANNING
Section
   
153.01   Area Planning Department
   
153.02   Comprehensive Plan adopted
   
153.03   Area Plan Commission approval required prior to public works
construction
§ 153.01 AREA PLANNING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The county hereby adopts the provisions of I.C. 36-7-7-1 et seq.
   (B)   An Area Planning Department is created effective on August 6, 1962.
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners shall select the representatives of the
county who are to be members of the Area Plan Commission, pursuant to I.C. 36-
7-7-4.
(BC Ord. passed 8-6-62)
§ 153.02 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED.
   (A)   The document consisting of text, maps and charts entitled Warrick
County, Indiana, Comprehensive Plan and dated 1993, is hereby adopted as the
comprehensive plan of the county, and is hereby made a part of this code the
same as if set forth in full herein.
   (B)   In order that the comprehensive plan shall at all times be current
with the needs of the towns of Elberfeld, Tennyson and Lynnville and Warrick
County, and shall represent the best thinking of the County Commissioners, Area
Plan Commission, Town Boards, Commissions, and departments of the county and
towns in light of changing conditions, the County Commissioners and Town Boards
may direct the Area Plan Commission to prepare amendments from time to time to
the Comprehensive Plan and recommend to the Town Boards and County
Commissioners extensions, changes, or additions to the plan which the
Commission considers necessary.
   (C)   The Comprehensive Plan shall be the policy guide for decision making
that affects the physical development of Warrick County (unincorporated areas)
and the Towns of Elberfeld, Tennyson and Lynnville.
(BC Res. 1993-7, passed 4-26-93; Am. BC Res. 2009-14, passed 10- 19-09; Am. BC
Res. 2019-05, passed 6-10-19: Am. BC Res. 2024-02, passed 2-12-24)
§ 153.03 AREA PLAN COMMISSION APPROVAL REQUIRED PRIOR TO PUBLIC WORKS
CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Prior to the commencement of any public works program listed below in
any unincorporated area written approval must be obtained from the County Area
Plan Commission.
      (1)   In order to secure such approval the engineer, surveyor, consulting
engineer, or the owner shall submit to the Area Planning Commission complete
plans and specifications for the construction of:
         (a)   Any public water system.
         (b)   Any sanitary storm sewer system.
         (c)   Any gas distribution system.
         (d)   Any street or highway system.
      (2)   In any unincorporated area in which the construction of the above
is contemplated and by this construction it is necessary to connect to or
extend any existing or proposed system lying outside the corporate limits of
all towns and cities, the Clerk- Treasurer of the town or city must file the
above construction plans with the Area Plan Commission.
(BC Ord. passed 9-6-66)
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer of all towns and cities now participating in the
County Master Development Plan are hereby required to furnish the Area Plan
Commission with a complete copy of all plans for the establishment or extension
of any and all public utilities within such participating town or city upon
final approval thereof by the governing unit of such participating town or
city.
(BC Ord. passed 9-6-66)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Purpose
   
154.002   Jurisdiction
   
154.003   Authority
   
154.004   Definitions
Procedure for Submission of Major Subdivisions
   
154.010   Pre-application conference
   
154.011   Application and fees
   
154.012   Notice of public hearing
   
154.013   Preparation for primary approval
   
154.014   Form of submission
   
154.015   Vicinity plan
   
154.016   Required primary plat information
   
154.017   Optional primary plat information
   
154.018   Primary plat approval
   
154.019   Final plat
   
154.020   Required submissions prior to consideration of secondary approval
   
154.021   Inspection of improvements during construction
   
154.022   Proof of financial responsibility
   
154.023   Secondary plat approval
   
154.024   Completion of street improvements and acceptance of maintenance by
county
Procedures for Submission of Minor Subdivisions
   
154.035   Application and fees
   
154.036   Notice of public hearing
   
154.037   Preparation and submission of minor subdivision plat
   
154.038   Required minor subdivision plat information
   
154.039   Minor subdivision plat approval
Procedures for Resubdivision and/or Replatting of Land
   
154.050   Procedure for resubdivision/replatting
Vacation of Plats
   
154.060   Procedures for vacation of plats
General Regulations and Design
   
154.070   General
   
154.071   Streets
   
154.072   Alleys
   
154.073   Easements
   
154.074   Blocks
   
154.075   Lots
   
154.076   Public sites and open spaces
   
154.077   Non-residential subdivisions
   
154.078   Entrance requirements and specifications
Street and Utility Improvements
   
154.090   Standards and approvals
   
154.091   General requirements
   
154.092   Monuments and markers
   
154.093   Minimum standards for street and highway construction
   
154.094   Curbs and gutters
   
154.095   Sidewalks
   
154.096   Storm drainage
   
154.097   Water supply
   
154.098   Sewage disposal and sanitary sewers
   
154.099   Street name signs
   
154.100   Railroad crossings
   
154.101   Traffic-control devices/pavement markings
   
154.102   Erosion control
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.120   Fees
   
154.121   Administration
   
154.122   Validity
   
154.123   Enforcement
Certificates
   
154.130   Certificates required with plats
   
154.131   Certificate of approval
   
154.132   Land surveyor’s certificate
   
154.133   Legal description certificate
   
154.134   Dedication certificate
   
154.135   Acknowledgment certificate
   
154.136   County Drainage Board
   
154.137   Other certificates
Thoroughfare Plan
   
154.145   Applicability
   
154.146   Classifications
   
154.147   Roads by classification
   
154.148   Compliance with plan
   
154.149   Modification
   
Appendix A:   Street Sign Specifications
   
Appendix B:   Warrick County Roadway Specifications
   
Appendix C:   Checklist for Parcelization
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted for the purpose of adopting subdivision
regulations to control and regulate the division of land for any purpose
whatsoever within the jurisdiction of the Area Plan Commission. The Area Plan
Commission shall have all the powers and duties with respect to primary and
secondary plat approvals and subdivisions, and the procedures relating thereto
which are specified by law and by this chapter. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the
requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare, by providing for the harmonious development of Warrick County, for the
coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned
streets or with other features, for adequate open spaces for traffic, schools,
recreation and air, for adequate storm water drainage and sewage disposal, for
the efficient and economical maintenance of streets, and for the development
for public use of public grounds.
   (B)   Private wells and septic systems in lieu of public water and sewer
facilities are allowable where permitted under the Warrick County Zoning
Ordinance and approved by the Health Department.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.002 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land within the corporate
limits of Elberfeld, Lynnville, Tennyson and any other participating cities or
towns, and the unincorporated areas of Warrick County, Indiana, as now or
hereafter established.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.003 AUTHORITY.
   Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners, under authority of I.C. 36-7-
4-700 et seq., as amended, that:
   (A)   No plat or replat of a subdivision of land as defined herein located
within the corporate limits of the towns of Elberfeld, Lynnville, and Tennyson,
any other participating cities or towns, and the unincorporated areas of
Warrick County, shall be recorded until it shall have the approval of the
Commission, and such approval shall be entered upon the plat. The plat shall be
accompanied by a certificate bearing the seal of the Commission, signed by the
President of the Commission, and attested to by the Executive Director of the
Commission disclosing that proper public notice of the hearing has been given
and that a majority of the members of the Commission concur in its approval.
   (B)   No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of
such subdivision has been approved by the Area Plan Commission, in accordance
with the provisions of these regulations and filed with the County Recorder.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
   ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS. Record title owners whose property is contiguous
to the subject property, including any property that would touch at any point
the subject property, ignoring all rights-of-way, easements and alleys,
including property owned by a governmental body for the primary purpose of a
road way. However, record title owners of property separated from the subject
property by a freeway or expressway are not considered ABUTTING PROPERTY
OWNERS, and need not be notified as ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS. For the purpose
of notifying abutting property owners if only a portion of a parcel of real
estate is being considered at the public hearing, and with the remaining
portion owned by the same property owner, then the abutting property owner to
the entire parcel shall be notified, except that when the abutting property
owner's real estate is 500 feet or more distant from the part of the real
estate being considered, no notification shall be required.
   ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF SIDEWALKS. Acknowledgment of completion of sidewalk
construction in accordance with primary plat.
   ACT. I.C. 36-7-4-700 et seq. as added by Acts of 1981, P.L. 309, Section 23,
and amended by Acts of 1982, P.L. 211, Section 4 and all future acts amendatory
thereto.
   ALLEY. A strip of land dedicated to public use and providing a permanent
secondary means of access to abutting property at the rear or sides thereof.
   APPLICANT. The person or persons who apply for approval of a subdivision by
the Area Plan Commission under this chapter. This person or persons are also
known as the SUBDIVIDER.
   BASIC IMPROVEMENTS. See IMPROVEMENTS - BASIC.
   BENCH MARK. A monument for which an accurate elevation has been established
and recorded on the plat, using the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance
between the right-of-way of any street, and the foundation of any buildings,
except designated projections as set forth in the Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance in effect for Warrick County, Indiana, and participating
jurisdictions.
   COMMISSION. The Warrick County Area Plan Commission.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The complete development plan, or any of its parts, for
the development of Warrick County prepared by the Area Plan Commission and
adopted in accordance with Chapter 138, Acts of 1957, General Assembly of
Indiana, and all amendments thereof and supplement thereto as is now or may
hereafter be in effect, as found in I.C. 36-7-1-500 et seq.
   COUNTY. Warrick County, Indiana
   CUL-DE-SAC. Local street with only one outlet having an appropriate terminus
for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   DRAINAGE BOARD. Warrick County Drainage Board.
   EASEMENT. Authorization or grant by a property owner to specific persons or
to the public to use the land for specific purposes.
   EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. The duly appointed head of the staff of the Area Plan
Commission.
   FIRM. Federal Insurance Rate Map as prepared by Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) for Warrick County, Indiana unincorporated areas plus
participating towns.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. 100-year flood contour line from FIRM (or FEMA maps for
Warrick County).
   IMPROVEMENTS – BASIC. The installation of sanitary sewers and water supply
lines.
   IMPROVEMENTS – STREET. The installation of streets, street signs, storm
sewers, curbs, gutters and sidewalks when required by the Area Plan Commission.
   LEGAL DRAIN. An open or tiled ditch, or combination of the two, which are
subject to the jurisdiction and control of the Drainage Board.
   LETTER OF CREDIT. A legally binding instrument, such as an Irrevocable
Letter of Credit or cashiers check, from a duly chartered financial institution
or insurance company providing surety satisfactory to the Area Plan Commission
that all improvements and installations (required as a condition of primary
plat approval) will be constructed in accordance with the standards of this
chapter. The Area Plan Commission no longer accepts a bond as surety that the
applicant or subdivider will complete all improvements in accordance with the
primary plat approval.
   LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT. Warrick County Board of Health.
   LOT. The tract within a subdivision marked by the subdivider (or applicant)
as a numbered, lettered or other identified tract to be offered as a unit of
land for transfer of ownership or for development which is an identifiable
parcel of land having frontage on a public street or right-of-way.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street or through lots abutting two streets.
   MAINTENANCE, ACCEPTANCE OF. Official recognition by the Board of
Commissioners that streets in a subdivision have been constructed in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and approved construction plans for a
specific subdivision and acceptance by the Board of Commissioners of
responsibility for ongoing maintenance of the streets.
   MUNICIPAL FACILITIES. This is the basic infrastructure provided by a
jurisdiction to support the development of land. This basic infrastructure
provides for the movement of motor vehicles, bicycle and pedestrians, the
disposal of liquid waste, the provision of potable water for drinking, and the
conveyance of stormwater. Accordingly, municipal facilities include streets
(including bicycle and pedestrian facilities), sanitary sewers, waterlines, and
stormsewers or drainage ditches. Where sanitary sewers or a public liquid waste
disposal system does not exist, a private liquid waste disposal system (such as
a septic system) must be provided as approved by the Health Department. Where a
public water supply system does not exist, a private source of potable water
(such as a well) must be provided as approved by the Health Department. In this
chapter, MUNICIPAL FACILITIES do not include electric, gas, telephone and other
telecommunication facilities although easements may be requested by providers
of such utilities for the provision of such facilities to the development.
   ORDINANCE. This chapter and all subsequent additions or amendments thereto.
   OWNER. The individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
   PARCEL. An area of land that is:
      (1)   Under common fee simple ownership;
      (2)   Contained within a continuous border; and
      (3)   A separately identified parcel for property tax purposes.
   PARTICIPATING CITIES AND TOWNS. The towns of Elberfeld, Lynnville, Tennyson
and any other general purpose unit of government located within Warrick County
that freely chooses by official act of its legislative body to submit itself to
the provisions of this chapter and to the administration of zoning and other
planning, related studies and ordinances administered by the Area Plan
Commission.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or any
other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
   PLAT or PRIMARY PLAT. A map or drawing prepared in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter upon which the subdivider's plan of the
subdivision is presented and which he or she submits for approval of the Area
Plan Commission and intends to record in the final form.
   PLAT RELEASE. The release of a "major" subdivision final plat for the
purpose of recordation effected by the execution of the plat by the Executive
Director and President of the Area Plan Commission.
   PRIMARY APPROVAL. An approval (or approval with conditions imposed) granted
to a "major" subdivision by the Plan Commission after having determined in a
public hearing that the subdivision complies with this chapter.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. An irrevocable letter or cashiers check
in an amount and form satisfactory to the Area Plan Commission providing surety
that all improvements and installations, required as a condition of "major"
subdivision primary plat approval, will be constructed in accordance with the
standards of this chapter.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. In addition to MUNICIPAL FACILITIES as defined above,
public  improvements may include ditches, drainage ways, legal drains,
stormwater retention or detention facilities, public trails and paths, parks,
recreation areas, nature conservation areas, or other public improvements for
the enjoyment of the general public or those who reside on the land to be
subdivided.
   RECORDER. The County Recorder of Warrick County, Indiana.
   REPLAT. A change in a recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any
street layout on such plat, or area reserved therein for public use, or any lot
line, with the following exception: in case of a division of a single lot in a
recorded subdivision to be added to the adjacent lot for additional acreage
without affecting any street layout or area reserved for public use, the replat
is exempt from the subdivision process. The replat shall be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor with a legal description, submitted to the Area Plan
Commission for information purposes, and recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
transportation facilities, public utilities, or other special public uses.
Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a public agency
shall be dedicated to the public use by the maker of the plat on which such
right-of-way is established.
   SECONDARY APPROVAL. The stage of application for formal Plan Commission
approval of a final plat of a subdivision the construction of which has been
completed or guaranteed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
which, if approved and signed by the designated officials may be submitted to
the County Recorder for filing.
   SECONDARY or FINAL PLAT. The map, drawing, or plan described in this chapter
of a subdivision and any accompanying material submitted to the Commission for
secondary approval, and which, if approved and signed by the designated
officials, may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.
   STATE BOARD OF HEALTH. Indiana State Board of Health.
   STREET. A public right-of-way, intended for vehicular traffic, including
expressways, parkways, primary thoroughfares, collector streets, local streets,
cul-de-sacs, marginal access streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, ways,
courts and other public ways, with the exception of alleys and as now or
hereafter or otherwise designated.
      (1)   FREEWAYS and EXPRESSWAYS. Major streets and highways used primarily
for through traffic, mixed traffic or fast or heavy traffic, generally
including interstate, U.S. and/or state routes. Freeways are facilities with
full access control and grade separation (or interchange) of all crossing
transportation facilities. All facilities with a federal functional
classification of interstate are freeways. Expressways are facilities with
partial access control. Access points to expressways are generally not less
than 1,200 feet in rural areas and 600 feet in urban areas. All facilities with
a federal functional classification of principal arterial that are on the
National Highway System (but not interstates) are expressways. These facilities
have minimum right-of-way widths in excess of 150 feet.
      (2)   ARTERIALS. Streets designed, planned and intended for through
vehicular traffic in conformance with the Warrick County Comprehensive Plan.
All facilities with a federal functional classification of minor arterial are
arterials. The arterial designation corresponds to the dual roadway portion of
the previous primary thoroughfare class (and may also be known as primary
arterials). These facilities are eventually intended to have four through
traffic lanes with access controlled by permit.
      (3)   URBAN MAJOR COLLECTOR. Streets designed, planned and intended to
serve as collectors and distributors of through vehicular traffic in urban
areas. All facilities with a federal functional classification of urban
collector are urban major collectors. The urban major collector designation
corresponds to the single roadway portion of the previous primary thoroughfare
class (and may also be known as secondary arterials). These facilities are
generally intended to have two through traffic lanes with access controlled by
permit. On occasion, four through traffic lanes may be necessary to the
magnitude of abutting development.
      (4)   RURAL MAJOR COLLECTOR. Streets designed, planned and intended to
serve as collectors and distributors of through vehicular traffic in rural
areas. All facilities with a federal functional classification of rural major
collector are rural major collectors. The rural major collector designation
corresponds to the single roadway portion of the previous primary thoroughfare
class (and may also be known as secondary arterials). These facilities are
generally intended to have two through traffic lanes with access controlled by
permit. On occasion, four through traffic lanes may be necessary to the
magnitude of abutting development.
      (5)   RURAL MINOR COLLECTOR. Streets designed, planned and intended to
serve as collectors and distributors of through vehicular traffic in rural
areas. All facilities with a federal functional classification of rural minor
collector are rural minor collectors. The rural minor collector designation
corresponds to the previous secondary thoroughfare class. These facilities are
generally intended to have two through traffic lanes with access controlled by
permit.
      (6)   RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR STREETS. Streets designed, planned and
intended to carry intermediate volumes of traffic within residential areas and
from the minor streets to the arterial, primary and secondary streets.
      (7)   MINOR STREETS. Streets that carry low volumes of traffic and are
used primarily to provide access to the abutting properties.
      (8)   MARGINAL ACCESS or SERVICE STREETS. Minor streets parallel with and
adjacent to arterial, primary and secondary streets which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from rapid through traffic.
      (9)   CUL-DE-SACS. Short streets having one end open to traffic, the
other end being permanently terminated by a vehicle turn around.
      (10)   RURAL ROAD. Any county road five miles or more from any
incorporated city or town boundary or any existing county right-of-way open for
public use.
         (a)   Rural roads shall be allowed only at the discretion of the Board
of Commissioners in new subdivisions which must be located in "A" Agriculture
and/or "CON" Recreation and Conservancy zoning districts with minimum lot sizes
of two and one-half acres.
         (b)   Prior to the filing of a subdivision for primary plat where
rural rock roads are requested a written request to permit rural rock roads
must be submitted in the Office of the Area Plan Commission at least two weeks
prior to any County Commissioners meeting. The request must explain in detail
the reasons and facts supporting the request setting forth location, number of
lots proposed, approximate acreage of lots, sketch of proposed subdivision.
Justification for rural roads may include unusual conditions of the plat such
as, but not limited to, unusual topographical conditions or other exceptional
conditions peculiar to the site that would result in extra ordinary hardship or
deny the reasonable use and value of said land.
   SUBDIVIDER. Person or persons who own all or any part of the real estate
included within the plat at the time of the final approval of said plat. This
person or persons are also known as the APPLICANT.
   SUBDIVISION OF LAND and SUBDIVIDE.
      (1)   The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots, parcels,
tracts, sites, units, plats or interests, whether for residential or non-
residential use, for the purpose of offer, sale, lease or development in a
manner prescribed by this chapter. PARCELS OF LAND are those separately
identified as tracts for property tax assessment. The two types of subdivisions
provided for under this chapter are defined as follows:
         (a)   A MAJOR SUBDIVISION means a division of land not classified as a
"minor" subdivision including, but not limited to:
            1.   A division of land into more than three new lots (that is
three new parcels excluding the residual of the original parcel) per year; or
            2.   Any division of land (regardless of the number of new lots
being created) requiring the extension of an existing street or municipal
facilities, or the creation of a new street or municipal facilities, or the
creation of any public improvements.
         (b)   A MINOR SUBDIVISION means a division of land containing not more
than three new parcels (that is three new parcels excluding the residual of the
original parcel) in One Family Dwelling “R-1", “R-1A”, “R-1B”, “R-1C”, “R-1D”
districts, "A" Agriculture and "CON" Recreational and Conservancy zoning
districts.
      (2)   The following divisions of land shall be considered PARCELIZATION.
         (a)   Area affected. The following divisions of land shall not be
considered a SUBDIVISION. All other subdivisions of land shall be subdivided in
accordance with this chapter as a minor or major subdivision.
         (b)   Parcelization. The following subdivisions are excluded from the
necessity of conforming to the platting provisions of this chapter only after
review and approval by the Plat Review Committee for conformity with this
chapter and the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. Parcelization may only be done
in "CON" Recreation and Conservancy, "A" Agricultural and “R-1", “R-1A”, “R-
1B”, “R-1C”, “R-1D” One Family Dwelling Districts. Parcelization may not be
done on any property located within a recorded major or minor subdivision.
            1.   The conveyance of not more than two new lots or parcels, with
a minimum of 2 1/2 acres, located within a metes and bounds described legal
description deed with no further parcelization within a 12-month period. If the
division is to be a building site, the applicant shall submit to the Plat
Review Committee proof of septic site/sewer connection and water line or
potable water approval.
            2.   The conveyance of parcels, 25 acres or greater, conveyed from
a parcel of land, provided the new parcels so conveyed do not require any new
street improvements, meets all Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance provisions;
however, there shall be no further re-parcelization of, or conveyances from,
the lots or parcels so created. All newly created parcels shall state that they
are not yet approved as a building site and shall be for recreational and or
agricultural purposes.
            3.   The conveyance of land not within a recorded subdivision,
between the owners of contiguous parcels of land, provided that no additional
building sites are created by the parcelization.
            4.   For the purposes of parcelization, the term PARCEL shall be
defined as a separately identified parcel for property tax purposes.
         (c)   Parcelization procedure and approval.
            1.   Meet with the Plat Review Committee with a conceptual plan to
determine whether the conceptual plan would meet the parcelization
requirements.
            2.   If the requirements have been met, a licensed land surveyor
must create metes and bounds description(s) of the parcel(s) along with a
proposed survey drawing of the parcelization plat.
            3.   File a copy of a completed APC Parcelization Checklist and the
proposed plat of survey along with any required fees. Staff will assign
addresses for the parcel(s).
            4.   Three different circumstances exist for public notice and
opportunity to comment on the "parcelization" application:
               (a)   If the subdivider has obtained the signatures of all
abutting property owners stating their approval (or no objection to Area Plan
Commission approval) and such accompanies the "parcelization" plat at the time
of application for approval by the Area Plan Commission, no further public
notice nor a public hearing are necessary, and the Executive Director of the
Warrick County Area Plan Commission may certify (approve) the "parcelization"
plat for recording.
               (b)   If the subdivider has not obtained the signatures of all
abutting property owners stating their approval at the time of the application
to the Area Plan Commission for approval of the plat, the applicant shall give
notice of the right to voice objections to the Subdivision Review Committee and
then the right to appeal to the full Area Plan Commission to all abutting
property owners of record. Within seven days of filing of the application, the
notice shall be sent by the applicant to abutting property owners of record by
certified mail with return receipts using a prescribed form furnished by the
Area Planning Commission. The notice of the right to voice objections to the
Subdivision Review Committee and then the right to appeal to the full Area Plan
Commission shall inform the abutting property owner that he or she has ten days
from the post marked date of the mailing of the notice to submit a written
objection (the address of the Area Plan Commission being included in the
notice) to the Area Plan Commission for an audience before the Subdivision
Review Committee. Only abutting property owners of record shall make such an
objection, and the objection shall be heard before the Subdivision Review
Committee before the objector may appeal to the full Area Plan Commission. An
affidavit which lists the abutting property owners and attests that notice has
been duly given to said property owners must be filed with the Area Plan
Commission along with all return receipts within ten days of the filing of the
application. Two possible actions may occur:
                  (i)    If the affidavit is in order and no oral nor written
objection has been received by the Area Plan Commission on or before the close
of the ten days of notification of the abutting property owners, the Executive
Director of the Warrick County Area Plan Commission may certify (approve) the
"parcelization" plat for recording.
                  (ii )   If on the other hand, an oral or written objection is
received by the Area Plan Commission on or before the close of the tenth day
subsequent to the notification of the abutting property owners, the Executive
Director of the Warrick County Area Plan Commission shall announce, within 14
days of receipt of the application, the date that the objection will be
reviewed by the Subdivision Review Committee by giving written notification to
the applicant and the objector.
Following the review before the Subdivision Review Committee, the Executive
Director of the Area Plan Commission may approve, disapprove (with written
findings that set forth its reasons for denying approval and provide the
applicant a copy) the "parcelization" application, or request the full Area
Plan Commission to review the matter. If the application is to be approved, the
Executive Director shall inform all objectors by certified mail of their right
to appeal to the full Area Plan Commission by oral or written request within
ten days. Only those abutting property owners who have raised an original
objection and requesting a review by Subdivision Review Committee can appeal to
the full Area Plan Commission. lf no oral or written appeal is received within
ten days, the Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission shall certify
(approve) the "parcelization" plat for recording.
               (c)    After the Subdivision Review Committee has met and the
Executive Director has made a finding to deny the parcelization, the applicant
may appeal to the full Area Plan Commission. After the Subdivision Review
Committee has met and the Executive Director has informed all objectors of the
intent to approve the parcelization an original objector who is also an
abutting property owner may appeal orally or in writing to the full Area Plan
Commission within ten days of receiving notice of the intent to approve the
subdivision. Finally, the Executive Director may request an appeal before the
full Area Planning Commission. Under any of these three circumstances, the Area
Planning Commission will hold a Public Hearing at the next scheduled Area
Planning Commission and the Executive Director shall give written notice to the
applicant and any objectors of the date of the Public Hearing.
            5.   If the parcelization is approved, the applicant must record
the deeds when property is transferred in the Office of the County Recorder. A
copy must be submitted to the APC office.
      (3)   Lot line adjustments. A lot line adjustment may be done for changes
to a lot line where the adjoining lots/parcels are platted having a common lot
line and common zoning (“R-1", “R-1A”, “R-1B”, “R-1C”, “R-1D” One Family
Dwelling Districts, Agriculture and Conservancy zonings are done by
parcelization).
         (a)   No additional lots of building sites may be created.
         (b)   The newly created sites must meet all requirements of the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.
         (c)   The lot line adjustment cannot exceed 30 feet. Anything larger
than said 30 feet shall require a major subdivision or replat.
         (d)   The actual property line is not officially moved until a deed to
transfer the title is recorded.
      (4)   The term SUBDIVISION includes resubdivision and, when appropriate
to the context, includes the process of subdividing and the land subdivided.
   SUBDIVISION REVIEW COMMITTEE. A five member committee appointed by the
Commission for the review of plats. At least one member of the Subdivision
Review Committee shall also be a member of the Area Plan Commission. Other
members of the committee shall include a staff member designated by the
Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission, a representative of the County
Engineer's Office, a representative of the County Surveyor's Office, and a
representative of the County Health Department.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The Thoroughfare Plan identifies the future roadway
system supporting the Future Land Use Plan that is part of the Comprehensive
Plan. The Thoroughfare Plan places the major streets and highways of the county
into functional class (i.e., the purpose the road serves.) In turn, each
functional class has a typical right-of-way width and design cross section
(i.e., number of lanes, pavement width, etc.). The Thoroughfare Plan is used in
the development review process to reserve right-of-way for future roadway
improvements and to guide the design of roadway improvements by the public or
private sectors. (See §§ 154.145 et seq.)
   ZONING ORDINANCE. An ordinance and Zone Map now or hereafter adopted which
divides the jurisdiction of the county into districts, with regulations and
requirements and procedures for the establishment of land use controls.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2007-21, passed 9-12-07; Am. BC
Ord. 2010-17, passed 12-6-10; Am. BC Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-20-10; Am. BC Ord.
2011-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. BC Ord. 2011-11, passed 5-9-11; Am. BC Ord. 2013-
05, passed 3-11- 13; Am. BC Ord. 2015-23, passed 10-12-15; Am. BC Ord. 2022-04,
passed 2-14-22; Am. BC Ord. 2022-05, passed 2-14-22; Am. BC Ord. 2022-06,
passed 2-14-22; Am. BC Ord. 2022-07, passed 2-14-22)
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION OF MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 154.010 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   (A)   The subdivider (or applicant), owner of record and registered land
surveyor proposing to subdivide or plat land into a subdivision shall schedule
a pre-application conference with the Subdivision Review Committee for
technical review before submitting a written application for major subdivision
plat approval. At this consultation a sketch plan of the proposed plat shall be
submitted containing the following information:
      (1)   A proposed layout of the streets, lots, and other elements basic to
the proposed use in relationship to site conditions.
      (2)   Location of parks, recreational and other public and semi-public
sites existing and proposed within or near the area proposed to be platted.
      (3)   Proposed methods for handling sewage disposal, drainage, water
supply and other utility services.
   (B)   The sketch plan may be a pencil drawing superimposed upon a print of a
topographic survey of the area proposed to be platted or may be in any other
graphic medium and form containing and accurately depicting the above
information. The pre-application conference does not require formal application
fee or filing of a plat with the Area Plan Commission.
   (C)   During the pre-application conference, the Subdivision Review
Committee will identify any possible concerns relative to:
      (1)   Access to the subdivision for motor vehicles, emergency vehicles,
bicycles, and pedestrians, including connections to the surrounding street
network.
      (2)   Fulfilling requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan.
      (3)   Internal circulation.
      (4)   Extension or creation of sanitary sewers or provision of private
sewage disposal systems.
      (5)   Extension or creation of water lines.
      (6)   Provision of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, protection and
use of legal drains, provision of stormwater retention/detention facilities.
   (D)   The Subdivision Review Committee may identify any other relative
issues to the subdivision of the property and answer questions of the
subdivider (or applicant) concerning the major subdivision process and plat
content.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.011 APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   A subdivider desiring approval of a plat for a major subdivision of
any land lying within the jurisdiction of the Area Plan Commission, shall
submit a written application for a certificate of approval and six copies of a
plat of the subdivision in accordance with §
154.016, to the Area Plan Commission. A read-only electronic version of the
plat shall also be provided in a format specified by the Area Plan Commission
staff. The written application shall be on the form provided (in reproducible
or electronic format) by the Area Plan Commission. The Area Plan Commission
staff shall prepare the application form on the basis of the requirements of
this chapter. The Area Plan Commission shall approve the application form.
   (B)   No land shall be subdivided for any non-agricultural purpose:
      (1)   Unless adequate access to the land over approved streets or
thoroughfares exists or will be provided by the subdivider (applicant); or
      (2)   If such land is considered by the Commission to be unsuitable for
such use by reason of flooding or improper drainage, objectionable earth and
rock formation, topography, or any other feature harmful to the health and
safety of future residents and of the community as a whole.
   (C)   No land shall be subdivided for any non-agricultural purpose unless it
is in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance, now or hereafter adopted.
   (D)   (1)   At the time of filing an application for plat approval of the
plan, the application shall be accompanied by an application fee as set by the
Area Plan Commission pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-411.
      (2)   The fees shall be made payable to the Area Plan Commission to cover
the cost of advertising, checking and verifying the proposed plat. The Area
Plan Commission shall surrender the application fee to the County Auditor. No
application fee shall be refunded.
   (E)   Street construction plans shall be initially reviewed under the
primary plat filing fee. During the 30 days preceding the public hearing before
the Board of Commissioners for street construction plan approval, the
subdivider shall make any revisions required by the County Highway Engineer to
the plans and resubmit the revised plans at least one week prior to the public
hearing. The Board of Commissioners in their approval of street plans shall not
include the approval of layout of the right-of-way for proposed streets and
roads within such subdivisions, as such approval shall be the exclusive
province of the Area Plan Commission pursuant to its exclusive authority for
primary plat approval under I.C. 36-7-4-405(2) and 36-7-4-701(b).
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.012 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   The procedure for public notice, public hearing and Area Plan Commission
action on the major subdivision application is as follows:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for primary approval, the Plan
Commission staff shall review the application for technical conformity with the
standards fixed in this chapter. Within 30 days after receipt of the
application by the Area Plan Commission, the Executive Director shall announce
a date for public hearing before the Commission by giving written notification
to the applicant (or subdivided and by general publication of the date of said
public hearing in a newspaper with circulation in the area of the proposed
major subdivision. The date of said hearing shall not be scheduled later than
30 days after the announcement.
   (B)   At least 21 days prior to the date set for the public hearing, the
applicant (or subdivider) shall give written notice to all abutting property
owners. The applicant (or subdivider) shall give notice by certified mail with
return receipts using a prescribed form furnished by the Area Plan Commission.
An affidavit, which lists the abutting property owners and attests that notice
has been duly given to said property owners, must be filed with the Area Plan
Commission along with all return receipts prior to the date set for the
hearing. Failure of the applicant (or subdivider) to comply with the above
notification and affidavit requirements (both in time schedule and substance)
shall result in cancellation of the public hearing, and there shall be imposed
another filing fee equal to the original filing fee for rescheduling of the
public hearing, cancellation of the original public hearing, and republication
of the notice of the public hearing.
   (C)   Following the public hearing, the Area Plan Commission may approve or
disapprove (with written findings that set forth its reasons for denying
approval and provide the applicant a copy) the major subdivision application.
If the application is approved and all requirements of this chapter are met,
the President and Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission shall certify
(approve) the major subdivision plat for recording.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2013- 06, passed 6-24-13; Am. BC
Ord. 2019-18, passed 8-12-19)
§ 154.013 PREPARATION FOR PRIMARY APPROVAL.
   (A)   The plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and duly
signed and sealed in form, content and detail prescribed hereinafter.
   (B)   The plat shall be prepared to meet at least the minimum requirements
as detailed under §§
154.070 through
154.078 and §§
154.090 through
154.102.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.014 FORM OF SUBMISSION.
   The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not more than 100
feet to one inch on a sheet or sheets 24 inches by 36 inches or multiples
thereof, except that, when the drawing at that scale requires more than two
sheets, the plat may be drawn at a scale of 200 feet to one inch. A read-only
electronic version of the plat shall also be provided in a format specified by
the Area Plan Commission staff.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.015 VICINITY PLAN.
   (A)   The plat application for primary plat approval must include the
following information.
   (B)   Vicinity plan. A vicinity plan drawn to a scale of not less than 1,000
feet to one inch showing the relationship of the plat to its general
surroundings and showing and identifying the following details:
      (1)   Existing streets within 1,000 feet of the subdivision.
      (2)   Municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of the tract.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.016 REQUIRED PRIMARY PLAT INFORMATION.
   (A)   The major subdivision plat must include the following in order to be
considered for primary approval:
      (1)   Contents.
         (a)   Proposed name of subdivision. The name shall not duplicate the
spelling or pronunciation of any other recorded subdivision.
         (b)   Location by section, quarter section, township, range, city,
town or civil township and complete metes and bounds or other legally recorded
boundary description.
         (c)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (applicant) if
other than the owner and seal of registered land surveyor preparing the plat.
         (d)   Scale of plat including graphic scale, north point and date.
      (2)   Existing conditions.
         (a)   Boundary lines of proposed subdivision indicated by a heavy line
with bearings and distances and the approximate acreage.
         (b)   Location and description of all monuments with references by
distance and bearings to quarter section and quarter-quarter section corners.
         (c)   Location, width and names of all existing or prior platted
streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way and easements,
parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings or structures, and
section and municipal corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract.
         (d)   In case of a replat creating additional lots, all descriptive
lines and lot numbers of the original plat being vacated shall be shown by
dotted lines in their proper position in relation to the new arrangement of the
plat, the new plat being clearly shown in solid lines so as to avoid ambiguity
or confusion.
         (e)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract: name and right-of-way
width and location.
         (f)   Municipal facilities, public improvements and utilities on and
adjacent to the tract.
         (g)   Existing contours with intervals of not more than five feet
where the slope is greater than 10% and not more than two feet where the slope
is less than 10%. Elevations shall be based on the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929. If not practicable an assumed datum to the satisfaction of the
County Highway Engineer may be used.
         (h)   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Area Plan
Commission: location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil,
rock and ground water conditions; depth to ground water unless test pits are
dry at a depth of five feet; location and results of soil percolation tests if
individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
         (i)   Other conditions on the tract: water courses, 100-year flood
contour line from FIRM map, legal drains, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas,
existing structures, and other significant features.
         (j)   Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other
nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recording data and number, and show approximate percent built-up, typical lot
size and dwelling type.
         (k)   Current zoning and, if applicable, proposed zoning on the tract
plus zoning on abutting tracts.
         (l)   Proposed public improvements; highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract.
         (m)   The nearest distance to a fire hydrant shall be shown. If such
distance is greater than 600 feet, the plat submission shall include a letter
from the appropriate fire chief stating the greater distance is acceptable or
that an alternative source of water is (or shall be made) available. Any
condition stated by the fire chief shall be placed on the plat. For final plat
approval, a letter approving water capacity and location of fire hydrants by
the appropriate water company will be required.
      (3)   Proposed conditions.
         (a)   Streets names and right-of-way; similar data for alleys, if any.
         (b)   Other rights-of-way or easements; location, width and purpose.
         (c)   Lot lines with adequate dimensions, including area, lot numbers
and block numbers. If proposed subdivision is a non-residential subdivision,
this condition may be waived by the Area Plan Commission if the subdivider
certifies to a minimum lot size and meets all other conditions of this chapter.
         (d)   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
playgrounds or other public uses.
         (e)   Minimum building setback lines for the front yard only and
distances at proposed building lines on any curved streets.
         (f)   Site data, including number of residential lots, type, typical
lot size, and acres in parks, open spaces or school sites.
         (g)   Title, scale, north arrow and date.
         (h)   Parcels of land to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for
public use or set aside for the use of property owners in the subdivision. Land
to be dedicated for parks or other public uses shall be set forth and shown on
the plat under the appropriate heading such as "Park" or "Out Lot for Public
Use".
      (4)   Accompanying plans, specifications and certifications.
         (a)   The application for primary plat approval must be accompanied by
the following:
            1.   If private sewage disposal systems and/or wells are proposed,
approval and certification of same by the County Health Department. In cases of
a non-residential subdivision not showing definite proposed lot lines allowed
by the Commission, this certification shall certify to the minimum lot size
allowed for said private sewage disposal system and/or well by the County
Health Department and State Board of Health.
            2.   If new sanitary sewer connections are to be installed, a
capacity letter from the municipality (or sanitary sewer utility) serving the
subdivision.
            3.   If new water service connections are to be installed, a
capacity letter from the municipality (or water utility) serving the
subdivision.
            4.   The subdivider shall submit to the Area Plan Commission two
initial and four final sets of drainage plans for the proposed subdivision with
a cost estimate for construction of the drainage improvements certified by a
registered engineer.
            5.   The subdivider shall submit to the Area Plan Commission two
initial and four final sets of detailed plans and specifications for street and
sidewalk construction. The detailed plans shall consist of cross sections and
profiles of streets showing grades. The profiles shall be drawn to county
standard scales and elevations and shall be based on the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929. The plans must be accompanied by a certificate of
compliance on a prescribed form available from the Area Plan Commission, which
said certificate shall contain the following:
               A.   Estimated date for the commencement of construction.
               B.   Estimated date for construction completion.
               C.   Project location.
               D.   Detailed description of the type of construction.
               E.   Location and typical street sign design if different from
standard design shown on
Appendix A of this chapter. Traffic control devices which include, but are not
limited to, stop signs at intersections, yield signs at intersections, dead end
signs, warning signs, and speed control signs shall be located and designed per
the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways
subject to approval by the Highway Engineer and Board of Commissioners
respectively reserving the right to make additions or changes. The Certificate
of Compliance must detail the type of devices, how many, and dollar amount of
each device.
               F.   Name, length and estimated cost of construction for each
street.
               G.   Location of sidewalks together with estimated cost of
construction.
               H.   Total estimated cost of all street and sidewalk
construction.
               I.   A certificate by the subdivider that the construction will
be completed in accordance with the plans submitted.
               J.   A certificate of a registered engineer that the
specifications meet the minimum requirements of this chapter.
               K.   A certificate of a registered engineer that he or she will
perform periodic job site inspections to determine that construction is
completed in accordance with the plans and specifications.
         (b)   Prior to primary approval being granted by the Area Plan
Commission, the following approvals must be obtained:
            1.   Drainage Board for the subdivision's drainage plan.
            2.   Board of Commissioners for the street plans and
specifications.
   (B)   The Area Plan Commission staff will take the necessary administrative
action to schedule the appropriate reviews by the Drainage Board, County
Highway Engineer and Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   Provided the street plans and specifications meet all applicable
provisions of this chapter, the County Highway Engineer and the Board of
Commissioners shall have no course than to grant approval of the plans and
specifications and to so certify.
   (D)   To establish the cost estimates referred to in division (A)(4)(a)5.H.
of this section, a cost breakdown must be submitted by a registered
professional engineer. If inconsistent with current development costs, the Area
Plan Commission may require a copy of the construction contract. Said cost
estimates may be used for the purpose of establishing the amount of the
irrevocable letter of credit for guaranteeing completion of improvements as
required by §
154.022.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2007-23, passed 9-12-07)
§ 154.017 OPTIONAL PRIMARY PLAT INFORMATION.
   At the discretion of the Area Plan Commission or Executive Director, the
following information shall be disclosed on the plat: proposed restrictive
covenants properly prepared and legally sound which may be deemed essential to
the sound development of the proposed area. At the discretion of the subdivider
and/or Area Plan Commission, restrictive covenants may be proposed to regulate
land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development.
Said covenants shall not be less restrictive than any of the provisions of this
chapter. The Area Plan Commission shall have no authority to enforce said
covenants. Enforcement shall be the responsibility of the property owners.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.018 PRIMARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   In determining whether to grant primary approval of a plat, the Plan
Commission shall determine if the plat or subdivision qualifies for primary
approval under standards prescribed in this chapter. Following the public
meeting the Commission shall render primary approval or disapproval of the plat
with or without conditions.
   (B)   The standards fixed in this chapter may be waived at the discretion of
the Commission; however, to be approved, the plat must still meet all
applicable standards prescribed in the zoning ordinance. As a condition of
granting a waiver, the Commission, may allow or require a commitment to be made
as described in part in I.C. 36-7-4-1015 as a condition to primary approval of
a proposed subdivision plat or development plan the owner of a parcel of real
property may be required or allowed to make a commitment to the Plan Commission
concerning the use or development of that parcel. (See Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance for the I.C. 36-7-4-1015 in its entirety)
   (C)   Primary approval is strictly tentative, involving the general
acceptability of the layout submitted and shall be effective for a maximum
period of five years unless, upon application of the subdivider, the Executive
Director grants an extension for one year. If the plat has not been submitted
for secondary approval within this time limit, the primary plat shall be
considered null and void and no further action shall be taken except by re-
application as hereinbefore provided.
   (D)   If, after the hearing the Commission determines the application and
plat comply with the standards in the this chapter, it shall make written
findings granting primary approval to the plat in triplicate form signed by the
President or the Commission and certified by the Executive Director. This
decision, which must also specify any condition imposed or waiver granted.
   (E)   If, after the hearing the Commission disapproves the plat, it shall
make written findings that set forth its reasons denying primary approval and
provide the applicant a copy.
   (F)   Primary approval of a plat, with or without conditions, shall in no
way constitute approval of the plat required prior to being filed with the
auditor and recorder. However, the Commission, Executive Director or County
Commissioners may not impose any additional terms, conditions or commitments
after primary approval.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2013-07, passed 6-10-13)
§ 154.019 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Within five years after primary approval, or within the time limit of
any extension granted, with or without conditions, the subdivider shall submit
a plat prepared by a registered professional land surveyor in conformance with
the primary plat for secondary approval. The Area Plan Commission will notify
the subdivider 90 days prior to the expiration of said five years.
   (B)   The secondary plat shall conform substantially to the approved primary
plat, reflecting all terms, conditions and commitments given by the subdivider
or required by the Area Plan Commission and it may constitute only that portion
of the approved primary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and
develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms with all the
requirements and standards of this chapter. The approved primary plat may be
submitted as the secondary plat if it meets all the necessary requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   Under no circumstance shall a secondary plat be recorded unless said
plat has received secondary approval and a plat release has been duly executed
as set forth in §§
154.020 through 154.023.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.020 REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS PRIOR TO CONSIDERATION OF SECONDARY APPROVAL.
   (A)   Timing and form of submission. At least two weeks prior to the date of
meeting at which it is to be considered by the Commission or Executive
Director, certain reproductions of the secondary plat, which may include all or
only a portion of the approved primary plat, shall be submitted to the Area
Plan Commission Office according to the following instructions. A replat,
limited to changing lot lines not increasing the number of lots, or adding
additional area, or a subdivision with no substantial change from the approved
primary plat, may be approved by the Executive Director after obtaining a sign-
off by the County Highway Engineer that the subdivision meets all the approved
street construction plans (i.e., the County Highway Engineer certifies that all
improvements have been made or establishes a dollar amount for an irrevocable
letter of credit covering the cost of improvements yet to be completed), the
County Surveyor that the subdivision meets all the approved drainage plan
approvals (i.e., the County Surveyor certifies that all improvements have been
made or establishes a dollar amount for an irrevocable letter of credit
covering the cost of improvements yet to be completed), and receipt of an
irrevocable letter of credit covering the cost of improvements yet to be
completed in the amount specified by the County Highway Engineer and County
Surveyor. It is at the discretion of the Executive Director if the secondary
plat must be presented to the Commission.
      (1)   One original reproducible Mylar transparency with six blackline or
blueline reproductions. A read-only electronic version of the plat shall also
be provided in a format specified by the Area Plan Commission staff.
      (2)   All plats shall be drawn with black drawing ink on a sheet(s) 24
inches by 36 inches. "Stick on" lettering or sheets are not acceptable. The
plats may be prepared on paper using "stick-on" from which a permanent Mylar is
made. Ammonia process Mylars are not acceptable. The left margin shall be a
minimum of two inches. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 60
feet to one inch unless the proposed lots are 2 1/2 acres or more which may be
drawn at a scale not more than 200 feet to one inch; multiple sheets are
acceptable. The six reproductions of the final plat and the original
reproducible Mylar transparencies shall become the property of the Area Plan
Commission.
   (B)   Required secondary plat information.  The secondary plat shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   Name of subdivision.
      (2)   Location by range, section, quarter section, township, city, town
or civil township with legal boundary description or by other legal
description.
      (3)   The name, address, and certification of the licensed surveyor
preparing the plat and his or her signature and seal.
      (4)   Scale shown graphically and numerically, north point and date.
      (5)   Boundaries of the tract with accurate dimensions and bearings as
determined by an accurate survey in the field that has been balanced and
closed, as well as physically located by monumentation.
      (6)   A note indicating the basis of all bearings used in the boundary
survey and shown on the plat. Reference to true meridian is encouraged.
      (7)   Sufficient data must be shown to determine readily the bearings and
length of every lot line, block line and boundary line. Dimensions of lots
shall be given as total dimensions, corner to corner, and shall be shown in
feet and hundredths of a foot. No ditto marks shall be used. All lots must show
square footage of lot area.
      (8)   Location and description of all monuments with references by
distance and bearing to quarter sections and quarter quarter sections.
      (9)   Right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way,
and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and central angles
of all curves.
      (10)   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
      (11)   On cul-de-sacs and on any curved street, angles at the center
thereof between markers on the perimeter shall be shown. No lot shall be
dimensioned to contain any part of an existing or proposed public right-of-way.
      (12)   Whenever a participating city or town or Warrick County has
established or adopted a system of coordinates, then the boundary survey shall
be tied into such system.
      (13)   The plat shall show clearly what markers, monuments or other
evidence were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the
subdivision. The adjoining subdivision shall be identified by lot and block
numbers, subdivision name, place of record, or other proper designations.
      (14)   Township and range and quarter-section lines shall be accurately
tied to lines of the subdivision by distance and bearing.
      (15)   At least two benchmarks shall be located in the subdivision and so
indicated with their elevations shown on the plat. All elevations shall be
based on the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 as shown on the primary
plat.
      (16)   Show the center and side lines of streets, the total width of all
streets, width of the portion being dedicated and the width of existing
dedications, and the widths each side of the center line; also, the width of
railroad rights-of-way appearing on the plat.
      (17)   Easements must be clearly labeled, identified, the side line
shown, and if already recorded, their recorded reference given. Easements shall
be denoted by fine dashed lines. The widths of easements and the lengths and
bearings of the lines thereof when needed and sufficient ties thereto
definitely locating the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown.
If the easement is being dedicated by the plat, it shall be so stated in the
owner's certificate of dedication.
      (18)   Numbers or letters for all lots or other areas.
      (19)   Street addresses for lots shall be obtained from records of the
Area Plan Commission Office.
      (20)   Building set-back lines for the front yard only and distances at
proposed building lines on any curved streets.
      (21)   Restrictions, dedications, and private covenants to be made a part
of the secondary plat by the inclusion or reference.
      (22)   The following certificates shall appear on the secondary plat:
         (a)   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
record title interest in the land subdivided consenting to the preparation and
recording of said plat.
         (b)   An acknowledgment certificate signed by a Notary Public.
         (c)   A certificate by the registered land surveyor responsible for
the survey and final plat and his or her signature and seal.
         (d)   A certificate for execution by the Area Plan Commission.
         (e)   A certificate from the County Drainage Board and signed by the
Secretary of said Drainage Board.
   (C)   In the event all basic and street improvements have been installed
prior to secondary approval, the following certificate must accompany the
secondary plat: a certificate of completion by a registered professional
engineer or registered land surveyor attesting that all basic improvements have
been installed in conformance with the primary plat and applicable provisions
of this chapter.
   (D)   In the event application for secondary approval is made prior to
completion of all basic improvements, proof of financial responsibility must be
filed with the Area Plan Commission in accordance with the provisions of §
154.022(B).
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2011-16, passed 7-11-11)
§ 154.021 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Street improvements inspection by County Highway Engineer.
Installation of all street improvements shall be inspected by the county or the
participating city or town within whose territorial boundaries the subdivision
is located. At least a 24 hour notice shall be given the County Highway
Engineer or town board of the participating jurisdiction prior to the
installation of any pavement for street construction. Such inspections are
required in all instances regardless of whether the work is performed before or
after the subdivision plat has been recorded. Failure to request inspection of
work performed after may be cause for denial of acceptance of the streets by
the county or participating jurisdiction for maintenance.
   (B)   Basic and street improvements inspection by Registered Engineer. The
installation of all basic and street improvements shall be inspected during
construction by a registered professional engineer at the expense of the
subdivider. If, on the basis of this (these) inspection(s) and a final
inspection upon completion of construction, the engineer finds that all basic
and street improvements have been constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, the said engineer shall provide the Area Plan
Commission with a certificate to that effect. By this rule, the Area Plan
Commission hereby prescribes the principal procedure for determining whether
all non-street improvements and installations have been constructed and
completed as required by this chapter.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.022 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   (1)   If the subdivider elects to install all improvements, including
traffic control devices, before he applies for secondary plat approval and it
is shown to the satisfaction of the Commission that the conditions of this
chapter have been met, and if the secondary plat conforms substantially to the
plat that received primary approval, the sudivider (applicant) is exempt from
the remaining provisions of this section of the chapter provided, however, that
said application for secondary approval is made within five years of primary
plat approval without the granting of extensions. Extensions shall be for not
less than one year, nor more than five years. Moreover, if the above conditions
are met, the Commission shall have no other course than to give secondary plat
approval within 30 days after application for secondary approval.
      (2)   The following provisions allowing for other proof of financial
responsibility in lieu of installing all improvements before applying for
secondary plat approval shall not apply to traffic control devices. The cost of
all devices shall be borne by the subdivider, and shall be installed by the
subdivider prior to any street being constructed, either completely or
partially, and opened to the public.
   (B)   If the subdivider (applicant) elects to apply, for secondary approval
prior to the complete installation of all basic and street improvements that
received primary approval, then in lieu thereof, the subdivider (applicant)
shall file with the Area Plan Commission an irrevocable letter of credit
guaranteeing that the improvements will be completed or other proof of
financial responsibility, as hereinafter set forth.
      (1)   If the subdivider (or applicant) elects to file an irrevocable
letter of credit with the Area Plan Commission to assure completion of all
basic and street improvements required by the Commission, such surety shall:
         (a)   Be securable to Board of Commissioners.
         (b)   Be in an amount determined by the County Highway Engineer and
County Surveyor to be sufficient to complete the improvements required.
         (c)   Provide surety satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Any funds received from irrevocable letters of credit shall be used
by the county only for the purpose of making the improvements and installations
for which the irrevocable letter of credit was provided. The proceeds of the
irrevocable letter of credit may be used for these purposes without
appropriation. If the improvement or installation is to be made within a
participating city or town, the county shall transmit the proceeds of the
irrevocable letter of credit or cashier's check to the participating city or
town who shall complete the improvements or installation.
      (3)   Such irrevocable letter of credit shall comply with all statutory
requirements and shall be satisfactory to the Attorney of the Board of County
Commissioners as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution. The period
within which required public improvements must be completed shall not exceed
two years from date of secondary approval. Such bond shall be approved by the
participating jurisdiction as to amount. The Plan Commission may upon proof of
difficulty, grant an extension of the completion date set forth in such bond
for a maximum period of one additional year, provided that the bond submitted
for this extension period meets all other requirements herein. The Commission
may at any time during the period of such bond accept a substitution of
principal or sureties on the bond as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   The subdivider shall have the option of providing proof of financial
responsibility to the county by means of any of the following courses of action
in lieu of providing the irrevocable letter of credit as specified in division
(B) of this section: the subdivider may submit a certified check (cashier's
check) to the County Auditor made payable to the county in an amount equivalent
to 100% of the estimated costs to complete the improvements as determined by
the County Highway Engineer and County Surveyor. In this event, the subdivider
shall be entitled to receive progress payments from the funds deposited by the
subdivider of not more than 90% of the value of any work completed; provided,
however, that all such work completed shall have been inspected and approved by
the registered professional engineer or land surveyor responsible for
inspecting the basic and street improvements. The remaining 10% of the
cashier's check over and above the 90% progress payments shall be paid by the
County Auditor upon receipt by the Area Plan Commission of a certificate of
completion of basic and street improvements as provided in §
154.021. Any payments or release of funds by the County Auditor shall be made
only upon receipt of an approval certificate signed by the Area Plan Commission
Executive Director.
   (D)   In the event that surety is required, which shall be in the form of an
irrevocable letter of credit or cashier's check, the time for each shall be as
follows.
      (1)   Streets and drainage.
         (a)   First submittal. Shall be a minimum of one year and maximum of
two years. If a cashier's check is used, it shall be deposited into an escrow
account with the Warrick County Auditor.
         (b)   Second submittal. If the improvements have not been completed;
the subdivider may have their engineer submit a certified report of percentage
of street and drainage completion yet to be finished and the dollar amount
required to complete the work. This submittal must be made to the Area Plan
Commission office a minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration date of the one
or two year expiration time line. The County Highway Engineer shall make an
inspection to verify said Engineer's certification. Once the County Engineer
gives his written approval, the subdivider may submit a new letter of credit a
minimum of ten days prior to the expiration date of the one being replaced. The
new letter of credit shall not exceed a time period of one year. In the case of
a cashier's check, a claim shall be submitted to the County Auditor for the
reduced dollar amount with the remainder needed for the completion to remain in
the escrow account. The time period for this shall not exceed one year.
         (c)   Third submittal. At the discretion of the Warrick County Board
of Commissioners, an extension of one additional year may be granted upon a
written request which shall be submitted to the Area Plan Commission office a
minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration date of the current surety in place.
This request must be placed on the agenda of the Warrick County Commissioners.
         (d)   Fourth submittal. In the event the subdivider can demonstrate
that due to some unforeseen circumstance or hardship beyond his or her control
and not self-created, they may request a second and final extension to be
granted by the Warrick County Board of Commissioners if improvement location
permits have been issued for less than 75% of the subdivision lots. At the
discretion of the Warrick County Board of Commissioners, they may grant the
extension for such period of time they deem adequate, however, not less than
one year and not to exceed two years.
      (2)   Sidewalks.
         (a)   First submittal. Shall be for a minimum of one year and a
maximum of five years. In the case that the subdivider has existing letters of
credit for sidewalks on sections of the same subdivision, the subdivider may
have the expiration date of less or more time than the time allowed to be the
same expiration date of other letters of credit being held on that development.
This will not shorten or lengthen the time period allowed to complete the
improvements.
         (b)   Second submittal. If the improvements have not been completed;
the subdivider may have his or her engineer submit a certified report of
percentage of sidewalk completion yet to be finished and the dollar amount
required to complete the work. This submittal must be made to the Area Plan
Commission office a minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration date of the
existing letters of credit or date cashier's check was submitted. The County
Highway Engineer shall make an inspection to verify said Engineer's
certification. Once the County Highway Engineer gives his or her written
approval, the subdivider may submit a new letter of credit a minimum of ten
days prior to the expiration date of the one being replaced. The new letter of
credit shall not exceed a time period of one year. In the case of a cashier's
check, a claim shall be submitted to the County Auditor for the reduced dollar
amount with the remainder needed for the completion to remain in the escrow
account. The time period shall not exceed one year.
         (c)   Third submittal. At the discretion of the Warrick County Board
of Commissioners, they may grant an extension of one additional year upon
written request of the subdivider and provided he or she follows the previously
mentioned procedure for submittal by the subdivider's engineer and agreed upon
by the County Highway Engineer. This request must be placed on the agenda of
the Warrick County Commissioners.
         (d)   Fourth submittal. In the event the subdivider can demonstrate
that due to some unforeseen circumstance or hardship beyond their control and
not self-created, they may request a second and final extension to be granted
by the Warrick County Board of Commissioners. If improvement locations permits
have been issued for less than 75% of the subdivision lots, at least one side
of each street must be installed for pedestrian safety and convenience by this
time. This is to be certified to by their engineer and verified by the County
Highway Engineer.
      (3)   There shall be no reduction in the dollar amount of any surety
during it's term.
   (E)   At such time all street construction has been completed and streets
accepted for maintenance and sidewalk construction acknowledged, any
irrevocable letter of credit guaranteeing the construction shall be released.
      (1)   The subdivider may submit an irrevocable letter of credit in favor
of the Board of County Commissioners to be held by the Area Plan Commission and
in an amount equivalent to 100% of the cost of completion of the uncompleted
portion of required basic improvements.
      (2)   The subdivider may submit any combination of an irrevocable letter
of credit or cashier's check to the county in an aggregate amount equivalent to
100% of the cost of completion of the uncompleted portion of required public
improvements.
      (3)   If water and/or sewer lines are required per this chapter, proof of
financial responsibility provided by subdivider to the municipality furnishing
water and/or sanitary sewage may be accepted as the proof of financial
responsibility required by this section provided the Area Plan Commission has
received written assurances from such municipality which furnishes such
services.
         (a)   With respect to the installation or extension of water, sewer,
or other utility service, the applicant may show by written evidence that he or
she has entered into a contract with the political subdivision providing the
service; and
         (b)   The Area Plan Commission determines based on written evidence
that the contract provides satisfactory assurance that the service will be
installed or extended in compliance with this chapter; or
         (c)   The plat and the applicable deed shall display the following
notations:
            The utility will not sell sewer/water taps for any lot in this
subdivision until the sewer/water lines servicing the subdivision are installed
and deemed substantially complete by said utility. Warrick County will not
issue Improvement Location Permits or Building Permits for any lot in this
subdivision until a sewer/water tap for the lot is issued by said utility.
      (4)   Any means of financial responsibility submitted by the subdivider
in lieu of an irrevocable letter of credit, such as a cashier's check, shall
comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the
Attorney of the County Commissioners as to form, sufficiency and manner of
execution.
   (F)   All improvements to be installed in a subdivision shall comply with
the requirements of §§
154.070 through
154.078 and
154.090 through
154.102.
   (G)   Upon certification of completion of all basic and street improvements
as required in §
154.021, the County Commissioners shall release the irrevocable letter of
credit or cashier's check that has been posted to guarantee completion of the
improvements and discharge the subdivider and surety from further liability or
responsibility thereunder. Any financial instrument (i.e., cashier's check)
used by the subdivider in lieu of an irrevocable letter of credit shall
likewise be released with a discharge of further liability or responsibility
for completion of the improvements.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2007-22, passed 9-12-07; Am. BC
Ord. 2013-29, passed 11-12-13; Am. BC Ord. 2021-01, passed 1-11-21)
§ 154.023 SECONDARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Executive Director shall examine the secondary plat and all
accompanying documentation to determine whether they conform with the primary
plat and with all changes permitted and all requirements of this chapter
imposed as a condition of the secondary plat's acceptance. If the Executive
Director shall determine not to approve said plat, they shall advise the
subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made before approval will
be granted, and shall set forth its reasons in its own records and provide the
applicant a copy. If the secondary plat does not conform substantially to the
approved primary plat then the Executive Director shall forward said secondary
plat to the Commission for approval. If Executive Director and/or Commission
shall determine to approve the plat, it shall affix the Commission's seal upon
the plat, together with the certifying signatures of its President and
Executive Director.
   (B)   Plat release.
      (1)   Provided the Executive Director and/or Area Plan Commission has
granted secondary approval, the plat release shall be executed by the Executive
Director upon receipt of a plat release fee as set by the Area Plan Commission
(pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-411) has been paid to the Area Plan Commission.
      (2)   Exclusion:
         (a)   There shall be no fee required for any application by a
participating unit of government in the Area Plan Commission.
         (b)   Corrected plat due to an error or omission.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.024 COMPLETION OF STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF MAINTENANCE BY
COUNTY.
   (A)   Unless waived by the Board of Commissioners, the subdivider shall:
      (1)   Complete all street construction, sidewalk construction, and
drainage improvements in accordance with the approved subdivision street plans
and drainage plans. Street construction and drainage improvements shall be
constructed within two years of issuance of the subdivision plat release
(unless an extension is granted by the Board of Commissioners). Sidewalks shall
be constructed within five years of the issuance of the subdivision plat
release (unless an extension if granted by the Board of Commissioners). In the
event an extension has been granted, the amount of the irrevocable letter of
credit shall not be reduced prior to its expiration date and the extension of
the irrevocable letter of credit or a new irrevocable letter of credit shall be
in force prior to the beginning of the extension period.
      (2)   Make application to the officer of the Area Plan Commission for the
acceptance of the subdivision streets for maintenance by the Board of
Commissioners by the time that two years has elapsed from the issuance of the
subdivision plat release (unless an extension has been granted).
   (B)   The application for acceptance of maintenance shall be accompanied by
a filing fee as set by the Area Plan Commission or the Board of Commissioners
pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-411:
      (1)   Four copies of the secondary plat; and
      (2)   Pursuant to §
154.021(B), a certificate from a licensed professional engineer attesting that
all required non-street improvements have been installed in accordance with all
applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Subsequent to receipt of the application for acceptance of
maintenance, the County Engineer shall conduct a field inspection of the
subdivision's street improvements and make a report of said inspection as well
as previous inspections during construction (pursuant to §
154.021) to the Board of Commissioners. The report shall list all deficiencies,
if any, shall need to be corrected as a condition for acceptance by the county
of the roadways for maintenance. However, the Board of Commissioners may
require an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount to cover possible repairs
to any completed improvements, including roadway and drainage, if the
improvements have not passed through a seasonal freeze-thaw cycle.
   (D)   If the findings of the County Engineer's report do not reveal any
deficiencies, the Board of Commissions shall have no other course than to
accept the subject roadways for maintenance.
   (E)   Whenever a subdivider receives a subdivision plat release he or she
shall, in addition to all other requirements, maintain the streets as laid out
and established on the subdivision plat in accordance with the minimum
standards for subdivision street maintenance established by the Board of
Commissions until such time as the streets are accepted for maintenance.
   (F)   Whenever a subdivider, his or her agents, employees or assigns,
conveys lots in a subdivision, in which the streets have not been accepted for
maintenance by the Board of Commissioners, he or she shall cause to be printed
in bold print across the face of the deed of conveyance the following:
      "STREET, ROAD AND OTHER MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS IN THIS SUBDIVISION HAVE NOT
BEEN MADE AND THE COUNTY WILL NOT ACCEPT THE SAME FOR MAINTENANCE UNTIL THE
OWNERS OF THE VARIOUS LOTS HEREIN IMPROVE THE SAME UP TO SAID MINIMUM
STANDARDS."
   In like manner, the Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission shall
cause the same language to be stamped or printed on the Secondary Plat
regardless of whether or not lots are being conveyed in the subdivision.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION OF MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 154.035 APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   A subdivider desiring approval of a plat for a minor subdivision of
any land lying within the jurisdiction of the Area Plan Commission shall submit
a plat of the subdivision in accordance with this subdivision to the Area Plan
Commission.
   (B)   A minor subdivision plat may be filed for approval for any division of
land creating not more than three new parcels (that is three new parcels
excluding the residual of the original parcel) provided that:
      (1)   The original parcel was not previously subdivided in the past 12
months;
      (2)   All parcels have frontage on an existing street with an improved
right-of-way maintained by the county or other participating jurisdiction;
      (3)   No extension of existing or creation of new streets, municipal
facilities or public improvements is proposed;
      (4)   It does not adversely affect the remainder or the parcel or
adjoining projects; and
      (5)   It does not conflict with any provision or portion of the
Comprehensive Plan, the Thoroughfare Plan, Zoning Ordinance (both text and
map), or this chapter.
   (C)   No land shall be subdivided if such land is considered by the
Commission to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or improper
drainage, objectionable earth and rock formation, topography, or any other
feature harmful to the health and safety of future residents and of the
community as a whole.
   (D)   At the time of filing of an application for minor subdivision plat
approval, the application shall be accompanied by an application fee as set by
the Area Plan Commission pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-411.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.036 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   Three different circumstances exist for public notice and opportunity to
comment on the minor subdivision application:
   (A)   If the subdivider has obtained the signatures of all abutting property
owners stating their approval (or no objection to Area Plan Commission approval
of the plat) and such accompanies the minor subdivision plat at the time of
application for approval by the Area Plan Commission, no further public notice
nor a public hearing are necessary, and the Executive Director of the Area Plan
Commission may certify (approve) the minor subdivision plat for recording.
   (B)   If the subdivider has not obtained the signatures of all abutting
property owners stating their approval at the time of the application to the
Area Plan Commission for approval of the plat, the applicant shall give notice
of the right to voice objections to the Subdivision Review Committee and then
the right to appeal to the full Area Plan Commission to all abutting property
owners of record. Within seven days of filing of the application, the notice
shall be sent by the applicant to abutting property owners of record by
certified mail with return receipts using a prescribed form furnished by the
Area Planning Commission. The notice of the right to voice objections to the
Subdivision Review Committee and then the right to appeal to the full Area Plan
Commission shall inform the abutting property owner that he or she has ten days
from the post-marked date of the mailing of the notice to submit a written
objection (the address of the Area Plan Commission being included in the
notice) to the Area Plan Commission for an audience before the Subdivision
Review Committee. Only abutting property owners of record shall make such an
objection, and the objection shall be heard before the Subdivision Review
Committee before the objector may appeal to the full Area Plan Commission. An
affidavit which lists the abutting property owners and attests that notice has
been duly given to said property owners must be filed with the Area Plan
Commission along with all return receipts within ten days of the filing of the
application. Two possible actions may occur:
      (1)   If the affidavit is in order and no oral nor written objection has
been received by the Area Plan Commission on or before the close of the ten
days of notification of the abutting property owners, the Executive Director of
the Area Plan Commission may certify (approve) the minor subdivision plat for
recording.
      (2)   If on the other hand, an oral or written objection is received by
the Area Plan Commission on or before the close of the tenth day subsequent to
the notification of the abutting property owners, the Executive Director of the
Area Plan Commission shall announce, within 14 days of receipt of the
application, the date that the objection will be reviewed by the Subdivision
Review Committee by giving written notification to the applicant and the
objector.
      (3)   Following the review before the Subdivision Review Committee, the
Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission may approve, disapprove (with
written findings that set forth its reasons for denying approval and provide
the applicant a copy) the minor subdivision application, or request the full
Area Plan Commission to review the matter. If the application is to be
approved, the Executive Director shall inform all objectors by certified mail
of their right to appeal to the full Area Plan Commission by oral or written
request within ten days. Only those abutting property owners who have raised an
original objection and requesting a review by Subdivision Review Committee can
appeal to the full Area Plan Commission. If no oral or written appeal is
received within ten days, the Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission
shall certify (approve) the minor subdivision plat for recording.
   (C)   After the Subdivision Review Committee has met and the Executive
Director has made a finding to deny the subdivision, the applicant may appeal
to the full Area Plan Commission. After the Subdivision Review Committee has
met and the Executive Director has informed all objectors of the intent to
approve the subdivision, an original objector who is also an abutting property
owner may appeal orally or in writing to the full Area Plan Commission within
ten days of receiving notice of the intent to approve the subdivision. Finally,
the Executive Director may request an appeal before the full Area Planning
Commission. Under any of these three circumstances, the Area Planning
Commission will hold a public hearing at the next scheduled Area Planning
Commission and the Executive Director shall give written notice to the
applicant and any objectors of the date of the public hearing.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.037 PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   A minor subdivision requires the submittal of a plat prepared by a
licensed land surveyor and duly signed and sealed prior to submission attesting
to the legal boundary descriptions and the monumenting of property corners of
all lots (existing and created).
   (B)   The minor subdivision plat shall include the information cited in §
154.038. Prior to submission of the plat, the subdivider is encouraged to
obtain the certifications of access, sewage disposal, potable water and
stormwater drainage. The plat will be accepted for processing by the Area Plan
Commission without these four certifications; and the Area Plan Commission
staff will forward the plat to the appropriate agencies for these three
certifications. Prior to submission of the plat, the subdivider is also
encouraged to obtain the signatures of all abutting property owners stating
their approval (or no objection to Area Plan Commission approval of the plat).
The plat will be accepted for processing by the Area Plan Commission without
abutting property owner signature. However, the subdivider shall (within seven
days of the filing) send out notifications to abutting property owners of their
right to voice objections to the Subdivision Review Committee and then to
appeal to the full Area Plan Commission within ten days notify, and shall file
an affidavit within ten days with the Area Plan Commission verifying the
notification. If any abutting property owner requests the review of an
objection by the Subdivision Review Committee, the review by the Subdivision
Review Committee shall be scheduled; if not, the Executive Director may certify
(approve) the plat for recording provided the plat and affidavit are in order.
If any party appeals to the full Area Plan Commission after the review by the
Subdivision Review Committee, a public hearing will be scheduled before the
full Area Plan Commission; after the public hearing, the Area Plan Commission
may approve or deny the subdivision stating the conditions for denial. If
approved, the President and Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission may
certify (approve) the plat for recording provided the plat and affidavit are in
order.
   (C)   The minor subdivision plat shall be submitted on a reproducible piece
of paper (with original signatures) drawn to a scale no larger than one inch
equals 200 feet plus six copies and a read-only electronic version of the plat.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.038 REQUIRED MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT INFORMATION.
   (A)   The application for minor subdivision plat approval shall include the
following data:
      (1)   Title of minor subdivision.
      (2)   Recording data of the deed of the property being divided, including
deed book and page number and tax block and lot number. (A copy of the deed
shall be attached.)
      (3)   Owners of record with their names, addresses, and original
signatures (to be affixed and dated).
      (4)   A parent tract legal boundary description, with the lengths and
bearings from all property corners (to be monumented with a steel rod) shown on
the plat. Each parcel shall have a legal boundary description, with the lengths
and bearings from all property corners (to be monumented with a steel rod)
shown on the plat.
      (5)   Location map of the subdivision from the nearest public road
intersection, with north point and scale.
      (6)   Location and description of all monuments with references by
distance and bearings to quarter section corners, section corners, grant
corners, or recorded subdivision corners.
      (7)   All lots numbered or lettered with the acreage of each lot shown.
      (8)   All public rights-of-way including streets and utility easements
shown and labeled with the width thereof. A statement shall be placed on the
plat that no buildings, structures, fences, shrubs or trees shall be placed in
the public right-of-ways, either existing or to be dedicated by this plat.
      (9)   Building setbacks from the front lot line.
      (10)   Thoroughfare setback lines and dedication of an additional right-
of-way consistent with Thoroughfare Plan, if applicable.
      (11)   100-year flood contour line from the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) or the statement that all areas are outside the 100-year flood plain. If
any portion of the lot falls within the 100-year flood plain, a suitable
building site above the 100-year flood plain elevation shall be readily evident
from the plat by showing the portion of the flood plain to be filled. Further,
access to a suitable building site above the 100-year flood plain shall be
demonstrated.
      (12)   Location of existing water, sewer, other municipal services, and
other utilities (electric, gas, telephone, cable television, etc.)
      (13)   Zoning classification of the subject property and all abutting
properties.
      (14)   Names and addresses of record of all abutting property owners with
appropriate references to the tax block and lot number and deed book and page
number for all abutting properties.
      (15)   Any existing buildings and structures (including fences) and their
placement on the lots.
      (16)   Natural waters courses designated with the statement that no
buildings, structures, fences, shrubs or trees shall be placed in the
easements. Legal drains designated, if applicable.
      (17)   Any significant geologic structures (such as sinkholes) shall be
shown on the plat, and it shall be readily evident from the plat that a
suitable building site exists.
   (B)   The following certifications must appear on the plat:
      (1)   Certificate of Access by the County Highway Engineer/State Highway
Representative:
         All parcels have Ingress and Egress to each proposed building site to
(road name) which is a public county/state maintained roadway.
         Conditions: (statement of no conditions or the conditions cited).
                                                                  
         Signature & Title         Date
      (2)   Sewage Disposal Certificate (if private systems are to be used):
         Private waste disposal systems have been approved for this Minor
Subdivision; however, the type and size of the onsite sewage disposal system
for each parcel in this Minor Subdivision will be determined by the Warrick
County Health Department. These systems will comply with Regulation 410 IAC 6-
8.1 as set down by the Indiana State Board of Health and Warrick County
Ordinance #1985-15. This Ordinance regulates the installation, construction,
maintenance and operation of private sewage disposal systems and provides
penalties for violations. Diagrams of these systems are available at the
Warrick County Health Department, Boonville, Indiana. Only one (1) sewage
permit shall be issued per parcel. The approved sites for the private waste
disposal systems are as shown on this plat. Any site other than those shown as
"approved area" must be approved by Warrick County Health Department, to
regulate the placing of these systems with designated approved sites and will
not be the responsibility of the Warrick County Area Plan Commission.
         Conditions: (statement of no conditions or the conditions cited)
                                                                        
         Warrick Co. Health Dept.      Date
         (If Sanitary Sewer System)
         Sanitary sewer lines are in place and guaranteed available for
connection to all parcels.
         Conditions: (statement of no conditions or the conditions cited).
                                                                        
         Name & Sewer Company       Date
      (3)   Potable Water Certificate:
         Water lines are in place and available for connection to all parcels.
         Conditions: (statement of no conditions or the conditions cited).
                                                                      
         Name & Water Company      Date
         (If water is supplied by wells or cisterns)
         Water will be provided to all parcels by wells or cisterns.
         Conditions: (statement of no conditions or the conditions cited).
                                                                        
         Warrick Co. Health Dept.      Date
      (4)   Stormwater Drainage Certificate by the Warrick County Surveyor:
         I, (name), Warrick County Surveyor, certify that this Minor
Subdivision will not effect the drainage in this area nor does it require
drainage Plan submittal.
         Conditions: (statement of no conditions or the conditions cited)
                                                                       
         Warrick County Surveyor       Date
      (5)   Surveyor Certificate:
         I, (name), Registered Land Surveyor in the State of Indiana, hereby
certify: (a) that I have examined the FEMA Flood Hazard Map Community No. ( ),
dated ( ), and have determined that this Minor Subdivision IS/IS NOT in a Flood
Hazard Area; and (b) that all property corners have been monumented.
         [Note: If any portion is located within the 100-year flood plain, you
must delineate that portion as shown on the flood plain panel. Further, you
must demonstrate that the remainder of the lot can have a suitable building
site with access above the 100-year flood elevation, showing any portion of the
lot to be filled at an elevation two (2) feet above the 100-year flood plain.]
                                                                
         Surveyor's Name         Date
         & L.S. Number
      (6)   Abutting Property Owner Certificate:
         I, (name), have no objection to the approval of this subdivision plat
by the Area Plan Commission and waive my right to request a Public Hearing
before the Area Plan Commission on this subdivision.
                                                                               
         Abutting Property Owner Name      Date
         [This certification may be placed on the plat next to the name of the
abutting property owner with a note referring to the statement above (placed on
the plat), or in an attachment to the plat with the abutting property owners'
names, addresses, tax block and lot and deed book and page listed.]
      (7)   Executive Director Certificate:
         I, (name), Executive Director, Warrick County Area Plan Commission,
hereby certify this division of land is determined to be an "Minor Subdivision"
as defined and subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance
in effect for Warrick County; and that any deviation from said requirements
shall cause this certification to become null and void.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2007-19, passed 9-12-07; Am. BC
Ord. 2007-24, passed 9-12-07; Am. BC Ord. 2007-25, passed 9-12-07)
§ 154.039 MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL.
   Four different circumstances exist under which approval of the minor
subdivision plat is given:
   (A)   The Executive Director may certify the plat for recording if the minor
subdivision application and plat are in order; and the certificates of access,
sewage disposal, potable water and stormwater drainage have been signed by the
appropriate authorities (at the time of the original filing or subsequent to
the original filing when the Area Plan Commission staff circulates the plat for
signatures), and all abutting property owners have signed the plat (stating no
objection and waiver of the right to request a public hearing).
   (B)   The Executive Director may certify the plat for recording if the minor
subdivision application, plat and affidavit of notice to abutting property
owners (of their right to voice an objection to the Subdivision Review
Committee and then appeal to the full Area Plan Commission) are in order; and
the certificates of access, sewage disposal, potable water and stormwater
drainage have been signed by the appropriate authorities (at the time of the
original filing or subsequent to the original filing when the Area Plan
Commission staff circulates the plat for signatures), and no abutting property
owner requests (orally or in writing) an opportunity to voice objections to the
Subdivision Review Committee within ten days of the mailing of the
notifications to abutting property owners.
   (C)   If an opportunity to voice objections to the Subdivision Review
Committee is requested by any abutting property owner within the specified time
period, the Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission may approve,
disapprove (with written findings that set forth its reasons for denying
approval and provide the applicant a copy) or appeal to the full Area Plan
Commission the minor subdivision application, following the review by the
Subdivision Review Committee. If no appeal to the full Area Plan Commission is
received within the specified time period from an objector after notification
of the intent to approve the subdivision the application is approved, the
Executive Director of the Area Plan Commission shall certify (approve) the
minor subdivision plat for recording.
   (D)   If an appeal is made by the subdivider, an objector of standing or the
Executive Director to the full Area Plan Commission within the specified time
period, the Area Plan Commission may approve or disapprove (with written
findings that set forth its reasons for denying approval and provide the
applicant a copy) the minor subdivision application, following the Public
Hearing. If the application is approved, the President and Executive Director
of the Area Plan Commission shall certify (approve) the minor subdivision plat
for recording.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
PROCEDURE FOR RESUBDIVISION AND/OR REPLATTING OF LAND
§ 154.050 PROCEDURE FOR RESUBDIVISION/REPLATTING.
   For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such
changes affects any street layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon
for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plat legally
established prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions,
such parcel shall be approved by the Area Plan Commission by the same
procedures, rules, and regulations as for subdivisions. Such change also must
be in conformity with statutes governing platting and vacating of public ways
(I.C. 36-7-3 et seq., as amended).
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
VACATION OF PLATS
§ 154.060 PROCEDURES FOR VACATION OF PLATS.
   Any recorded plat or part of any recorded plat may be vacated only in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-3 as amended.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
GENERAL REGULATIONS AND DESIGN
§ 154.070 GENERAL.
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided for any non-agricultural purpose if such
land has inadequate access or if such land is considered by the Area Plan
Commission to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or improper
drainage, or objectionable earth or rock formations, topography or other
feature harmful to the health, safety and welfare of future residents and the
community as a whole.
   (B)   The subdivision plan shall conform to the principles and standards
which are generally exhibited in the Comprehensive Plan as is now or hereafter
shall be adopted, in whole or in part; and, specifically with that part of the
plan which deals with land use and thoroughfares.
   (C)   The following standards and requirements shall be deemed as a minimum
and whenever the applicable standards and requirements of any applicable zoning
ordinance or of any participating city or town are higher or more restrictive,
the latter shall control.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.071 STREETS.
   (A)   The street and highway design shall conform both in width and
alignment to any Comprehensive Plan or Thoroughfare Plan of Streets and
Highways approved and/or adopted by any participating city or town or the
county as indicated in the Thoroughfare Plan being a part of the Long Range
Transportation Plan. Right-of-way for any such street or highway indicated on
said Thoroughfare Plan shall be dedicated.
   (B)   If a parcel of land to be subdivided includes a portion of the right-
of-way to be acquired for a freeway or expressway, the Area Plan Commission
shall determine the boundaries of the right-of-way to be acquired, and the
subdivider shall either dedicate or create an outlot in the subdivision
covering all the area included in said right-of-way. This right-of-way or
outlot shall revert back to the subdivider if not used within eight years.
   (C)   All streets shall be in alignment with existing and proposed exterior
streets by continuations of the centerlines thereof or by advantageous
development of the area in which the subdivision lies. When continuation of the
centerline is impractical in the opinion of the Area Plan Commission, the
centerlines shall be separated by at least 150 feet.
   (D)   Residential streets shall be designed to discourage rapid through
traffic. Straight tangents of more than 1,350 feet are prohibited.
   (E)   (1)   Where it is desirable in the opinion of the Plan Commission to
provide street access to abutting property, proposed streets shall be extended
by dedication to the boundary of such property. Unless deemed unnecessary by a
traffic study, residential subdivisions with 60 or more lots (or dwelling
units) shall be served by two access points, and shall be served by:
         (a)   Two different roadways if bordered by more than one roadway; or
         (b)   Two access points or a divided main entry roadway from the same
roadway if bordered by only one roadway.
      (2)   The Commission may require additional access on any development
where deemed necessary.
   (F)   Proposed streets and highways shall be adjusted to the contour of the
land as far as practicable so as to produce usable lots and streets of
reasonable gradient.
   (G)   Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
limited (full or partially controlled) access highway, the Area Plan Commission
may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting
contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots
with rear service alleys, or other treatment necessary for adequate protection
of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local
traffic.
   (H)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited (fully or partially controlled) access highway right-of-way, the Plan
Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of
such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land, as for park purposes in residential district, or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distance shall
also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and
future grade separations.
   (I)   Minimum street and highway right-of-way widths.
      (1)   The right-of-way should be free of all obstacles with the exception
of mailboxes.
      (2)   All street and highway rights-of-way, measured from lot line to lot
line, shall be as follows except as defined in the Thoroughfare Plan a part of
the Long Range Transportation Plan adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
Type of Street Right-of-Way Width in Feet
Type of Street             Right-of-Way Width in Feet
Freeway or Expressway      "to be determined" by County Highway Engineer or
                           State
Arterial                   90
Urban major collector      70
Rural major collector      80
Rural minor collector      70**
Residential collector      70
Minor Residential District 50
Private Street             40
Cul-de-sac                 50
Rural road                 50**
Marginal Access            40
 
** The County Engineer may request the greater right-of-way width on approaches
to intersections, rolling terrain or other special circumstances.
      (3)   Subdivisions platted along both sides of an existing street shall
provide the entire minimum right-of-way.
      (4)   Subdivisions platted along only one side of an existing street
shall provide one-half of the minimum right-of-way measured from the center
line of such existing street or the section line when the street was originally
placed on the section line.
      (5)   Half streets are prohibited, unless determined by the Plan
Commission to be essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in
conformity with the other requirements of this chapter or unless the Plan
Commission finds it to be practicable to require the dedication of the other
half when the abutting property is subdivided. Whenever a half street exists
adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be
platted within such tract.
   (J)   Intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall intersect one another as nearly as possible at right
angles and in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than 60 degrees.
      (2)   Property lines at street and alley intersections shall be rounded
with a radius of at least ten feet. When the smallest angle of intersection is
less than 60 degrees, this minimum radius shall be increased. In commercial
districts a comparable chord may be used in place of an arc.
      (3)   Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets (that
is, more than four intersection legs) should be avoided.
      (4)   The number of intersections of minor streets with major streets
should be kept to a minimum.
   (K)   Street grades.
      (1)   Street grades, except under extreme physical conditions, shall not
exceed the following:
Type of Street Per Cent Grade
Type of Street                            Per Cent Grade
Arterial , urban or rural major collector 5
Rural minor collector                     7
Residential collector                     8
Minor                                     8
Cul-de-sac                                8
Alley                                     8
Rural Road                                8
 
      (2)   For adequate drainage, the minimum street and gutter grades shall
be not less than one-half of one percent.
      (3)   All new streets and gutters shall be located on a grade above the
100-year flood plain elevation.
   (L)   Street alignment.
      (1)   Between reverse curves with a deflection angle on the centerline
greater than five degrees the following minimum tangents shall be introduced.
 
Type of Street                                             Tangent in Feet
Arterial, urban collector, rural major collector, or rural 200
minor collector
Residential collector and rural road                       100
 
      (2)   Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the horizontal
alignment of a street occurs, a curve with the following minimum radius shall
be provided.
 
Type of Street                            Minimum Radius of Curvature in Feet
Arterial, urban collector and rural major 500
collector
Rural minor collector                     300
Residential collector                     200
Minor                                     100
Rural road                                100
 
      (3)   All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves
designed to provide the following minimum sight distance as measured between
points 3.5 feet above the center line of the road or street surface.
 
Type of Street                            Minimum Sight Distance in Feet
Arterial, urban collector and rural major 600
collector
Rural minor collector                     500
Residential collector                     300
Minor                                     200
Rural road                                200
 
   (M)   Dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs. Permanently designed cul-de-sacs
shall not be longer than 1,320 feet from the nearest intersecting street and
shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a radius at the
outside of the pavement of at least 40 feet and a radius at the outside of the
right-of-way of at least 50 feet.
   (N)   Reserve strips and private streets.
      (1)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets are prohibited except
where the control of such strips is placed with the county under conditions
approved by the Plan Commission.
      (2)   Private streets shall not be platted within a subdivision. Private
streets may be platted within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) as described in
the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.
   (O)   Street names and house numbers.
      (1)   Street names shall not be used which will duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing or platted streets. Proposed streets in alignment
and connecting with existing or platted streets shall bear the names of the
existing or platted streets. The Plan Commission may require different names if
not connected or through streets.
      (2)   House numbers in the county shall be obtained from the records of
the Area Plan Commission office. Each subdivider shall hereby cause to be
affixed to his or her subdivision secondary plat, by his or her surveyor a
house number for each lot in accordance with any house numbering system which
has been adopted by the Board of Commissioners, and is in effect for the
township in which said subdivision is located. Official house numbering maps
are on file in the office of the Area Plan Commission office.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-04, passed 1-9- 12; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-02, passed 1-11-21)
§ 154.072 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Unless provision for adequate goods delivery and pickup is made,
alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts. Except where
justified by unusual and extreme conditions of topography, traffic flow, or
access, alleys shall not be provided in residential districts.
   (B)   The minimum right-of-way width of an alley shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   Dead-end alleys should be avoided, but if unavoidable, shall be
provided with an adequate circular "T" or "Y" turn-around at the closed end, as
approved by the Area Plan Commission.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.073 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall grant easements wherever necessary, not less than
six feet in width for public utility, sewer and drainage purposes on each lot.
Dedication of easements shall be to the public for purpose of installing and
maintaining utilities, platting strips and for other public purposes as may be
ordered or directed by the Commission.
   (B)   Where a subdivision embraces all or any part of a water course,
drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-
way shall be provided which conforms substantially with the lines of such water
course, and is of adequate width as determined by the Plan Commission after
review by the Drainage Board. Further, if the 100-year flood plain elevation is
shown on FIRM maps, the building site shall be demonstrated to be above the
100-year flood plain elevation or it shall be demonstrated that the building
site and access thereto can be filled so as to be above the 100-year floodplain
elevation in compliance with flood plain regulations of the state. Any new
roadways shall be constructed on a grade above the 100-year flood plain
elevation.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.074 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet.
   (B)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth.
   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, shall be required
where deemed essential by the Plan Commission to provide adequate circulation
or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, or other community
facilities.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.075 LOTS.
   (A)   Every lot upon which a structure is hereafter erected shall abut on to
a dedicated public street or right-of-way.
   (B)   Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   (C)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from limited
(fully or partially controlled) access highways or railroads or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. There shall be no right
of access provided along the line of lots abutting limited (fully or partially
controlled) access highways and railroads.
   (D)   In any subdivision or part of a subdivision proposed for non-
agricultural purposes, the width and area of lots shall conform to the minimum
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the district of which the subdivision
is located.
   (E)   The minimum building setback lines established in the Zoning Ordinance
shall be observed for all lots in each subdivision.
   (F)   Residential lots fronting on an arterial, urban or rural major
collector or rural minor collector should have extra depth to permit deeper
building setbacks from such traffic arteries as follows from the roadway
centerline:
      (1)   Arterial – 70 feet;
      (2)   Rural major collector – 65 feet; and
      (3)   Urban collector or rural minor collector – 60 feet.
   (G)   No lot shall be divided by a municipal boundary line.
   (H)   When terrain so requires, easements for sanitary sewers along other
than the real lot lines shall be provided subject to approval of the Plan
Commission.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.076 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   Whenever a park, recreation area, school site, or other public use shown on
the Comprehensive Plan as now or hereafter adopted in whole or in part is
located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision, such proposed
public space, if not dedicated to the appropriate public agency, may be
required by the Area Plan Commission to be reserved for a period of one year
for later acquisition by the public agency. In the event of a government agency
or unit passing a resolution expressing its intent to acquire the land so
reserved within the reservation year, the reservation period shall be extended
for an additional year.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.077 NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The street and lot layout of a non-residential subdivision shall
conform generally to the Comprehensive Plan as is now or hereafter adopted, in
whole or in part, and specifically with that part of the Plan which deals with
zoning, land use and thoroughfares.
   (B)   Types of non-residential subdivision. Non-residential subdivisions
shall include industrial tracts and may include neighborhood and community
commercial or office tracts.
   (C)   Principles and standards. In addition to the principles and standards
in this chapter which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the
subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the
proposed street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to
the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The
following principles and standards shall be observed.
      (1)   Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and
dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
      (2)   Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate
the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereon.
      (3)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Area Plan Commission
with respect to sidewalks.
      (4)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from the proposed non-residential subdivisions,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or
potential residential development and provisions for a buffer strip where
necessary.
      (5)   Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas, or connected to streets intended for predominantly
residential traffic.
      (6)   Subdivisions for proposed commercial development shall take into
account and specifically designate all areas proposed for vehicular circulation
and parking, for pedestrian circulation, and for buffer strips.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.078 ENTRANCE REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All entrances shall be designed in accordance with the Standards and
Specifications as outlined in the Indiana Department of Transportation Access,
most recent, Standards Manual for state-maintained roads, and the Evansville
Metropolitan Planning Organization Access Standards Manual for spacing and
traffic movement and the Warrick County Roadway Specifications,
Appendix B of this chapter, for design and construction standards for locally
maintained roads; and approved by the County Highway Engineer. These standards
shall be followed and administered as they pertain to all aspects of the
entrance details, i.e. tapers, radii and lane widths.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2021-03, passed 1-11-21)
STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.090 STANDARDS AND APPROVALS.
   (A)   Roadway improvement work (except for grading) shall not be commenced
until plans and profiles for such work have been submitted to and approved by
the Board of Commissioners or the local legislative body having jurisdiction.
Such plans may be required before approval of the final plat. All such plans
and profiles shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the
county or the participating cities or towns within whose territorial limits the
work is to be done.
   (B)   Roadway improvement work shall not be commenced until the county or
the participating city or town within whose territorial limits the work is to
be done has been notified in advance. If the work has been discontinued for any
reason, it shall not be continued until notice is again given.
   (C)   All required roadway improvements shall be constructed under the
inspection of and subject to the approval of the county or the participating
city or town within whose territorial limits the subdivision lies.
   (D)   All underground utilities, waterlines, sanitary sewers and stone
drains installed initially in streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall
be constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets, service roads, alleys or
highways. Service connections for all underground utilities and sanitary sewers
shall be placed to such length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the
street or alley or sidewalk improvements when service connections thereto are
made. Utilities, waterlines and sewers should be installed under paved areas of
streets only when absolutely necessary.
   (E)   The subdivider's engineer shall develop plans and complete all
improvement design work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
to the approval of the Board of Commissioners.
   (F)   The subdivider shall develop plans and complete improvement work as
required by other utilities.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.091 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The subdivider shall install improvements in accordance with the general
requirements set forth in this section provided that the Board of Commissioners
may permit changes in typical section and details if unusual conditions arise
during construction to warrant such change.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.092 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   The corners of all lots shall be marked by steel bars at least 30 inches in
length and no less than five-eights inch in diameter, the top of the pipe or
bar to be set level with the established grade adjoining it at the following
points:
   (A)   The intersection of street and alley right-of-way lines.
   (B)   The intersection of all angles in the subdivision boundary line.
   (C)   The beginning and ending of all street curves on both right-of-way
lines.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.093 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET AND HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Streets and highways shall be graded to the full width of the right-
of-way and brought to grades specified on plans, profiles, and cross-sections
approved by the Board of Commissioners who shall receive one set of the plat
plans as approved after review by the engineer and Executive Director. All
street and highway improvements shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the
Board of Commissioners after review by the County Engineer.
   (B)   Streets and highways shall be paved the following minimum widths:
               Minimum Pavement Width (in Minimum Pavement Width (in Feet)
Type of Street Feet) Inclusive of Curb &  without Curb & Gutter
               Gutter
                          Minimum Pavement Width (in Minimum Pavement Width (in
Type of Street            Feet) Inclusive of Curb &  Feet) without Curb &
                          Gutter                     Gutter
Freeway (fully-controlled (not applicable)           38 x 2
access)
Expressway (partially-    42 x 2                     38 x 2
controlled access)
Freeway/expressway -      29 x 2                     16 x 2
service streets
Arterial, urban collector 28 x 2, plus 8 to 10-foot  24 x 2 plus 8 to 10-foot
or rural major collector  paved right-shoulder and   paved right-shoulder and
- dual roadway            14-foot median             14-foot median (or 4-foot
                                                     paved left-shoulder)
Urban collector or rural  62 (3-lane roadway with    58 (3-lane roadway with
major collector - single  10-foot paved shoulders)   10-foot paved shoulders)
roadway
Rural minor collector     40 (3-lane roadway)        40 (2 lanes with 8-foot
                                                     paved shoulders)
                                                     36 (2 lanes with 6-foot
Residential collector     40                         paved shoulders plus 3-
                                                     foot compacted aggregate
                                                     shoulders)
Minor residential                                    26 (2 lanes plus 3-foot
district                  30                         compacted aggregate
                                                     shoulders)
                                                     26 (2 lanes plus 3-foot
Cul-de-sac                30                         compacted aggregate
                                                     shoulders)
                                                     22 (2 lanes plus 3-foot
Rural road                (not applicable)           compacted aggregate
                                                     shoulders)
                                                     22 (2 lanes plus 3-foot
Marginal access           26                         compacted aggregate
                                                     shoulders)
Private street            24                         20
 
   (C)   Street construction shall be in accordance with the Road Standard
Specifications or any subsequent amendments thereto for locally-maintained
roads and the Roadway Design Manual of the Indiana Department of Transportation
for state-maintained roads.
   (D)   Rigid type pavement. Rigid type pavement may only be used in
commercial and industrial zoning districts; residential shall require a waiver
by the County Commissioners. Rigid type pavement shall consist of Portland
cement concrete placed on a properly prepared subgrade conforming in all
respect to the line, grade, thickness and typical cross-sections in the plans
prepared by the subdivider and approved by the County Engineer and Plan
Commission. Coarse aggregate for Portland cement concrete pavement shall be
size No. 5L only, as defined in the standard specifications. Vibrating screeds
or oscillating screeds will be permitted for finishing pavements provided the
required finish and smoothness are obtained. All joints shall be sealed.
Minimum design standards shall be according to the following table:
 
                 Arterial, Urban    Rural Minor
                 Collector or Rural Collector or Residential Local and all
                 Major Collector    Commercial   Collector   Other Streets
                                    Collector
Controlled Wheel 18,000 lbs.        11,000 lbs.  8,000 lbs.  6,000 lbs
Load
Base Type I      To be designed on
Granular         the basis of       8"           6"          4"
                 traffic
Concrete Uniform To be designed on
Design Thickness the basis of       8"           7"          6"
                 traffic
                 To be designed on
Total thickness  the basis of       16"          13"         10"
                 traffic
 
   (E)   Flexible pavement.
      (1)   Flexible type pavement shall consist of an asphaltic concrete
wearing course placed on suitable base and subbase courses on a properly
prepared subgrade conforming in all respects to the lines, grades, thickness
and typical cross sections in the plans prepared by the subdivider and approved
by the Board of Commissioners and County Engineer or Town Board.
      (2)   Subbase and base material shall be placed in accordance with latest
standards of the Indiana State Highway Department. Minimum design standards
shall be according to the following table.
 Arterial, Urban    Rural Minor          Residential Local and all other
 Collector or Rural Collector or         Collector   Streets Type
 Major Collector    Commercial Collector
                  Arterial, Urban   Rural Minor
                  Collector or      Collector or Residential Local and all
                  Rural Major       Commercial   Collector   other Streets Type
                  Collector         Collector
Controlled wheel  18,000 lbs.       11,000 lbs.  8,000 lbs.  6,000 lbs
load
Subbase granular  To be designed on
design thickness  the basis of      6"           6"          4"
                  traffic
Base Type I       To be designed on
granular          the basis of      6"           4"          4"
                  traffic
                  To be designed on
Base asphaltic    the basis of      3"           2"          None
                  traffic
                  To be designed on
Binder asphaltic  the basis of      2"           2"          2-1/2"
                  traffic
                  To be designed on
Surface asphaltic the basis of      1-1/2"       1-1/2"      1-1/2 "
                  traffic
Total thickness                     18-1/2"      15-1/2"     12"
 
   (F)   Rural roads. All rural roads as defined herein shall have a minimum of
eight inches of rock with side ditches. Subbase shall be at least four inches
in depth using #2 rock or #5 rock with the base constructed of at least four
inches of #53 rock. The intermediate course shall be a minimum of two and one-
half inches of asphalt binder. The surface shall be a minimum one and one-half
inches of asphalt or as directed by the Board of Commissioners.
   (G)   Where granular material of a quality equal to requirements for subbase
material is placed for use as a construction the neat lines for subbase for the
pavement may be left in place and be considered subbase for whatsoever part of
the subbase area it occupies, and the existence of such materials outside those
lines will not be considered subbase for whatsoever part of the subbase area it
occupies, and the existence of such materials outside those lines will not be
considered subbase or base or pavement surface. The subbase and base courses
shall be constructed simultaneously, and in no case shall the subbase be used
as a construction road.
   (H)   Alternate materials and methods may be used to take advantage of local
material conditions providing the depth, the materials used and the
construction methods produce a pavement which satisfies the design criteria set
out by this chapter.
   (I)   When minor residential streets serve commercial or industrial
development the Rural Minor Collector/Commercial Collector road specifications
shall be required.
   (J)   (1)   The subdivider shall provide for inspection by a registered
professional engineer of all street and highway construction. Prior to start of
construction, a time schedule estimating starting date and completion date of
construction and stating the registered professional engineer in charge of
inspection shall be submitted to the County Engineer, the Area Plan Commission
and the Board of Commissioners. Should any change be made in the submitted time
schedule from starting date to completion date, the change must be submitted in
writing and to the same agencies.
      (2)   Upon completion, all requests for acceptance of streets for
maintenance by the county must be accompanied by a certification by the
registered professional engineer in charge that the streets were constructed in
accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the County Highway
Engineer, and the Board of Commissioners.
   (K)   (1)   As a part of the Street Construction Plans there shall be
compaction specifications submitted and included in the design specifications
of the proposed streets. Upon review and approval of said Street Construction
Plans the Certifying Engineer or Developer shall then be required to provide
the subgrade compaction test results to the County Highway Engineer. Said
compaction results must be submitted to the County Highway Engineer prior to
submittal of the Request for Acceptance of Streets for Maintenance. The County
Highway Engineer shall not recommend that the county accept the streets for
maintenance until said results are provided, reviewed and deemed satisfactory.
      (2)   In the event that the results are not provided and reviewed prior
to date of expiration of the irrevocable letter of credit, the Board of
Commissioners may require that the developer submit an amount approved by the
County Highway Engineer to be deposited in the County Road Donation Fund. Said
amount shall be used for repairs of the streets within the development.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2012-05, passed 1-9- 12; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-11-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021-05, passed 1-11-21; Am. BC Ord.
2021- 06, passed 1-11-21)
§ 154.094 CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   (A)   Curbs and gutters shall be installed along all streets in the
subdivision except where they are judged unnecessary by the County Highway
Engineer for adequate drainage of storm water or for factors of safety. Curbs
and gutters must be of integral concrete or other approved design and the
materials and methods of construction must conform to the latest approved
minimum requirements of the standard specifications or any subsequent amendment
thereto. The minimum gutter grade shall not be less than 0.65%. Side drains
from the gutter (or curb spill-outs) are prohibited. No curbs shall be modified
for house gutter drains.
   (B)   For asphalt streets, curbs and gutters shall be constructed on
prepared compacted aggregate base. The construction on the Street Construction
Plans shall contain an illustration detail. The depth of the compacted
aggregate shall conform to the County Specifications for locally-maintained
roads and to Indiana Department of Transportation specifications for state-
maintained roads.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-11- 21)
§ 154.095 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Concrete sidewalks, at least four feet wide, four inches thick, shall
be installed on both sides of each street in all residential subdivisions with
lots of one acre or less for pedestrian safety and convenience, unless waived
by the Board of Commissioners. Sidewalks shall be located within the street
right-of- way a minimum of two feet from the back of curb on curbed streets or
in lieu of the two feet strip the sidewalk may be placed next to the back of
curb provided the width of the sidewalk is increased to a minimum of six feet.
In the event curbs are not required and side ditches are permitted, the
sidewalks are to be located in the street right-of-way at lease one foot from
the lot line. The sidewalks shall conform to the standard specifications or any
subsequent amendment thereto. The design of the sidewalks shall be a part of
the Street Construction Plans that must be submitted and filed at the same time
the primary plat is filed.
   (B)   Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete.
Sidewalks shall conform to Section 604 of the Indiana Department of
Transportation specifications. Sidewalks shall slope one-quarter inch per foot
toward the roadway. Concrete shall have a minimum 28 day compressive strength
of 3,500 pounds per square inch (p.s.i.).
   (C)   Expansion joint material shall conform to the requirements of the
Indiana Department of Transportation specifications. Concrete materials and
placement methods shall be in accordance with the materials and methods
specified in Section 3.5 "Portland Cement Concrete Pavements".
   (D)   The sidewalks shall conform and be designed in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act and provide depressed curb sections per the
Indiana Department of Transportation Standards. The design shall be shown on
the submitted and approved Street Construction Plans with a note stating that
the sidewalks are designed and constructed accordingly. The property owner is
responsible for maintenance of the sidewalks and any mailboxes placed in the
public right-of-way.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.096 STORM DRAINAGE.
   (A)   A storm water sewer or a surface drainage system adequate to serve the
area being subdivided shall be provided to accommodate a 50-year storm. The
Indiana Department of Transportation for crossings of state-maintained
facilities or U.S. Corps of Engineers for the crossings of "blue water" streams
may require accommodation of greater than the 50-year storm. Any storm water
retention or detention facilities shall be designed to accommodate the
difference between the 5-year storm without the proposed development and the
50-year storm with the proposed development. Such system shall be in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the County Drainage Board prior to
primary plat approval. The flow in any drainage structure shall not exceed 90%
of the structure capacity, except for basin discharge pipes that can be 100% of
capacity.
   (B)   (1)   Wherever curbs and gutters are provided or when the Area Plan
Commission and the County Surveyor determine the natural surface drainage to be
inadequate, the subdivider shall construct a storm water sewer system with
catch basins appropriately spaced along the streets in the subdivision. Valley
gutters extending across the street surface shall not be used.
      (2)   Wherever curbs and gutters are provided within a development,
stormwater flow in the gutterline shall not exceed 600 lineal feet. In cases of
excessive lengths of drainage, an inlet should be installed to intercept the
water and direct the water through a structure. In design of the subdivision,
provisions shall be made to prohibit the drainage of stormwater across
intersections. Positive drainage shall be achieved and no standing water shall
be allowed. The minimum gutter grade shall not be less than 0.65%. Side drains
from the gutter (or curb spill-outs) are prohibited.
   (C)   A natural surface drainage system shall be permitted when curbs and
gutters are not provided and the natural drainage will, in the opinion of the
County Surveyor, adequately drain the storm water from the subdivision. The
drainage ways should be shallow swales sowed in grass rather than deep, open
ditches and have a minimum grade of 1% unless lined with a concrete ribbon.
Roadside drainage shall not be disrupted by private driveways. The subdivider
shall install a suitable pipe in accordance with the county's Driveway Culvert
Ordinance.
   (D)   In the design of a storm water sewer system for a subdivision, the
present and future expected run-off from the larger drainage area should be
considered. For this reason, it may be desirable that larger sewers than those
needed to service the immediate subdivision be installed.
   (E)   All pipes shall conform to American Society of Testing Materials
Standards Specifications in Section 7, 8 and 9 and Design Criteria shall
conform to the County Storm Drainage Manual to insure maximum hydraulic
efficiency.
   (F)   All drainage structures shall be designed and shown on the Street
Construction Plans with a detail sheet showing the size and type of structures
to be used, including drop structures, culverts, street inlets, manholes,
beehives and area drains. These shall be constructed in accordance with the
plans and specifications on file as well as the manufacturers specifications.
Adequate grade and drainage structure friction coefficients shall be obtained
and indicated on supporting drainage calculations for the type of structure
used. The flow in any drainage structure shall not exceed 90% of the structure
capacity, except for basic discharge pipes that can be 100% of capacity. All
drainage structures shall have junction boxes at major changes in grade or
direction that are accessible for maintenance and repair of the structure.
   (G)   Drainage swales flatter than 1% grade shall use either 16-inch wide,
six-inch thick, concave, reinforced, concrete ribbons or 16-inch wide, six-inch
thick, reinforced, concrete flat ribbons with three feet of sod on each side.
Drainage swales greater than 8% shall have appropriate, permanent erosion
control measures.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2021-08, passed 1-11- 21; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-09, passed 1-11-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021-10, passed 1-11-21)
§ 154.097 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   If a public water main is reasonably accessible, a complete water
distribution system approved by the water utility or the Indiana State Board of
Health, including a connection for each lot and fire hydrants meeting the
requirements of the Fire Insurance Underwriters Association shall be installed.
   (B)   If public water main is not reasonably accessible each lot may be
provided with an individual water supply, provided such supply is installed in
accordance with the minimum requirements of the Health Department and the
Indiana State Board of Health.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.098 SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   If a public sanitary sewer main is reasonably accessible, a complete
sanitary sewer system approved by the sanitary sewer utility or the Indiana
State Board of Health, including a lateral connection for each lot in the
subdivision, shall be installed.
   (B)   If, in the judgment of the Plan Commission, a public sanitary sewer
main is not reasonably accessible, sanitary wastes may be disposed of by one of
the following methods:
      (1)   The subdivision may be provided with a complete sanitary sewer
system, including a lateral connection for each lot and a neighborhood or
community sewage treatment plant, all meeting the approval of the Indiana
Stream Pollution Control Board and the State Board of Health.
      (2)   The subdivider may provide a private sewage disposal system on
individual lots consisting of a septic tank and soil absorption field or other
approved sewage disposal system, provided such disposal systems are installed
in accordance with the minimum standards of the Indiana State Board of Health
and provided that the soil in the subdivision will properly absorb sewage
effluent as determined by percolation tests. The private sewage disposal system
shall be approved by the Public Health Department.
   (C)   If a sanitary sewer system is to be installed, it must be approved by
the accepting utility.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.099 STREET NAME SIGNS.
   The subdivider shall install street signs at the intersection of all streets
in the subdivision constructed in substantial conformance to the prototype
design shown in Figure 1 or an alternate design approved by the Board of
Commissioners. The signs and method of display shall be subject to approval by
the Board of Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.100 RAILROAD CROSSING.
   Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossing necessary to
provide access to or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including the
preparation of all documents necessary for application to the Indiana State
Public Service Commission for the establishment and improvement of such
crossing. The cost of such railroad crossing improvement shall be borne by the
subdivider.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.101 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES/PAVEMENT MARKINGS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall be required to provide traffic control devices in
all new subdivisions. The devices shall include, but not be limited to, stop
signs at intersections, yield signs at intersections, dead end signs, warning
signs, and speed control signs. Location of devices shall be shown on the
street construction plans, as a separate sheet, submitted to the Area Plan
Commission as a part of the primary plat application and must receive approval
by the County Highway Engineer and Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   These devices must be installed in accordance to the provisions of the
Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. The
cost of all devices shall be borne by the subdivider, and shall be installed by
the subdivider prior to any street, being constructed either completely or
partially, and opened to the public.
   (C)   Where deemed necessary by the County Highway Engineer pavement
markings shall be included in design of all subdivisions and entrances.
Thermoplastic stop bars, lane stripings and any other stripings deemed
necessary shall be shown on the Street Construction Plans to be approved by the
County Highway Engineer and Board of Commissioners. After the final pavement
surface asphalt-layer has been installed by the subdivider, the pavement
markings shall be installed by the subdivider.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.102 EROSION CONTROL.
   Minimum erosion-control measures shall be established and implemented that
are consistent with Indiana Department of Environmental Management minimum
standards and practices.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.120 FEES.
   The Area Plan Commission may establish fees from time to time, pursuant to
I.C. 36-7-4-411, with regards to filing fees pertaining to applications for
minor and major subdivisions.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.121 ADMINISTRATION.
   These subdivision regulations shall be administered by the Area Plan
Commission or its designates.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.122 VALIDITY.
   If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, clause, word,
provision, or portion of this chapter, shall be held to be unconstitutional or
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding or decision shall
not affect or impair the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, clause,
phrase, word, provision, or portion so held to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.123 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, or any regulation
herein contained, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor infraction for each
day's violation.
   (B)   No improvement location permit shall be issued for any property
subject to the provisions of this chapter until the appropriate requirements
are met and the approvals required by this chapter are granted.
   (C)   Any land within the territorial limits of Warrick County, Indiana
subdivided in violation of the terms of this chapter after the effective date
hereof, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and the owner of such land
shall be liable for maintaining a common nuisance, which may be restrained,
enjoined or abated in any appropriate action or proceeding.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
CERTIFICATES
§ 154.130 CERTIFICATES REQUIRED WITH PLATS.
   Each plat submitted to the Area Plan Commission for secondary approval shall
contain or be accompanied by the following certificates, acknowledgments and
descriptions in substantially the following forms, as set forth in this
subchapter.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.131 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.
UNDER THE AUTHORITY PROVIDED TITLE 36, ARTICLE 7, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 700, ET
SEQ., OF THE INDIANA CODE AND ALL ACTS AMENDATORY THERETO, A MAJORITY OF THE
MEMBERS OF THIS WARRICK COUNTY AREA PLAN COMMISSION HAVE GIVEN PRIMARY APPROVAL
TO THIS PLAT IN THE MANNER PRESCRIBED IN THE WARRICK COUNTY SUBDIVISION CONTROL
ORDINANCE, AT A MEETING HELD ON THE             DAY OF            , 20    .
WARRICK COUNTY AREA PLAN COMMISSION
   SEAL                                      , President
                                                , Executive Director
Plat Release:
                                                                
Date            Executive Director
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.132 LAND SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE.
   Each final plat submitted to the Area Plan Commission for approval shall
carry a certificate signed by a registered professional land surveyor in
substantially the following form:
“I, (name), Registered Land Surveyor in the State of Indiana, hereby certify:
(a) that this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on
               , 20    , and that all the monuments shown thereon actually
exist, and that their location, size, type and material are accurately shown,
and that all property corners have been monumented and comply with the
provision of this ordinance; and (b) that I have examined the FEMA Flood Hazard
Map Community No. ( ), dated ( ), and have determined that this Major
Subdivision IS/IS NOT in a Flood Hazard Area.”
[Note: If any portion is located within the 100-year flood plain, you must
delineate the portion as shown on the flood plain panel. Further, you must
demonstrate that the remainder of the lot can have a suitable building site
with access above the 100-year flood elevation, showing any portion of the lot
to be filled at an elevation two (2) feet above the 100-year flood plain.]
   Seal                                        
      Signature
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2007-20, passed 9-12-07)
§ 154.133 LEGAL DESCRIPTION CERTIFICATE.
   The plat submitted to the Area Plan Commission for secondary approval shall
contain a metes and bounds legal description prepared by the registered
professional land surveyor of the outside boundary of the completed survey.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.134 DEDICATION CERTIFICATION.
   Each plat submitted to the Area Plan Commission for secondary approval shall
carry a deed of dedication, either of said plat or incorporated therein by
reference, in substantially the following form:
"We, the undersigned owners of the real estate shown and described herein, do
hereby lay off, plat and subdivide said real estate in accordance with the
herein plat.
This subdivision shall be know and designated as
                               , an addition to the City, Town, Township,
Warrick County, State of Indiana. All streets and alleys and public open spaces
shown and not heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the public.
Front yard building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this plat,
between which lines and the property lines of the streets, there shall be
erected or maintained no building or structure.
Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities
are reserved as shown on the recorded plat. Within these easements, no
structure planting or other material shall be placed or permitted to remain
which may damage or interfere with the installation and maintenance of
utilities or which may change the direction of flow of drainage channels in the
easements, or which may obstruct or retard the flow of water through drainage
channels in the easements. The easement area of each lot and all improvements
in it shall be maintained continuously by the owner of the lot, except for
those improvements for which a public authority or utility company is
responsible.
The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the right to
cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof
erected or maintained in violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the public,
and reserve to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision and
to their heirs and assigns:"
WITNESS OUR HAND AND SEALS THIS         DAY OF                          ,
20     .
                                                  
   Signature
                                                  
   Signature
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.135 ACKNOWLEDGMENT CERTIFICATE.
State of Indiana
County of Warrick
Before me, the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State,
personally appeared                                and each separately and
severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her
voluntary act and deed, for the purposes therein expressed.
WITNESS my hand and Notarial Seal this        day of                       ,
20   .
   Seal                                           
    Notary Public
My Commission Expires                             , 20    .
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.136 COUNTY DRAINAGE BOARD.
   Each final plat submitted to the Commission shall carry a certificate from
the County Drainage Board in substantially the following form:
"I                              hereby certify that I am the Secretary of the
Warrick County Drainage Board; that on
                                         , 20    , the drainage plan for
                                                subdivision was presented
before the Board and that on                       , 20     , the drainage plan
was approved by said Board. The drainage easements shown on the plat will not
be under the continuing jurisdiction of this Board, which has no authority over
the construction or subsequent maintenance of such drains. The drainage
easements inure solely for the benefit of the landowners in the subdivision and
no dedication thereof to the County or this Board is to be implied by this
approval."
   Seal                                        
      Signature
      Date                        
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.137 OTHER CERTIFICATES.
   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or documents as may be
required by the Commission in the enforcement of these regulations.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
THOROUGHFARE PLAN
§ 154.145 APPLICABILITY.
   To promote public safety, thoroughfare regulations are adopted and
established. These thoroughfare regulations shall be applied in the development
review process of all newly proposed plats, major and minor, submitted to the
Area Plan Commission.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.146 CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   State/Federal Principal Arterial (NHS).
      (1)   The State/Federal Arterial class has been split into the Principal
Arterial Class and Other Arterial Class to better reflect the state/federal
functional designation of highways. State/Federal Principal Arterials are part
of the national highway system, and may be freeways with full access control,
(i.e., grade separation of all crossroads and railroads and interchanges with
select crossroads), expressways with some at-grade signalized intersections
with full access control, or multiple-lane divided arterials with partial
access control. This class would be equivalent to the arterial or expressway
with full controlled access.
      (2)   The Principal Arterials under the state/federal functional
classification are I-64, I-164 and S.R. 66. The right-of-way requirements and
design cross sections for these highways vary. (The total setback shall be
determined by the state or the federal government, whichever is appropriate).
   (B)   Other State/Federal Arterial. The Other State/Federal Arterial
designation applies to the United States and state designated routes that are
not Principal Arterials. This class includes minor arterials and major
arterials under the state/federal functional classification system that are
maintained by the state. In the county, these facilities are S.R. 57, S.R. 61,
S.R. 62, S.R. 68, S.R. 161, S.R. 261 and S.R. 662. The right-of-way
requirements and design cross section for these highways vary. (The total
setback shall be determined by the state.) This class would be equivalent to
the arterial or expressway with partially controlled access.
   (C)   Arterial. This class contains four lane roads that are not designated
as state or federal routes. In the county, Epworth Road from S.R. 66 to
Telephone Road is the only road in this class. This class is equivalent to the
primary class with dual roadway.
   (D)   Urban major collector. This class generally contains two lane roads
under the maintenance of the county that are in the urbanized portions of the
county. These roads are to collect traffic from local streets and get the
traffic to the arterial system. This class is equivalent to the primary class
with single roadway in an urban area. Since these roads are in the urban areas,
they would have roadside ditches/curb and gutter requiring additional right-of-
way.
   (E)   Rural major collector. This class contains two lane roads under the
maintenance of the county that are in the rural portions of the county. These
roads are to collect traffic from local streets and get the traffic to the
arterial system. This class is equivalent to the primary class with single
roadway in a rural area. Since these roads are in the rural areas, they would
have roadside ditches requiring additional right-of-way than the urban major
collectors.
   (F)   Rural minor collector. This class contains two lane roads under the
maintenance of the county that are in the rural portions of the county. These
roads are to collect traffic from local streets and get the traffic to major
collectors or arterials. These roads have generally lower traffic volumes than
major collectors and the design standards are different than major collectors.
This class is equivalent to the secondary class of street.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.147 ROADS BY CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   Arterial.
      Epworth Road – S.R. 66 to Telephone Road. 2007 S-8
   (B)   Urban major collector.
      Bell Road – Old S.R. 261 to S.R. 66
      Epworth Road – S.R. 662 to S.R. 66
      Lincoln Avenue – County Line to S.R. 66
      Sharon Road – Newburgh Town limits to S.R. 66
   (C)   Rural major collector.
      Anderson Road – Vann Road to Jenner Road
      Bell Road – S.R. 66 to Telephone Road
      Boonville New Harmony Road – County Line to S.R. 61
      Casey Road – S.R. 261 to S.R. 66
      Frame Road – Newburgh Town limits to S.R. 66
      Fuquay Road – S.R. 261 to Telephone Road
      Jenner Road – S.R. 261 to Anderson Road
      Lenn Road – S.R. 66 to Sharon Road
      Libbert Road – S.R. 66 to Telephone Road
      Newburgh Truck Bypass – includes Ellerbusch, Grimm, Willow Pond
      Oak Grove Road – County Line to S.R. 261
      Oak Grove Road – S.R. 261 to Anderson Road
      Old Boonville Highway – County Line to S.R. 62
      Telephone Road – County Line to Fuquay Road
      Vann Road – Libbert Road to S.R. 261
      Vann Road – S.R. 261 to S.R. 61
   (D)   Rural minor collector.
      Anderson Road – Ferstel Road to Vann Road
      Asbury Cemetery Road – Heim Road to New Harmony Road
      Bell Road – Telephone Road to Jenner Road
      Bullocktown Road – County Line to Rockport Road
      Center Road – S.R. 261 to S.R. 62
      Dale Heilman Road – S.R. 161 to County Line
      Elberfeld Road – County Line to St. Johns Road
      Eskew Road – S.R. 261 to Millersburg Road
      Folsomville Road – Boonville Town limits to S.R. 68
      Fuquay Road – Telephone Road to Chandler Town limits
      Heim Road – County Line to Chandler Town limits
      Jenner Road – S.R. 261 to Bell Road
      Lincoln Avenue – S.R. 66 to S.R. 61
      Martin Road – Ferstel Road to Vann Road
      Millersburg Road – County Line to St. John Road
      New Hope Road & Roeder Road – S.R. 61 to Bullocktown Road
      North Road – Elberfeld Town limits to S.R. 68
      Old S.R. 66 – Bates Road to County Line
      Rockport Road – Boonville Town limits to S.R. 161
      Roeder Road – S.R. 61 to Anderson Road
      St. John Road – Titzer Road to Elberfeld Town limits
      Sharon Road – S.R. 66 to S.R. 61
      State Street – Chandler Town limits to Gardner Road
      State Street – Chandler Town limits to New Harmony Road
      Stevenson Station Road – Telephone Road to New Harmony Road
      Titzer Road – St. John Road to Stevenson Station Road
      Weyerbacher Road – New Harmony Road to S.R. 68
      Yankeetown Road – Old State Route 66 to Boonville Town limits
 
THOROUGHFARE STANDARDS
                                                             Shoulder Building
Class for    Existing    Right-        Width   Median        Width    setbacks
Thoroughfare Class in    of-way No. of (both   Width  Curb & (one     (feet)
Plan         Subdivision width  Lanes  sides)  (feet) Gutter side)    from edge
             Ordinance   (feet)        (feet)                (feet)   of right-
                                                                      of-way
             Primary
Arterial     dual        90*    4      48      14     Yes    No       25
             roadway
Urban major  Primary
collector    single      70*    2/4    24/48   0      Yes    8-10     25
             roadway
Rural major  Prima
collector    single      80*    2/4    24/48   0      No     8-10     25
             roadway
Rural minor  Secondary   70**   2      24      0      No*    8        25
collector
*   The County Engineer may request curb and gutter adding 2 feet to each side
of the pavement.
**   The County Engineer may request greater right-of-way widths on approaches
to intersection, rolling terrain, and other special circumstances.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.148 COMPLIANCE WITH PLAN.
   All development proposals shall allocate adequate access for streets in
conformity with the thoroughfare plan and shall designate and label all such
streets in accordance with the listed definitions, specifications, and
requirements regarding control of access, platted width, and setback
requirements.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06)
§ 154.149 MODIFICATION.
   A person desiring a modification from the requirements of this subchapter
must file a request with the Warrick County Board of Commissioners.
(BC Ord. 2006-05, passed 3-20-06; Am. BC Ord. 2013-08, passed 6-10-13)
APPENDIX A: STREET SIGN SPECIFICATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1139.png]
APPENDIX B: WARRICK COUNTY ROADWAY SPECIFICATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/645e4bc65e25a2dd953495689f2188c7dd4ff1c1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1141.png]
APPENDIX C: CHECKLIST FOR PARCELIZATION
1.           Submit five copies of proposed survey plat of parcelization, with
a copy of the existing recorded deed and plat book page from the Warrick County
Auditor's Office.
        a.   Drawing shall include metes-and-bounds legal description of any
proposed newly created parcels (on drawing or as separate attachment).
Accurately reflect the written boundary description. Locate and label the true
POB and all ties to found section or quarter-section corners. Any recorded
easements found shall be shown on the parcels/lots.
        b.   Drawing shall identify any flood plain areas as well as legal
drains. The survey plat shall reference, if determined, the 100-year-flood
contour and elevation as established on the FEMA Flood Insurance Maps.
Reference FIRM panel number. If no flood plain or floodway is located on
property, a statement to this effect shall be placed upon the survey plat.
        c.   Survey plat shall show any existing structures.
        d.   Survey plat shall show road rights-of-way.
        e.   Indicate north direction and scale.
2.           If the newly created parcel(s) are building sites, documentation
must be submitted as to septic system approval/sewer connection and potable
water/water connection.
(BC Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-20-10)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
   
155.01   Adoption of Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance by reference
§ 155.01 ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE BY REFERENCE.
   The Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for Warrick County, Indiana (except
Boonville, Newburgh and Chandler), is hereby adopted by reference as if set
forth in its entirety herein. Copies of the complete, updated zoning ordinance
are available for review by the general public during regular business hours in
the Office of the Area Plan Commission and in the Auditor’s Office.
(Am. BC Ord. 2019-13, passed 6-10-19; Am. BC Ord. 2020-13, passed 7-13-20; Am.
BC Ord. 2020-14, passed 7-13-20; Am. BC Ord. 2020-23, passed 10-12-20; Am. BC
Ord. 2020-24, passed 10-12-20; Am. BC Ord. 2021-038, passed 12-13-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-39, passed 12-13-21; Am. BC Ord. 2021-40, passed 12-13-21; Am. BC
Ord. 2021-41, passed 12- 13-21; Am. BC Ord. 2023-11, passed 6-26-23; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-12, passed 6-26-23; Am. BC Ord. 2023-13, passed 6-26-23; Am. BC Ord.
2023-17, passed 9-11-23; Am. BC Ord. 2023-18, passed 9-11-23; Am. BC Ord. 2023-
19, passed 9-11-23; Am. BC Ord. 2024- 12, passed 9-9-24; Am. CC Ord. 2025-12,
passed 9-8-25; Am. CC Ord. 2025-13, passed 9-8-25; Am. CC Ord. 2025-14, passed
9-8-25; Am. CC Ord. 2025-15, passed 9-8-25)
CHAPTER 156: UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND PREMISES
Section
   
156.01   Definitions
   
156.02   Adoption of Unsafe Building Law
   
156.03   Unsafe Building Fund
§ 156.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Building Department of Warrick County.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Building Commissioner of the Building Department
of Warrick County.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. The Area Plan Commission of Warrick County.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Defined in I.C. 36-7-9-2, which definition is
incorporated herein by reference.
   UNSAFE BUILDINGS and UNSAFE PREMISES. Defined in I.C. 36-7-9-4, which
definitions are incorporated herein.
(BC Ord. 2006-08, passed 6-28-06)
§ 156.02 ADOPTION OF UNSAFE BUILDING LAW.
   (A)   The provisions of I.C. 36-7-9 are adopted and incorporated, in total,
by this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Department is responsible for the administration of this
chapter.
(BC Ord. 2006-08, passed 6-28-06)
§ 156.03 UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
   There is hereby established a fund to be known as the Unsafe Building Fund.
This Fund shall be used to carry out the purposes of this chapter or other
purposes authorized by law.
(BC Ord. 2006-08, passed 6-28-06)
CHAPTER 157: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
157.01   Purpose and intent
   
157.02   Definitions
   
157.03   Weeds, rank vegetation, garbage and junk prohibited
 
   
157.99   Penalty
§ 157.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to regulate and
control the growth and require the cutting and removal of weeds and other rank
vegetation on all parcels of real estate on residential and commercial
properties in the unincorporated areas of Warrick County not otherwise exempted
herein. It is further declared that the purpose of this chapter is to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare, and enhance the environment for the
people of Warrick County by making it unlawful for residential and commercial
property owners and occupants to allow a public nuisance as defined in I.C. 32-
30-6-6 to exist on any real property located within Warrick County.
(BC Ord. 2018-07, passed 4-23-18; Am. BC Ord. 2023-06, passed 4-10-23)
§ 157.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless otherwise designated.
   ABANDONED VEHICLES. Shall have the same meaning as I.C. 9-13-2-1 as any
motor vehicle that is at least three model years old, is mechanically
inoperable, and is left on private property continuously in a location visible
from public property for more than 20 days. ABANDONED VEHICLES do not include
farm equipment, farm implements, or machinery parts that are, or may be, used
in agricultural operations, or may be considered antique farming implements.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The individual employed or appointed by Warrick
County to enforce the terms of this chapter. The term shall also refer to the
Code Enforcement Officer's deputies, assistants, and employees.
   GARBAGE. Includes putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, and any refuse,
rubbish, and yard waste as defined herein.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. The Code Enforcement Officer, the Warrick County
Commissioner in whose district the alleged violation of this chapter is
located, and/or other employee of Warrick County as specifically designated by
the Board of Commissioners of Warrick County in their discretion.
   JUNK. Includes, without limitation, abandoned vehicles, parts of vehicles,
scrap iron and/or other metals, wood, paper, rags, rubber tires, bottles, and/
or any dismantled household appliances or parts thereof, whether inoperable or
operable.
   OWNER. A person holding legal or equitable title to real property used for
residential or commercial purposes within the unincorporated limits of Warrick
County, Indiana.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
trust, or any commercial association or venture, however defined.
   PUTRESCIBLE. Substances which are subject to organic decomposition.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including animal
wastes, and ashes.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery, construction debris, and similar materials.
   WEEDS and RANK VEGETATION. Includes any excessive growth of vegetation,
other than trees, bushes, shrubs, or ornamental plants, that is nine inches or
more in height and/or listed as a weed in the U.S. Department of Agriculture
publication entitled Common Weeds of the United States, or in any similar
government publication. This term does not include agricultural crops,
including hay and pasture, which are maintained for that purpose in areas crops
are permitted to be grown.
   YARD WASTE. Severed grass, weeds, leaves, brush, tree trimmings, hedge
clipping, and other yard and garden materials.
(BC Ord. 2018-07, passed 4-23-18; Am. BC Ord. 2023-06, passed 4-10-23)
§ 157.03 WEEDS, RANK VEGETATION, GARBAGE AND JUNK PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Weeds, rank vegetation, garbage, and junk declared public nuisances.
Weeds, rank vegetation, garbage, and junk as herein defined that constitute
violations of this chapter are declared to be public nuisances due to the
danger to the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Warrick
County.
   (B)   Violation. It is a violation of this chapter for an owner to allow
weeds, rank vegetation, garbage, and/or junk to accumulate on real property
located within Warrick County used for residential or commercial purposes,
thereby creating a public nuisance affecting a neighborhood or community as may
be determined by the Hearing Authority.
   (C)   Prevention of public nuisances. All owners shall cut and remove weeds
and rank vegetation and shall keep their real property clear of garbage and
junk.
   (D)   Violation report and violation notice. All alleged violations of this
chapter shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   Violation reports. Violations of this chapter shall be reported on
forms to be provided by and submitted to the Administrator of the Warrick
County Commissioners ("violation report"). A violation report may be submitted
by any resident of Warrick County in the same neighborhood or community of the
alleged nuisance.
      (2)   Inspections. Following the submission of a violation report by one
or more neighbors or community members or the applicable Township Trustee that
alleges a violation of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer, or the
County Commissioner in whose district the alleged violation is located, or
their designee, shall inspect the real property that is the subject of
violation reports and file an inspection report with the Warrick County
Administrator, which shall include the following determinations:
         (a)   Whether the owner has violated this chapter;
         (b)   If any of the violation reports were filed for purposes other
than to report a violation under this chapter; and
         (c)   If the violation reports were submitted by neighbors or
community members.
      (3)   Violation notices. Upon determination that the owner has committed
a violation of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer, or their designee,
shall issue a written notice ("violation notice") to the owner and any
occupants of the property. The violation notice shall identify the violation(s)
and order the owner to mitigate the public nuisance within ten business days
from the date on which the owner has been served the violation notice
("abatement period"). Personal service, service by U.S. certified mail, or any
other manner of service recognized in the Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure
shall constitute proper service upon the owner and any occupants of the
property for the purposes of this chapter.
      (4)   Reinspection and determination of penalty. Following the abatement
period, the Code Enforcement Officer, or their designee(s), shall conduct a
reinspection of the real property to determine whether the owner has mitigated
the public nuisance(s) identified in the violation notice and whether any
violations of this chapter remain on the property. In the event public nuisance
(s) still exist on the property at the time of said reinspection, the Code
Enforcement Officer, or their designee(s), shall be authorized to issue a fine
to the owner for continued violation of this chapter in accordance with §
157.99.
      (5)   Abandoned vehicle abatement procedure. In the event a violation
report identifies one or more abandoned vehicles on the subject property, the
county shall comply with all due process requirements for notice and abatements
of those abandoned vehicles as specified under Indiana law, including I.C. 9-
22-1 et seq.
   (E)   Violation notice appeal. Any violation notice issued pursuant to this
chapter may be appealed to the Hearing Authority if written notice of appeal is
served on the Hearing Authority by the owner prior to the expiration of the
abatement period. The timely appeal of a violation notice shall toll the
abatement period pending the issuance of a decision thereon by the Hearing
Authority.
   (F)   Abatement of public nuisance.
      (1)   Weeds and rank vegetation. In the event the violation(s) set forth
in a violation notice relate to the presence of weeds and/or rank vegetation,
and if the owner fails to timely abate each such violation set forth in the
violation notice within the abatement period, the Code Enforcement Officer, or
the County Commissioner in whose district the violation is located, shall be
permitted to abate the public nuisance in the form of cutting or removing weeds
and/or rank vegetation. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or said County
Commissioner, or their designee(s), shall be authorized to enter any area
surrounded by an enclosure and to remove any lock or barrier to entry affixed
to such enclosure, in order to access and abate said public nuisance. The
procedure as set forth in this division (F)(1) relating to the entry upon
property to abate a public nuisance violation, and the subsequent abatement of
the public nuisance violation in the fonn of cutting or removing weeds and/or
rank vegetation, shall not require an order of abatement issued by Warrick
County Superior or Circuit Courts.
      (2)   Garbage, junk, and abandoned vehicles. For all other violations of
this chapter not related to the existence of weeds and/or rank vegetation, if
the owner fails to timely abate each violation set forth in a violation notice
within the abatement period, the Code Enforcement Officer or the County
Attorney may file an action for an ordinance violation in the Warrick County
Superior or Circuit Courts seeking an order of abatement of said nuisance. Said
order of abatement shall grant the county or its designees permission to abate
the public nuisance, including the removal of garbage and/or junk and any
abandoned vehicles identified in the violation notice.
      (3)   Abatement costs. Upon completion of the abatement as set forth in
this division (F), the Code Enforcement Officer or the County Commissioner in
whose district the violation is located, or their designee(s), shall prepare a
certified statement as to the actual administrative and other costs incurred by
Warrick County in taking such action in addition to any penalties provided
herein ("abatement costs"), and shall serve a copy of the invoice on the owner.
The owner shall, within ten calendar days from the date on which the owner is
served with such invoice ("payment period"), pay in full the amount stated
thereon payable to the Warrick County Board of Commissioners.
   (G)   Appeal of costs. Any invoice for abatement costs issued pursuant to
this chapter may be appealed to the Hearing Authority if written notice of
appeal is served by the owner on the Hearing Authority within ten calendar days
from the date on which the invoice is served on the owner. The timely appeal of
an invoice shall toll the payment period pending the issuance of a decision
thereon by the Hearing Authority.
   (H)   Failure to pay. If the owner fails to timely pay an invoice for
abatement costs issued pursuant to this chapter, the Hearing Authority, or its
designee, shall certify to the Warrick County Auditor the amount of the invoice
for abatement costs, plus any additional administrative costs incurred in the
certification of the same. The Warrick County Auditor shall place the total
amount so certified on the tax duplicate for the property at issue, and the
total amount, including any accrued interest, shall be due and payable with the
parcel's real estate tax bill.
   (I)   Time of appeals. The Hearing Authority shall issue a decision granting
or denying, in whole or in part, any timely requested appeal of notice of
violation or invoice for abatement costs within 30 calendar days following
receipt of the same, and may in its discretion meet with the owner to assist it
in reaching a decision on the appeal. The date on which the Hearing Authority's
decision is served on the owner shall thereafter become the first calendar day
of the abatement period or payment period, as applicable.
   (J)   Miscellaneous.
      (1)   Venue. The Warrick County Superior Court shall be the court of
proper venue and jurisdiction for the enforcement of this chapter and for any
appeals from the Hearing Authority's final decision as to any violation.
      (2)   Cumulative remedy. This chapter supplements and does not limit any
other remedy or action available in law or equity regarding the subject matter
hereof.
      (3)   Applicability. This chapter shall not apply to the following:
         (a)   Agricultural and industrial operations as described in I.C. 32-
30-6-9;
         (b)   Forestry operations as described in I.C. 32-30-6-11;
         (c)   Real property upon which agricultural crops are cultivated,
including hay and pasture, as described in I.C. 36-7-10.1-3(a); and
         (d)   Warrick County municipal corporations as defined in I.C. 36-1-2-
10, and Warrick County governmental units, departments, and school
corporations.
      (4)   Abatement vendors. The Board of County Commissioners may invite and
accept no less than two reasonable bids for abatement vendors who shall be
private businesses and not any department of the county. Said vendors shall
provide abatement services as independent contractors for violations of this
chapter including the abatement of weeds and rank vegetation, garbage, and
junk, and the bids may be renewed and updated at various times when deemed
appropriate by the Board of Commissioners.
      (5)   Public Nuisance Fund. Any and all abatement costs, fees, penalties,
and fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into a Public
Nuisance Fund or other fund as determined by the county fiscal body for the
express purpose to cover the costs of administration of the enforcement of this
chapter.
(BC Ord. 2018-07, passed 4-23-18; Am. BC Ord. 2019-06, passed 3-25-19; Am. BC
Ord. 2023-06, passed 4-10-23)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall incur a fine
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the following:
      (1)   First violation: $100;
      (2)   Second violation: $500; and
      (3)   Third and subsequent violations: $1,000.
   (B)   In addition to a fine as described in division (A) above, any person
who violates this chapter shall be required to pay any abatement costs incurred
by Warrick County in accordance with § 157.03(F)(3), which may include the
following at the discretion of the Hearing Authority:
      (1)   The actual administrative costs incurred by Warrick County, or its
designee, in issuing the violation notice;
      (2)   The actual filing fees incurred in filing the ordinance violation
in court and attorney fees of up to $250;
      (3)   The actual administrative and other costs incurred by the Warrick
County in abating a public nuisance; and
      (4)   The actual administrative costs of Warrick County certifying the
abatement costs to the County Auditor.
(BC Ord. 2018-07, passed 4-23-18; Am. BC Ord. 2023-06, passed 4-10-23)
CHAPTER 158: NOISE
Section
   
158.01   Definitions
   
158.02   General prohibitions
   
158.03   Specific restrictions
   
158.04   Noise caused by motor vehicles
   
158.05   Stationary sources
   
158.06   Exemptions
   
158.07   Enforcement
   
158.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Scientific Definitions
   
Appendix B:   Octave Band Breakdowns of dBA Limits
§ 158.01 DEFINITIONS.
   All terminology used in this chapter shall be in conformance with applicable
publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its
successor body. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The loudness of a sound measured through a filtering
device intended to stimulate human hearing. The level is designated db(A) or
dBA.
   COMMERCIAL ZONE. Zones C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 as defined in the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for Warrick County, Indiana.
   DECIBEL ("dB"). The unit for measuring the sound pressure level of a sound.
   FREQUENCY. The objective way to describe the pitch of sound.
   HERTZ. The unit for measuring the frequency of a sound (sometimes called
CYCLES PER SECOND.)
   INDUSTRIAL ZONE. Zones M-1, M-2, and M-3 as defined in the Comprehensive
Zoning Ordinance for Warrick County, Indiana.
   LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle with gross vehicular weight less than
8,000 pounds, including automobiles, vans, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles,
motor scooters, dune buggies, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, go-karts,
minibikes, trail bikes, and light trucks.
   MODIFIED EXHAUST SYSTEM. Any exhaust system in which the original noise
abatement device has been removed, altered, or replaced to produce more noise.
   NOISE. Any unwanted sound.
   OCTAVE BAND. A way to divide the entire frequency range of sounds into
sections for more accurate measurement.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any noise for which the information content is ambiguously
communicated to the listener, including understandable spoken speech,
comprehension of whether a voice is raised, agitated, or normal, or
comprehensible musical rhythms.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONES. Zones R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1D, R-2, R-2A, R- 2B, R-3,
R-0, and R-MH as defined in the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for Warrick
County, Indiana.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument designed to measure sound pressure levels.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. An objective way to describe the loudness of a sound.
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
§ 158.02 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall make or cause to be made any noise that unreasonably annoys,
disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or
welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property's value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific
restrictions listed in the following sections.
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
§ 158.03 SPECIFIC RESTRICTIONS.
   The following acts are declared to be unlawful:
   (A)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments, tape or record players,
amplifiers, and similar devices. Operating or permitting the use or operation
of any radio, television set, musical instrument, tape or record player,
amplifier, and/or similar device(s) in such a manner as to be plainly audible
across property boundaries or through partitions common to two or more persons
within a building;
   (B)   Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the use or operations of
any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
lawnmower, or similar device used outdoors between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. in such a manner that will disturb or annoy any reasonable person
nearby;
   (C)   Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction, drilling, or demolition between the hours of 7:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner that will disturb or annoy any
reasonable person nearby, except:
      (1)   In the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit issued by the Office of the Board of
Commissioners; which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three
days while the emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed for periods
of three days while the emergency continues; or
      (2)   If the Office of the Board of Commissioners determines that public
health and safety will not be impaired by sound made by such work between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and that loss or inconvenience would result
to any party in interest, and the Office of the Board of Commissioners grants
permission for such work to be done between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is issued
or during the progress of the work;
   (D)   Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle in any county highway in
a manner that makes unreasonable noise and continuing to do so after being
asked to stop, except in an emergency or when required by law;
   (E)   Participation in parties or social gatherings. Participation in any
party or social gathering between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. giving
rise to noise that is plainly audible across property boundaries or between
partitions common to two or more persons within a building;
   (F)   Yelling or shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing
in any public street or public place, particularly between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in a manner that makes unreasonable noise and continuing to
do so after being asked to stop, except when a permit granted therefor for some
special occasion is in effect;
   (G)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any loud or
raucous noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church, or court while such premises are in use, or adjacent to any hospital
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of that institution or which
unduly disturbs patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are
displayed in the streets indicating that such premises is a school, hospital,
or court street; and
   (H)   Animals. An owner of an animal determined to be a nuisance under §
131.11 shall be subject to a fine under §
131.99.
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
§ 158.04 NOISE CAUSED BY MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DEVICE. Any radio, tape recorder/player, compact disc player, stereo
system, record player, television, or other electronic device capable of
producing or reproducing any sound, noise, musical rhythm or vocal sound.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, such as but not limited to, automobiles,
truck, motorcycles, or any other vehicle propelled or operated by a mechanical
means of power.
      PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any noise, musical sound, musical rhythm, or any other
sound that is electronically amplified or broadcast in any manner that can be
heard from a distance greater than 20 feet from the source of the sound.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC PLACE. Shall include, without limitation,
any avenue, street, road, alleyway, easement, parkway, highway, sidewalk, park
or other public place that is owned or controlled by any governmental entity.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful within the unincorporated limits of Warrick
County for any person to cause the sound level of noise emitted during the
operation of a motor vehicle to be plainly audible or distract any person at a
distance of not less than 20 feet from the edge of the lane being traveled by
the person alleged to be in violation of this division.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which
causes excessive noise as a result of a defective or modified rapid
acceleration, de-acceleration, engine revving, or tire squealing.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful within the unincorporated limits of Warrick
County for the owner, operator, passenger, or other person to play, use,
operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated, any device located on or
within any motor vehicle at such a level so to be plainly audible or distract
any person at a distance greater than 20 feet from said motor vehicle.
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
§ 158.05 STATIONARY SOURCES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the sound pressure level
to exceed the limits listed below at any point on the boundary of the property
where the person is located:
      (1)   If the person is located within a residential zone: 55 dBA at all
times;
      (2)   If the person is located within commercial zone: 55 dBA at all
times; or
      (3)   If the person is located within an industrial zone: 66 dBA at all
times.
   (B)   If the property boundary lies between two of the zones listed above,
the lower limit shall apply regardless of the zone in which the person creating
the noise is located.
   (C)   In addition to the above, no person within a residential or a
commercial zone shall make or cause to be made any earth-shaking vibrations
perceptible without the aid of instruments beyond the property boundary of the
vibration source.
   (D)   No person within an industrial zone shall make or cause to be made any
earth-shaking vibrations perceptible without the aid of instruments beyond the
zone boundary of the zone in which the vibration source is located.
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
§ 158.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to the following:
   (A)   Sounds incidental to agricultural activities;
   (B)   The emission of sound for the purposes of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of work
to prevent or alleviate physical or property damage threatened or caused by a
public calamity or other emergency;
   (C)   Sounds incidental to outside school activities sponsored by a school
located within the county;
   (D)   Special events sanctioned by the state, county, and/or municipal parks
conducted within the rules established by the Warrick County Department of
Parks and Recreation; or
   (E)   When a special use ordinance is found to be in conflict with this
chapter, the special use ordinance and permit shall prevail.
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
§ 158.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced through the Warrick County
Sheriff’s Office. Citations issued shall be filed with the Warrick Superior
Court, County Division, and may be filed by Warrick County's Code Enforcement
Officer or the Warrick County Attorney.
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
§ 158.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Noise caused by motor vehicles. Any person who violates any provision
of §
158.04 for the first time within any 12 month period shall be fined an amount
of not less than $300. Each subsequent violation of §
158.04 within the same 12 month period shall result in a fine of not less than
$1,000 but shall not exceed $2,500. Each day such a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate violation for purposes of this division.
   (B)   Other violations. Any person found in violation of any other provision
of this chapter other than §
158.04 shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $2,500 for each
such violation. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation for purposes of this division.
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
APPENDIX A: SCIENTIFIC DEFINITIONS
§ 1 SCIENTIFIC DEFINITIONS.
   The scientific definitions of the terms used in this chapter shall be:
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level of a sound measured through
an a-weighted filter network. The level read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
   DECIBEL (dB). The unit used for comparing the sound pressure level of a
sound to the sound pressure level of a reference sound having a sound pressure
of 20 micropascals.
   FREQUENCY. The number of periodic oscillations, vibrations, or waves per
unit time (usually one second).
   HERTZ. The unit for measuring the frequency of a sound. The number of hertz
is the number of cycles per second of a periodic sound pressure wave.
   OCTAVE BAND. A portion of the entire sound frequency spectrum contained
between two frequencies, A and B, such that A = 2B.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm (base 10) of the ratio of
the measured sound pressure to a reference pressure of 20 micropascals. The
sound pressure level is expressed in decibels (dB).
      Sound Pressure A
      SPL = 20LOG10 10
      Sound Pressure B
      Sound Pressure A = Measure Sound Pressure
      Sound Pressure B = Referenced Sound Pressure
      (10 Micropascals)
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
APPENDIX B: OCTAVE BAND BREAKDOWNS OF dBA LIMITS
§ 1 OCTAVE BAND BREAKDOWN OF dBA LIMITS.
   The octave-band breakdowns of the dBA limits used in this chapter shall be:
   (A)   For a residential zone.
 
For a Residential Zone (55 dBA)
Octave Band Center Frequency (hz) Maximum Boundary SPL (dB)
31.5                              72
1,000                             45
2,000                             39
4,000                             34
8,000                             32
 
   (B)   For a commercial zone.
 
For a Commercial Zone (64 dBA)
Octave Band Center Frequency Maximum Boundary SPL (dB)
31.5                         79
1,000                        55
2,000                        50
4,000                        46
8,000                        43
 
   (C)   For an industrial zone.
 
For an Industrial Zone (dBA)
Octave Band Center Frequency Maximum Boundary SPL (dB)
31.5                         80
1,000                        57
2,000                        52
4,000                        48
8,000                        45
 
(BC Ord. 2023-14, passed 7-24-23)
CHAPTER 159: MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
Section
   
159.01   Maintenance of sidewalks, generally
   
159.02   Condition of sidewalk
   
159.03   Notice to repair sidewalk
§ 159.01 MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS, GENERALLY.
   (A)   The responsibility for care, maintenance, and repairs of sidewalks
located in unincorporated areas of the county shall be that of any landowner
whose property abuts a sidewalk.
   (B)   All repairs of sidewalks must comply with all applicable county
ordinances regarding construction of public sidewalks.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create or establish any
third-party cause of action against a landowner in the county with respect to
the condition or maintenance of a sidewalk located in unincorporated areas that
abut the landowner’s property.
(Ord. 2024-18, passed 10-28-24)
§ 159.02 CONDITION OF SIDEWALK.
   A landowner whose property abuts any sidewalk located in unincorporated
areas of the county shall maintain and repair that portion of the sidewalk that
abuts the landowner's property at the landowner's own expense, as and when
needed, including but not limited to:
   (A)   Repairs of damaged or broken sidewalk;
   (B)   Removal of snow and ice; and
   (C)   Removal of vehicles, debris, vegetation, or other obstructions.
(Ord. 2024-18, passed 10-28-24)
§ 159.03 NOTICE TO REPAIR SIDEWALK.
   (A)   A landowner shall perform all repairs to such portion of a sidewalk
abutting the landowner's property located in an unincorporated area within 30
days of being notified, either in person or by mail, by the Board of County
Commissioners or its designee. However, nothing in this chapter requires the
Board of County Commissioners to undertake any routine inspections of sidewalks
in the unincorporated area of the county.
   (B)   If a landowner fails to perform the repairs to that portion of the
sidewalk as directed in the notice, then the county may hire an independent
contractor to perform the repairs. Upon completion of the repairs, the county
shall prepare a certified statement as to the actual costs it incurred in
performing the repairs, and shall serve a copy of the invoice to the landowner.
Within ten calendar days from the date on which the landowner was served with
the invoice, the landowner shall pay in full the amount stated thereon, payable
to the Board of County Commissioners.
   (C)   If the landowner fails to timely pay an invoice described under §
159.03(B), the Board of County Commissioners, or its designee, shall certify to
the County Auditor the amount of the invoice, plus any additional
administrative costs in certification of the invoice. The County Auditor shall
place the total amount so certified on the tax duplicate for the landowner’s
property abutting the sidewalk that was the subject of repairs, and the total
amount, including any accrued interest, shall be due and payable with the
property’s real estate tax bill.
(Ord. 2024-18, passed 10-28-24)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS AND DETACHMENTS
      
III.   ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREAS
      
IV.   FRANCHISES
      
V.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
VI.   REZONINGS
      
VII.   VACATIONS
      
VIII.   STREET NAME CHANGES
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
BC    6-13-  Agreement for the transfer of jurisdiction of various roads in the county
Ord.  85     from the local highway system to the state highway system
-
BC           Interlocal cooperation agreement between the Town of Newburgh and the
Res.  3-14-  county, regarding allowing the Sheriff to act as dispatcher for the
1986- 86     Newburgh Police Department and Newburgh police officers to act in a law
2            enforcement capacity for the Sheriff outside the corporate boundary of the
             town
BC           Joint resolution with Town of Lynnville designating the county as the
Res.  2-22-  single agency to administer building rules and inspections within the
1988- 88     boundaries of the town
6
BC           Joint resolution with Town of Tennyson designating the county as the single
Res.  3-28-  agency to administer building rules and inspections within the boundaries
1988- 88     of the town
7
             Interlocal cooperation agreement between the City of Boonville and the
BC           county, regarding allowing the Sheriff to act as dispatcher for the
Res.  3-28-  Boonville Police Department and Boonville police officers to act in a law
1988- 88     enforcement capacity for the Sheriff in those areas located within one mile
9            of the corporate limits of the city, which area is outside the corporate
             limits of the city
BC           Approving the Articles of Agreement and joining in the forming of an
Res.  7-24-  organization to be known and designated as the Evansville Urban
1989- 89     Transportation Study
12
BC           Joint resolution with City of Boonville designating the county as the
Res.  2-5-90 single agency to administer building rules and inspections within the
1990-        boundaries of the city
4
BC           Joint resolution with Town of Elberfeld designating the county as the
Res.  4-23-  single agency to administer building rules and inspections within the
1990- 90     boundaries of the town
8
BC
Res.  2-4-91 Concurrence with a proposal to change portions of certain roadways in the
1991-        county within the federal aid system
06
             Interlocal cooperation agreement between the Town of Tennyson and the
BC           county, regarding allowing the Sheriff to act as dispatcher for the
Res.  6-22-  Tennyson Town Marshal and Tennyson Town Marshal to act in a law enforcement
1992- 92     capacity for the Sheriff in those areas located within one mile of the
13           corporate limits of the town, which area is outside the corporate limits of
             the town
BC
Ord.  7-2-92 Authorizing execution of an interlocal cooperation agreement (Town of
1992-        Tennyson)
17
BC
Res.  6-8-98 Approving an interlocal cooperation agreement with the town of Tennyson
1998-
6
BC
Res.  8-24-  Joint resolution with Ohio Township Trustee establishing a common and
1998- 98     unified plan of group insurance for the employees of Warrick County
9
BC
Res.  10-26- Approving and ratifying interlocal agreement between Warrick County
1998- 98     Commissioners and the City of Boonville
14
BC
Res.  12-31- Authorizing a joint city/county traffic feasibility study leading to a
1998- 98     Boonville bypass proposal
18
CC
Res.  2-4-99 Approving the formation of a sewer district in Pigeon Township
1999-
03
BC
Res.  9-27-  Authorizing local match commitment for the Self-Sufficiency Demonstration
1999- 99     Project
9
BC
Res.
1999- 11-22-
10    99     Enabling the county to participate in the TEA-21 Grant application process
and   12-2-  as one of the eight lead counties seeking federal funding for
CC    99     transportation improvement studies
Res.
1999-
9
BC           Authorizing execution and delivery of master equipment lease/purchase
Res.  9-13-  agreement and related instruments by and between the county and Old
2000- 00     National Bank
4
BC           Approving the Southwest Indiana 2000 Comprehensive Economic Development
Res.  6-13-  Strategy and supporting the creation of the Southwest Indiana Economic
2001- 01     Development District
06
BC
Res.  5-1-02 Authorizing an agreement for potholing request at Lockwood Lane and Epworth
2002-        Road in the Town of Newburgh
07
BC
Res.  4-21-  Authorizing a master equipment lease/purchase agreement
2004- 04
04
BC
Res.  9-15-  Approving an amendment to Evansville Urban Transportation Study (EUTS)
2004- 04     Articles of Agreement
06
BC
Ord.  10-14- Approving an interlocal agreement with the Town of Newburgh regarding the
2004- 04     Newburgh Master Lift Station Project
13
BC
Res.  3-16-  Approving the interlocal agreement with Vanderburgh County, Indiana
2005- 05     regarding the construction of Lynch Road
06
CC           Approving an interlocal agreement between Warrick County, Indiana and
Res.  4-7-05 Vanderburgh County, Indiana regarding the financing and construction of the
2005-        extension of Lynch Road
02
CC
Res.  5-4-06 Authorizing the execution of a memorandum of agreement between Warrick
2006-        County and Southern Indiana Gas and Electric Company
08
BC
Res.  8-10-  Approving and adopting a memorandum of agreement transferring jurisdiction
2009- 09     of a roadway between Warrick County and the Town of Newburgh
13
CC
Ord.  7-9-15 Authorizing the creation of a Regional Development Authority with Gibson,
2015-        Posey, and Vanderburgh Counties
02
BC
Res.  5-22-  Waiving recoupment rights related to the Newburgh Master Lift Station
2017- 17     Project and its interlocal agreement
13
Res.         Authorizing resolution pursuant to an agreement between the government and
2018- 4-24-  Deere & Company dated January 30, 2018 by entering into an installment
10    18     purchase agreement with Old National Bank to assist in the funding of the
             government’s strategic plan
BC
Res.  5-14-  Approving guaranteed energy savings contract for renovation of the historic
2018- 18     old courthouse
12
BC           Approving an interlocal agreement between the Warrick County Economic
Res.  3-25-  Development Department and the Warrick County Department of Parks and
2019- 19     Recreation for the design, bidding, construction, funding, operation,
03           management, and maintenance of the Friedman Park Events Center
BC           Approving an interlocal agreement between the county and Gibson County for
Res.  5-13-  the transfer and housing of Indiana Department of Corrections ineligible
2019- 19     inmates according to Indiana law
04
BC
Res.  10-28- Approving an installment purchase agreement of three dump trucks for the
2019- 19     Warrick County Highway Department
08
BC
Res.  4-26-  Approving an interlocal agreement between Warrick County and the Warrick
2021- 21     County Solid Waste Management District
06
BC           Authorizing the assignment to the Indiana Building Corporation (as lessor
Res.  3-25-  to issue lease rental revenue bonds) of the CMC contract with Garmong
2024- 24     Construction Services to pay for its provision of a construction manager
04           for the construction and equipping of a new Sheriff’s Office and Security
             Facility
BC           Authorizing the county to enter into a lease-purchase agreement with the
Res.  5-13-  Caterpillar Financial Services Corporation to purchase, acquire and lease
2024- 24     personal property
07
            
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS AND DETACHMENTS
 
Ord. No.        Date Passed Description
                            Granting the petition of the City of Boonville
                            seeking consent to annex part of the west half of
BC Res. 1988-14 8-22-88     Section 35, Township 5 South, Range 8 West and part
                            of the East half of Section 34, Township 5 south,
                            Range 8 West and lying in Warrick County
                           
 
TABLE III: ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREAS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.          Date Passed Description
                              Establishing 9.03 acres owned by Boonville Ready
CC Res. 1986-3    9-2-86      Mix Corp. in Ohio Township as an economic
                              revitalization area
                              Establishing 6 acres more or less and owned by
CC Res. 1988-03   5-12-88     Industrial Woodkraft, Inc., in Boon Township, as
                              an economic revitalization area
                              Establishing 4.653 acres owned by James O. Scales
CC Res. 1989-1    5-11-89     and Mark F. Bush d/b/a JM Leasing in Boon
                              Township as an economic revitalization area
                              Establishing 4.653 acres owned by James O. Scales
CC Res. 1989-2    6-15-89     and Mark F. Bush in Boon Township as an economic
                              revitalization area
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              property tax abatement for redevelopment or
                              rehabilitation of property and the construction
CC Res. 1991-1A   7-11-91     of structures to be used for the medical
                              treatment and education of the surrounding
                              community at the SE corner of I-164 and Lloyd
                              Expressway intersection (Deaconess Development
                              Corporation)
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1991-2    9-3-91      revitalization area for Deaconess Development
                              Corporation Real Estate Improvements Project
                              Declaring as an economic revitalization area the
                              south half of Section 7, Township 4 South, Range
                              9 West, lying east of Indiana State Road 57; the
CC Res. 1992-19   12-3-92     north half of Section 18, Township 4 South, Range
                              9 West, lying east of Indiana State Road 57; and
                              that portion of the South half of Section 18,
                              Township 4 South, Range 9 West, lying north of
                              Interstate No. 64 all in Warrick County
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              property tax abatement for redevelopment or
CC Res. 1992-22A  12-3-92     rehabilitation of property and the construction
                              of structures to be used for manufacturing and
                              support office at 5688 Prospect Drive, Newburgh,
                              In.
                              Preliminary resolution declaring an economic
CC Res. 1994-2    1-6-94      revitalization area for property tax abatement
                              for redevelopment of property located on Bell
                              Oaks Drive extended
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1994-9    7-7-94      revitalization area for property abatement for
                              Woodcraft Industries, Inc.
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1994-10   7-7-94      revitalization area for property tax abatement
                              for Sunrise Development Group
                              Confirming declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1995-4    4-13-95     revitalization area for property located at 977
                              Hyrock Blvd.
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1995-14   8-16-95     revitalization area for property located at 3133
                              Business Park Drive
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1996-2    1-4-96      revitalization area for property located at 800,
                              822 and 844 Office Park Drive Warrick County
                              Industrial Park (Inman)
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1996-4    5-2-96      revitalization area for property located at 3111
                              Warrick Drive, Warrick County Industrial Park
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 1996-6    6-6-96      property located at lots 10 and 11 Warrick
                              Research and industrial Center #3 Subdivision
CC Res. 1997-2    1-2-97      Confirming declaration of economic revitalization
                              area for property tax abatement
                              Confirming declaration of economic revitalization
CC Res. 1998-2    11-12-98    area for property located at Lot 10 Warrick
                              Research and Industrial Center #3 Subdivision
                              Confirming resolution of the Warrick County
                              Council confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1997-2    12-4-97     revitalization area for property located at lot
                              ten Warrick Research and Industrial Center #3
                              subdivision
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 1998-5    5-7-98      property tax abatement for the property located
                              at 10300 Telephone Road, Chandler, Indiana
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1998-5    5-7-98      revitalization area for property tax abatement
                              for the property located at 10300 Telephone Road,
                              Chandler, Indiana
                              Declaration an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 1998-8    8-6-98      property tax abatement for the property located
                              at 11788 Blue Bell Road, Elberfeld, Indiana
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1998-9    8-6-98      revitalization area for property tax abatement
                              for the property located at 11788 Blue Bell Road,
                              Elberfeld, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 1998-10   10-7-98     property tax abatement for property located at
                              3111 Warrick Drive, Boonville, Indiana
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 1998-10   10-7-98     revitalization area for property tax abatement
                              for the property located at 3111 Warrick Drive,
                              Boonville, Indiana
CC Res. 1999-5    4-8-99      Confirming the declaration of an economic
                              revitalization area for property tax abatement
                              Approving a statement of benefits regarding real
CC Res. 1999-7    8-5-99      estate improvements to be constructed at 977
                              Hyrock Blvd., Boonville, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2000-4    6-1-00      property located at 5622 Vann Road, Newburgh,
                              Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2000-5    7-6-00      property located at 11744 Blue Bell Road,
                              Elberfeld, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2000-6    7-6-00      property located at 5622 Vann Road, Newburgh,
                              Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2000-8    11-2-00     property located at 5744 Prospect Drive,
                              Newburgh, Indiana
CC Res. 2000-9    11-2-00     Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              property located in Anderson Township
                            (H + H Celcon, LLC)
CC Res. 2000-10   12-7-00     Confirming an economic revitalization area for
                              property located in Anderson Township
                            (H + H Celcon, LLC)
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2000-11   12-7-00     property located at Elberfeld, Indiana
                              (Euronique, Inc.)
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2001-02   1-5-01      property located at Elberfeld, Indiana
                              (Euronique, Inc.)
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2001-03   2-8-01      property located at 7599 St. John's Road,
                              Elberfeld, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2001-04   4-5-01      property located at 7599 St. John's Road,
                              Elberfeld, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2001-05   5-3-01      property located at 5499 Prospect Drive,
                              Newburgh, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2001-06   6-7-01      property located at 5499 Prospect Drive,
                              Newburgh, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2003-1    3-6-03      property located at 7844 Highway 66, Newburgh,
                              Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2003-2    3-6-03      property located at 7844 Highway 66, Newburgh,
                              Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              property located south of Highway 66, west of
CC Res. 2003-3    4-3-03      Yankeetown railroad line, north of the Ohio River
                              and east of Vanada Road at Heritage Federal
                              Credit Unit in Anderson Township
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
                              property located south of Highway 66, west of
CC Res. 2003-4    4-3-03      Yankeetown railroad line, north of the Ohio River
                              and east of Vanada Road at Heritage Federal
                              Credit Unit in Anderson Township
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2003-05   4-3-03      property located at 7844 Highway 66, Newburgh,
                              Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2003-06   4-3-03      property located at 7844 Highway 66, Newburgh,
                              Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2004-02   3-11-04     property located at 7190, 7160, 7110 Parker
                              Drive, Newburgh, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2004-03   3-11-04     property located at 7190, 7160, 7110 Parker
                              Drive, Newburgh, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2004-04   3-11-04     property located at 4760, 4790, 4820, and part of
                              4840 Rosebud Lane, Newburgh, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2004-05   3-11-04     property located at 4760, 4790, 4820, and part of
                              4840 Rosebud Lane, Newburgh, Indiana
                              Confirming declaration of economic revitalization
                              area for property located at Lots 1-11 in the
                              Warrick Research and Industrial Center #3; Lot 1
CC Res. 2005-11   12-8-05     in the Warrick Research and Industrial Center #4;
                              Lots 1-17 in the Warrick Research and Industrial
                              Center # 5; and Lots 18-31 in the Warrick
                              Research and Industrial Center #6
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 2006-01   1-6-06      revitalization area for property located at
                              Warrick Research & Industrial Center on Prospect
                              Drive
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2007-4    6-7-07      redevelopment property known as Mohler
                              Technology, located at 2355 Eby Road in
                              Boonville, Indiana.
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2008-4    2-14-08     Lots 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 in the Roslin
                              Industrial Park
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 2008-05   4-10-08     revitalization area for Lots 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
                              and 14 in the Roslin Industrial Park
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for Lot
CC Res. 2008-09   6-5-08      2B in the Warrick County Industrial Park, Section
                              2C
                              Confirming declaration of an economic
CC Res. 2008-10   7-10-08     revitalization area for Lot 2B in the Warrick
                              County Industrial Park, Section 2C
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for the
CC Res. 2008-11   8-7-08      North Warrick Industrial Park, Subdivision
                              Section 1, in Elberfield, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for Lot
CC Res. 2009-01-2 5-7-09      11 in the Warrick Research and Industrial Center
                              No. 3
CC Res. 2009-02   6-4-09      Declaring an economic revitalization area for Lot
                              11 of the Warrick Research and Industrial Center
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for BC
CC Res. 2010-03   7-8-10      Holdings, LLC, to redevelop and/or rehabilitate
                              real property located at 11744 Blue Bell Road,
                              Elberfield, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2010-04   7-8-10      Fibertech, Inc., to redevelop and/or rehabilitate
                              real property located at 11744 Blue Bell Road,
                              Elberfield, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for BC
CC Res. 2010-05   8-5-10      Holdings, LLC, to redevelop and/or rehabilitate
                              real property located at 11744 Blue Bell Road,
                              Elberfield, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2010-06   8-5-10      Fibertech, Inc., to redevelop and/or rehabilitate
                              real property located at 11744 Blue Bell Road,
                              Elberfield, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for Leo
                              Brown Group, LLC, to redevelop and/or
CC Res. 2010-07   12-2-10     rehabilitate property and to construct structures
                              to be used for a healthcare facility on Stahl
                              Road in Warrick County, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2011-01   1-6-11      Leo Brown Group, LLC, to redevelop and/or
                              rehabilitate real property on Stahl Road in
                              Warrick County, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2011-03   5-5-11      Prime Foods, Inc., to redevelop and/or
                              rehabilitate real property in Lot 2B in the
                              Warrick County Industrial Park, Section 2C
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2011-04   6-2-11      Prime Foods, Inc., to redevelop and/or
                              rehabilitate real property in Lot 2B in the
                              Warrick County Industrial Park, Section 2C
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2011-05   6-2-11      real property in the North Warrick County
                              Industrial Park Subdivision Section 1, in
                              Elberfield, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2011-06   7-7-11      real property in the North Warrick County
                              Industrial Park Subdivision Section 1, in
                              Elberfield, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for A-
                              Fab, LLC, to redevelop and/or rehabilitate real
CC Res. 2011-08   10-6-11     property on parcels 87-09-33-100-064, 87-09-33-
                              100-062, and 87-09-33-100-049, in Warrick County,
                              Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for A-
                              Fab, LLC, to redevelop and/or rehabilitate real
CC Res. 2011-09   11-3-11     property on parcels 87-09-33-100-064 and 87-09-
                              33-100-062, located at 977 Hyrock Blvd. in
                              Warrick County, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2012-01   4-12-12     property tax abatement on parcels 87-12-28-100-
                              090.000-019 and 87-12-28-100-091.000-019, in
                              Warrick County, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2012-02   5-3-12      property tax abatement on parcels 87-12-28-100-
                              090.000-019 and 87-12-28-100-091.000-019, in
                              Warrick County, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              property tax abatement on all of parcel 87-12-22-
CC Res. 2013-01   1-3-13      400-077.000-019 and part of 87-12-22-400-
                              076.000.019 and 87-12-22-400-218-000.019, in
                              Warrick County, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
                              property tax abatement on all of parcel 87-12-22-
CC Res. 2013-01   1-3-13      400-077.000-019 and part of 87-12-22-400-
                              076.000.019 and 87-12-22-400-218-000.019, in
                              Warrick County, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-01   1-8-15      property tax abatement on real property located
                              at 11744 Blue Bell Road, Elberfield, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-02   1-8-15      property tax abatement on personal property
                              located at 11744 Blue Bell Road, Elberfield,
                              Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-05   3-12-15     property tax abatement (BS Holdings, LLC) for
                              real property located at 11744 Blue Bell Road,
                              Elberfield, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-06   3-12-15     property tax abatement (Fibertech, Inc.) for
                              personal property located at 11744 Blue Bell
                              Road, Elberfield, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-7    4-2-15      property tax abatement on personal property
                              located at 612 Grace Way, Chandler, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-8    4-2-15      property tax abatement on real property located
                              at 612 Grace Way, Chandler, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-09   5-7-15      property tax abatement (Freedom Ordinance
                              Manufacturing, Inc.) on personal property located
                              at 612 Grace Way, Chandler, Indiana
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              real and personal property tax phase-in on
CC Res. 2015-10   7-9-15      property located at Lot 2A in the Warrick
                              Industrial Park, Section 2C, parcel 87-09-33-211-
                              001.000-002
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-11   7-9-15      real and personal property tax phase-in on
                              property in the Warrick Research and Industrial
                              Center, Tax Code 060-5580-006 and 060-5580-0004
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-12   8-6-15      real and personal property tax abatement (PKS
                              Patriot, LLC) for personal property located at
                              5700 Vann Road, Newburgh, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
                              real and personal property tax abatement (Prime
CC Res. 2015-13   8-6-15      Foods, Inc.) for personal property located at Lot
                              2A in the Warrick County Industrial Park, Section
                              2C, parcel 87-09-33-211-001.000-002
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2015-14   9-3-15      real property tax phase-in (Freedom Ordinance,
                              LLC) for real property located at 612 Grace Way,
                              Chandler, Indiana
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2016-01   1-7-16      real property tax phase-in for real property
                              located at 9800 Lincoln Avenue, Newburgh,
                              Indiana, parcel 87-12-28-100-092.000-019
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2016-02   2-4-16      real property tax abatement for real property
                              located at 9800 Lincoln Avenue, Newburgh,
                              Indiana, parcel 87-12-28-100- 092.000-019
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2018-07   6-14-18     real and personal property tax phase in Powerup
                              Inc. d/b/a PBTT Corp., parcel 87-13-19-101-
                              005.000-019 and 87-13-19-101-006.000-019
                              Confirming an economic revitalization area for
                              real property tax abatement for real property
CC Res. 2018-09   7-5-18      located at 5622 Vann Road, Newburgh, Indiana,
                              parcel 87-13-19-101-005.000-019 and 87-13-19-101-
                              006.000-019
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              real and personal property tax phase-in for real
CC Res. 2018-11   10-4-18     property more particularly described as 11833
                              Industrial Park Drive, Eberfield, Indiana 47613,
                              parcel 87-04-18-101-001.000-007
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
                              revitalization area for real property and
CC Res. 2018-12   11-1-18     personal property tax abatement, North American
                              Lighting, Inc. described as parcel 87-04-18-101-
                              001.000-007, and as more commonly known as 11833
                              Industrial Park Drive, Elberfeld, Indiana 47613
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              real property tax phase-in for real property more
                              particularly described as 3744, 3766, 3788, 3800,
                              3822, 3844, and 3866 Venetian Drive, Newburgh,
CC Res. 2020-01   1-2-20      Indiana 47630, parcels 87-12-20-303-011.000-019,
                              87-12-303-012.000- 019, 872-12-20-303-013.000-
                              019, 87-12-20-303-014.000-019, 87-12-20-303-
                              015.000-019, 87-12-20-303-0016.000-019, and 87-
                              12-20-303-017.000-019
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
                              revitalization area for real property tax phase-
                              in, Summit Land Development, LLC, real property
                              more particularly described as 3744, 3766, 3788,
CC Res. 2020-02   2-6-20      3800, 3822, 3844, and 3866 Venetian Drive,
                              Newburgh, Indiana 47630, parcels 87-12-20-303-
                              011.000-019, 87-12-303-012.000-019, 872-12-20-
                              303-013.000-019, 87-12-20-303-014.000-019, 87-12-
                              20-303-015.000-019, 87-12-20-303-0016.000-019,
                              and 87-12-20-303-017.000-019
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              real and personal property tax phase-in, Phenix
CC Res. 2020-08   8-6-20      Properties, LLC, real property more particularly
                              described as Lot 11 of North Warrick Industrial
                              Park Section 3, Elberfield, Indiana 47613
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
                              revitalization area for real property and
                              personal property tax phase-in, Phenix
CC Res. 2020-09   9-3-20      Properties, LLC and Phenix Specialty Films, LLC,
                              real property more particularly described as Lot
                              11 of North Warrick Industrial Park Section 3,
                              Elberfield, Indiana 47613
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2020-12   11-5-20     personal property tax phase-in, Euronique, Inc.,
                              real property commonly known as 7633 St. Johns
                              Road, Elberfeld, Indiana 47613
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
                              revitalization area for personal property tax
CC Res. 2020-13   12-3-20     phase-in, Euronique, Inc., real property commonly
                              known as 7633 St. Johns Road, Elberfeld, Indiana
                              47613
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2021-02   2-4-21      personal property tax phase-in, Fibertech, Inc.,
                              real property commonly known as 11744 Blue Bell
                              Road, Elberfeld, Indiana 47613
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
                              revitalization area for personal property tax
CC Res. 2021-03   3-4-21      phase-in, Fibertech, Inc., real property commonly
                              known as 11744 Blue Bell Road, Elberfeld, Indiana
                              47613
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              real and personal property tax phase-in, Kaiser
                              Aluminum Warrick LLC, real property described as
                              part of the northeast quarter of fractional
CC Res. 2021-11   9-2-21      section 7, part of section 8, part of the west
                              half of section 9, part of the northwest quarter
                              of fractional section 16, and part of the
                              northeast quarter of fractional section 17, all
                              in township 7 south, range 8 west, Anderson
                              Township, Warrick County
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
                              revitalization area for real property and
C.C. Res. 2021-13 10-7-21     personal property tax phase-in, Kaiser Aluminum
                              Warrick LLC, part of tax parcels 87-16-07-201-
                              003.000-001, 87-16-08-401-002.000-001 and 87-16-
                              09-100-001.000-001.
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2022-01   2-15-22     real and personal property tax phase-in, Rustic
                              Hills Solar LLC.
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2022-02   2-15-22     real and personal property tax phase-in, Rustic
                              Hills Solar LLC.
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 2022-05   4-7-22      revitalization area for real property and
                              personal property (utility distributable
                              property) tax phase-in, Rustic Hills Solar LLC.
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
                              revitalization area for real property and
CC Res. 2022-06   4-7-22      personal property (utility distributable
                              property) tax phase-in, Rustic Hills Solar II
                              LLC.
CC Res. 2022-08   7-7-22      Declaring an economic revitalization area for
                              real property tax phase-in, Euro Properties LLC.
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 2022-09   8-4-22      revitalization area for real property tax phase-
                              in, Euro Properties LLC.
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2022-11   9-1-22      real property tax phase-in, Industrial Park
                              Holdings, LLC.
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 2022-12   10-6-22     revitalization area for real property tax phase-
                              in, Industrial Park Holdings, LLC.
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2024-03   3-7-24   real and personal property tax phase-in, Matrix
                              Design, LLC.
                              Confirming the declaration of 5688 Prospect
CC Res. 2024-6    4-4-2024    Drive, Newburgh, Indiana, as an economic
                              revitalization area for property tax phase-in,
                              Matrix Design, LLC.
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2024-13   10-3-24     real and personal property tax phase-in for 7633
                              St. Johns Road, Elberfeld, Indiana, Euro
                              Properties LLC and Euronique, Inc.
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2024-14   10-3-24     real and personal property tax phase-in for 3866
                              Stahl Road, Newburgh, Indiana, Kinship Duo LLC.
                              Approving certain matters in connection with the
BC Res. 2024-09   10-28-24    approval of the economic development plan for the
                              Warrick Gateway District Economic Development
                              Area.
                              Approving certain matters in connection with the
BC Res. 2024-10   10-28-24    approval of the economic development plan for the
                              Sports Facility Economic Development Area.
                              Approving certain matters in connection with the
BC Res. 2024-11   10-28-24    approval of the economic development plan for the
                              Grimm Road Mixed-Use Economic Development Area.
                              Confirming the declaration of 7633 St. Johns
                              Road, Elberfeld, Indiana, an economic
CC Res. 2024-16   11-7-24     revitalization area for real and personal
                              property tax phase-in, Euro Properties LLC and
                              Euronique, Inc.
                              Confirming the declaration of 3866 Stahl Road,
CC Res. 2024-17   11-7-24     Newburgh, Indiana, as an economic revitalization
                              area for real and personal property tax phase-in,
                              Kinship Duo LLC.
                              Approving certain matters in connection with the
BC Res. 2024-12   12-23-24    approval of the economic development plan for the
                              Warrick Gateway Housing Economic Development
                              Area.
                              Declaring an economic revitalization area for
CC Res. 2025-01   1-14-25     personal property tax phase-in (Warrick Newco,
                              LLC).
                              Confirming the declaration of an economic
CC Res. 2025-03   2-4-25      revitalization area for personal property tax
                              phase-in (Warrick Newco, LLC).
                             
 
 
TABLE IV: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.         Date Passed Description
                             Agreeing to a transfer of franchise for the
BC Res. 1987-8.1 10-16-87    operation of a cable television system from Marble
                             Construction, Inc. to Welbac Cable TV Corporation
                             Assignment of the agreement from Horizon Tele-
BC Res. 1987-8.2 10-26-87    Communications, Inc., to TCI of Indiana, Inc., and
                             the release of Horizon Tele- Communications, Inc.
                             from any further obligations
                             Consenting to the assignment of more than 5 of the
BC Res. 1994-5   11-28-94    ownership interest in the General Partner of Tele-
                             Media to Adelphia
BC Ord. 1994-21  12-12-94    Granting a 10-year renewal option to Tele- Media
                             for operating a cable TV franchise
BC Ord. 1995-8   4-10-95     Granting a cable television franchise to Castle
                             Cable, LLC
BC Ord. 1995-09  5-17-95     Granting a cable television franchise to Warrick
                             Cablevision, Inc.
BC Res. 1996-4   6-24-96     Consenting to the assignment of a cable television
                             franchise to Fanch Cablevision of Indiana, L.P.
BC Res. 1996-7   9-9-96      Consenting to the transfer of the cable television
                             franchise to NewPath Communications, L.C.
BC Ord. 1998-10  8-24-98     Granting a cable television franchise to Sigecom,
                             L.L.C.
                             Disapproving, denying and rejecting a proposed
BC Res. 1999-4   3-29-99     rate increase by Warrick Cablevision/Century
                             Communications Corp.
                             A subsequent resolution disapproving, denying and
BC Res. 1999-5   4-26-99     rejecting a proposed rate increase by Warrick
                             Cablevision/Century Communications Corp.
                             Consenting and approving transfer of control or
BC Res. 1999-7   8-23-99     transfer of CATV franchise by local franchising
                             authority
                            
 
TABLE V: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.        Date Passed Description
                            Lease of real estate known as the Old Warrick Jail,
CC Ord. -       11-18-74    located at the northwest corner of the intersection
                            of Main and Fourth Streets at Boonville, Indiana
BC Ord. 1987-17 10-5-87     Determining to sell certain land to the Warrick
                            County Jail Building Corporation
                            Authorizing the Board of Commissioners to purchase
CC Ord. 1989-5  8-10-89     the real estate located at the address of 109 West
                            Main Street, Boonville for a total consideration of
                            not more than $80,000
                            Approving the acquisition of property by the Board
CC Ord. 1992-20 7-21-92     of Commissioners upon which a new judicial center
                            is proposed to be constructed
BC Res. 1994-3  10-24-94    Transferring certain real estate to the Warrick
                            County Redevelopment Commission
CC Ord. 1995-4  4-24-95     Authorizing the purchase of real estate located at
                            120 East Main, Boonville
CC Res. 1995-13 8-3-95      Approval to purchase real estate to construct a
                            justice center
                            Approving real estate purchase agreement by and
BC Res. 1997-05 5-12-97     between the Warrick Co. Judicial Center Building
                            Corp., and the City of Boonville
BC Res. 1998-16 10-13-98    Approving transfer of Pfafflin Lake Boulevard to
                            Pfafflin Lake Corporation
CC Res. 2002-02 10-3-02     Approving the transfer of property for the
                            Boonville Junior League Baseball, Inc’s Park
                            Approving sale of property, lying south and
BC Res. 2006-07 12-20-06    adjacent to the existing 4-H Center property, and
                            west of Roth Road, to the Warrick County Department
                            of Parks and Recreation
BC Res. 2009-7  3-13-09     Approving the removal and junking of worthless
                            personal property
BC Res. 2009-10 6-8-09      Authorizing the delivery of a master equipment
                            lease/purchase agreement
                            Approving lease agreement with the Town of Chandler
BC Ord. 2010-11 8-23-10     for the construction of an EMS facility on five
                            acres of property on State Street in Chandler,
                            Indiana
                            Approving transfer of real estate to the County
CC Ord. 2011-01 4-14-11     Council on Aging for the construction of a senior
                            citizen center on 2.56 acres of property at 150
                            State Rd. 62 in Boonville, Indiana
BC Res. 2013-05 4-22-13     Approving sale of real estate on the northwest
                            corner of Fuquay Road and Gardner Road
BC Res. 2016-10 10-10-16    Approving the acquisition of certain property by
                            the Redevelopment Commission
                            Expressing interest in making a purchase of 3.7
CC Res. 2017-01 1-5-17      acres from Maken adjacent to current storage
                            facility on Prospect Drive
BC Res. 2021-11 8-23-21     Approving the real estate purchase and sale
                            agreement for 510 N. State Street
                           
 
TABLE VI: REZONINGS
Editor's note:
Rezoning ordinances dated prior to 1996 are on file in the office of the County
Clerk and are available for public inspection
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
BC    2-26-  Rezoning part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 32, Township
Ord.  96     6 South, Range 9 West, from R-1 A to C-3
-
BC    3-25-  Rezoning part of the south half of Section 32, Township 5 south Range 8 west,
Ord.  96     Boon Civil Township, from A Agriculture to R-1A Single Family Dwelling District
-
BC    3-25-  Rezoning part of the south half of Section 32 Township 5 south Range 8 west,
Ord.  96     Boon Civil Township from A Agriculture to R-2 Multiple Family Dwelling District
-
BC           Rezoning part of the south half of Section 32, Township 5 south, Range 8 west
Ord.  3-25-  and a part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 5, Township 6
-     96     south, Range 8 west, Boon Civil Township, from A Agriculture to R-1A Single
             Family Dwelling District
BC    4-22-  Rezoning Lot # 7 and 8 of Vanada Place as recorded in Plat Book #2 Page 72 in
Ord.  96     the Office of the Recorder, from R-1A single Family Dwelling and F-P Flood
-            Plain Districts to C-4 General Commercial District
BC    4-22-  Rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township
Ord.  96     6 south, Range 9 west from C-4 General Commercial to M-1 Light Industrial
-            District
BC    4-22-  Rezoning a part of the north half of the southeast quarter of the northeast
Ord.  96     quarter of Section 28, Township 6 south, Range 9 west in Ohio Civil Township,
-            from A Agriculture to R-1C Single Family Dwelling District
BC    4-22-  Rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of Section 33, Township 5 south, Range
Ord.  96     8 west in Boon Civil Township from A to C-3 District
-
BC    5-28-  Rezoning Lot 10 and Lot 11 of Warrick Research and Industrial Center No. 3,
Ord.  96     Ohio Township from M-2 General industrial to M-3 Solid Waste Disposal Facility
-            District
BC    6-24-  Rezoning part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 23, Township
Ord.  96     6 south, Range 9 west in Ohio Civil Township from C-3 Highway Commercial to C-
-            4 General Commercial District
BC    7-22-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 25,
Ord.  96     Township 6 south, Range 9 west, from A Agriculture to M-2 General Industrial
-            District
BC    9-23-  Rezoning a part of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
Ord.  96     28, Township 6 south, Range 9 west, from A Agriculture to R-2A Two Family
-            Dwelling District
BC    10-28- Rezoning Lot 10 and Lot 11 of Warrick Research and Industrial Center No. 3,
Ord.  96     Ohio Township, from M-3 to M-3
-
BC    11-25- Rezoning a part of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 5,
Ord.  96     Township 6 south, Range 8 west in Boon Civil Township from CON Recreation and
-            Conservancy to R-1A Single Family Dwelling District
BC    11-25- Rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 32, Township
Ord.  96     6 south, range 9 west from R- 1A Single Family Dwelling to C-4 General
-            Commercial District
BC    12-23- Rezoning a part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section
Ord.  96     32, Township 5 south, Range 8 west from A Agriculture to R-3 Resort District
-
BC    2-24-  Rezoning part of southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 5 south, Range 8
Ord.  97     west from A Agriculture to C-3 Highway Commercial District
-
             Rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 32, Township
BC    3-10-  6 south, Range 9 west, from C-1 Neighborhood Commercial to R-3 Resort District;
Ord.  97     and rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 32,
-            Township 6 south, Range 9 west, from R-2B Multiple Family Dwelling to R-
             3 Resort District
BC           Rezoning part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 34, Township
Ord.  4-3-97 4 south, Range 8 west, from C-1 General Commercial to M-1 Light Industrial
-            District
BC    4-28-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 20,
Ord.  97     Township 6 south, Range 9 west from A Agriculture to C-4 General Commercial
-            District
BC    4-28-  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 33, Township 6 south, Range 9
Ord.  97     west, from C-1 Neighborhood Commercial to C-4 General Commercial District
-
BC    4-28-  Rezoning a part of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 8,
Ord.  97     Township 6 south, Range 9 west in Ohio Civil Township from A Agriculture to M-
-            2 General Industrial District
BC           Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Fractional
Ord.  1-12-  Section 7, Township 4 South, Range 9 West of the 2nd Principal Meridian from C-
2009- 09     4 General Commercial to M-2 General Industrial
03
BC           Rezoning the southwest corner of the east half of the southwest quarter of
Ord.  5-11-  Section 26, containing 178 acres from A Agriculture and CON Recreation and
2009- 09     Conservancy to C-3 Highway Commercial Zoning
05
BC           Rezoning a part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 18,
Ord.  7-13-  Township 4 South, Range 9 West from M-1 Light Industrial to M-3 Solid Waste
2009- 09     Disposal Facility District
06
BC
Ord.  9-14-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 12,
2009- 09     Township 6 South, Range 9 West from R-2 to PUD with R-2 zoning
25
BC
Ord.  9-28-  Rezoning Lots 5 and 6 Golden Rule Enlargement to Taylorsville, now Selvin from
2009- 09     R-1A Single Family Dwelling to C-2
26-1
BC           Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 33, Township 6 South, Range 9
Ord.  11-9-  West of the Second Principle Meridian in Warrick County from A Agricultural to
2009- 09     C-4 General Commercial District
26-2
BC           Rezoning Lot 12 of Warrick Research and Industrial Center No. 1, and Lot 13 of
Ord.  6-28-  Warrick Research and Industrial Center No. 2, from M-2 General Industrial to C-
2010- 10     4 General Commercial
04
BC
Ord.  10-11- Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 22,
2010- 10     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A Agricultural to R-2B
12
BC           Rezoning Parcel 2 of Stuart Minor Subdivision, part of the northwest quarter of
Ord.  10-11- the northeast quarter of Section 1, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Civil
2010- 10     Township, from Agriculture to C-4 General Commercial
13
BC
Ord.  11-8-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 29,
2010- 10     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from A to C-4
15
BC
Ord.  11-22- Rezoning Lot #1 of the Victoria National Golf Club Minor Subdivision, parts of
2010- 10     Sections 17 and 18, Township 6 South, Range 8 West, from Ag to C-2
16
BC
Ord.  2-14-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20,
2011- 11     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from C-1 to C-4
05
BC           Rezoning part of Parcel 2 in the amended plat of Riverwind Minor Subdivision,
Ord.  2-28-  part of the south half of the northwest quarter of Section 20, Township 6
2011- 11     South, Range 8 West, from M-2 to A
07
BC           Rezoning Lot 72 and Lot 73 in Lexington Subdivision, part of the northwest
Ord.  4-11-  quarter of Fractional Section 6, Township 7 South, Range 8 West, from R2-B to
2011- 11     PUD
08
BC
Ord.  7-11-  Rezoning part of the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 24,
2011- 11     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from M-1 to A
15
BC
Ord.  8-22-  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 20,
2011- 11     Township 4 South, Range 9 West, from R-1A to A
20
BC           Rezoning Lot 2 in Victoria National Golf Club Minor Subdivision; part of
Ord.  9-16-  Sections 17 and 18, Township 6 South, Range 8 West; and Parcel 2, part of the
2011- 11     northeast and southeast quarters of Section 8, Township 6 South, Range 8 West,
22           from Agriculture, CON, and R-1D to C-2
BC           Rezoning Lot 3 in Victoria National Golf Club Minor Subdivision and all of
Ord.  9-16-  Outlot A in Victoria Overlook, parts of Sections 7, 17 and 18, Township 6
2011- 11     South, Range 8 West, from Agriculture, CON, and R-1D to C-2
23
BC
Ord.  9-16-  Rezoning parts of Sections 5, 8, and 17, Township 6 South, Range 8 West, from
2011- 11     Agriculture and CON to C-2
24
BC
Ord.  10-24- Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 35,
2011- 11     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from M-2 to C-4
26
BC
Ord.  11-28- Rezoning Lot 79 in Triple Crown Estates, commonly described as 8711 State Road
2011- 11     66, from C-1 to C-3
28
BC
Ord.  3-12-  Rezoning the southeast corner of the east half of the southeast quarter of the
2012- 12     northwest quarter of the S24-T4S, from A and CON to M-2
09
BC
Ord.  3-12-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 35,
2012- 12     Township 6 South, Range 8 West, from A and CON to C-4
10
BC
Ord.  3-12-  Rezoning part of the west half of Section 27, Township 5 South, Range 8 West,
2012- 12     Boon Township, from A to M-1
11
BC
Ord.  3-12-  Rezoning part of the west half of Section 27, Township 5 South, Range 8 West,
2012- 12     Boon Township, from A to C-4
12
BC
Ord.  3-12-  Rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 27, T- 5-S,
2012- 12     R-8-W, Boon Township, from A to R- 1A
13
BC           Rezoning part of Lot 2 Victoria Subdivision, part of the north half of the
Ord.  3-12-  northeast quarter of Section 15, Township 6 South, Range 8 West in Boon
2012- 12     Township, from A and CON Recreation to C-1
14
BC
Ord.  5-14-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 28,
2012- 12     Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township, from R-O to C-4
17
BC           Rezoning the amended plat of Park Place Phase III; Lots 12, 13 and 14 of High
Ord   8-27-  Pointe Centre North Section 1E; and Lots 11A and 11B of High Pointe Centre
2012- 12     North Section 1B from C-4 to PUD with C-4
26
BC
Ord.  11-13- Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
2012- 12     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A to C-4
31
BC
Ord.  2-11-  Rezoning all of Lots 2 and 3 of Paradise Park from C-1 to PUD/C-1
2013- 13
02
BC
Ord.  2-11-  Rezoning part of Parcel No.5 in Newburgh Plaza South from C-1 to C-4
2013- 13
03
BC
Ord.  3-11-  Rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 35, Township
2013- 13     6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from R-2 to R-O
04
BC
Ord.  7-9-13 Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township 5 South, Range 9
2013-        West from A to C-1
20
BC
Ord.  8-12-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20,
2013- 13     Township 6 South, Range 9 West from C-1 to R-1A
22
BC
Ord.  8-12-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 22, Township 6 South, Range 9
2013- 13     West, Ohio Township, from A to R-1
23
BC
Ord.  11-12- Rezoning Lot 7 in Warrick Research & Industrial Center #6 from M-2 to C-4
2013- 13
28
BC
Ord.  2-24-  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the southeast [quarter] of Section
2014- 14     26, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Civil Township from R-3 to R-2
06
BC
Ord.  4-29-  Rezoning part of Lot 2 in Jenner & Plank Minor Subdivision from A to R-2
2014- 14
12
BC
Ord.  5-13-  Rezoning part of Lot 16 in the re-plat of Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, and part of Lot 12
2014- 14     in Julian Place from A to R-O
14
BC
Ord.  5-13-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 26,
2014- 14     Township 4 South, Range 7 West, in Owen Township from R-3 to A
15
BC
Ord.  6-23-  Rezoning part of Section 28, Township 5 South, Range 8 West, containing 5.809
2014- 14     acres more or less, from M-1 to CON
17
BC
Ord.  6-23-  Rezoning part of Section 28, Township 5 South, Range 8 West, containing 3.01
2014- 14     acres more or less, from M-1 to CON
18
BC
Ord.  6-23-  Rezoning part of Section 28, Township 5 South, Range 8 West, containing 0.11
2014- 14     acre more or less, from M-1 to CON
19
BC           Rezoning Lot 6 in Warrick Research & Industrial Center No. 7, Lot 5 in A Replat
Ord.  7-14-  of Lots 2 and 5 in Warrick Research & Industrial Center No. 7, and part of the
2014- 14     west half of the northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 6 South, Range 8
20           West, Ohio Township, from C-4 and M-2 to C-4 w/PUD
BC           Rezoning part of Lot 1 in Warrick Research & Industrial Center No. 7 and parts
Ord.  7-14-  of Lot 2 in A Replat of Lots 2 and 5 in Warrick Research & Industrial Center
2014- 14     No. 7, from C-4 to M-2
21
BC
Ord.  7-28-  Rezoning Lots 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, and 65 in Arbor Pointe Section 1 from C-4 to
2014- 14     C-4 w/PUD
22
BC
Ord.  8-11-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 6 South, Range 8
2014- 14     West, Boon Township, from M-2 to CON
24
BC           Rezoning part of the east half of the east half of the southwest quarter of the
Ord.  10-13- northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township,
2014- 14     from A to R-1
25
BC
Ord.  10-13- Rezoning certain real estate from A to C-4
2014- 14
26
BC           Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 20,
Ord.  1-14-  Township 4 South, Range 9 West, Greer Township, containing 1.0 acre more or
2014- 15     less, from R-1 to A
28
BC           Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 20,
Ord.  1-14-  Township 4 South, Range 9 West, Greer Township, containing 0.833 acre more or
2014- 15     less, from R-1 to A
29
BC
Ord.  2-9-15 Rezoning part of Parcel No. 5 in Newburgh Plaza South from C-1 to C-4
2015-
02
BC
Ord.  3-23-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 28, Township 5 South, Range 6
2015- 15     West, Skelton Township, from R-1A to Ag
05
BC           Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 1, part of the southeast
Ord.  3-23-  quarter of Section 2, and part of the northwest quarter of Section 12, all in
2015- 15     Township 6 South, Range 8 West, from M-2 to M-3
06
BC
Ord.  3-23-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 6 South, Range 8
2015- 15     West, from M-2 to M-3
07
BC
Ord.  4-13-  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 21,
2015- 15     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Civil Township, from A to C-4
09
BC           Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
Ord.  4-27-  Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township; Outlot A, Lots 44, 45, 46, and
2015- 15     47 in High Pointe Centre North Section 2, Phase 2; and Lot 43 in the Replat of
11           Lots 42 and 43 in High Pointe Centre North Section 2, Phase 2; from C-4 and A
             to C-4 w/PUD
BC
Ord.  5-11-  Rezoning part of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 15, Township
2015- 15     6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A to R-1
13
BC
Ord.  5-11-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 15,
2015- 15     Township 5 South, Range 8 West, Boon Township, from C-3 to A
14
BC
Ord.  6-8-15 Rezoning part of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 25, Township
2015-        5 South, Range 8 West, from M-1 to R-1A
17
BC
Ord.  8-10-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 28,
2015- 15     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A to R-3 PUD
18
BC
Ord.  8-10-  Rezoning parts of the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 6 South, Range
2015- 15     9 West, Ohio Township, from A to R-1
19
BC           Rezoning part of Lot 12A of Orchard View Condominium s PUD 1C and part of
Ord.  10-12- Orchard View Condominium s PUD Sec. 1, all in Ohio Township, Section 23,
2015- 15     Township 6 South Range 9 West, from PUD/C-4 to PUD/R-2
22
BC           Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 33,
Ord.  10-26- Township 5 South, Range 7 West and part of the southwest quarter of the
2015- 15     southeast quarter of Section 28, Township 5 South, Range 7 West, lying in
25           Skelton Township, from A to R- 1A
BC
Ord.  11-9-  Rezoning Lot 26 in Engelbrecht Place, Section 2, Phase 1 subdivision, from C-
2015- 15     4 to R-2/PUD
26
BC           Rezoning two parcels on Arbor Pointe Drive and a third parcel, all in the
Ord.  11-9-  southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, in Ohio
2015- 15     Township, from C-4 to C-4 PUD
27
BC
Ord.  11-9-  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 26,
2015- 15     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from C-4 to M-1
28
BC
Ord.  12-14- Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 20,
2015- 15     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A to M-2
30
BC           Rezoning part of Lots 1 and 5 in Block 1 in Crest-View Terrace Subdivision in
Ord.  2-8-16 the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 35, Township 6 South,
2016-        Range 9 West, from C-1 to C-3
02
BC
Ord.  3-28-  Rezoning part of the south half of the south half of Section 18, Township 6,
2016- 16     Range 8 West, Boon Township, from M-2 to R-1
03
BC           Rezoning part of the southwest quarter and the northwest quarter of the
Ord.  5-9-16 southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 5 South, Range 8 West, Boon Township,
2016-        from A to R- 1D PUD
R-06
BC
Ord.  5-9-16 Rezoning part of the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 20,
2016-        Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A to C-4
07
BC
Ord.  6-13-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
2016- 16     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A to R-1
11
BC
Ord.  7-11-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 32,
2016- 16     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from R-1A to C-4
13
BC
Ord.  9-12-  Rezoning part of the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 15,
2016- 16     Township 6 South, Range 9 West (2622 Bell Road), from A to PUD/R-2
16
BC
Ord.  11-14- Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
2016- 16     Township 6 south, Range 9 west in Ohio Township from AG to R-1
22
BC
Ord.  11-28- Rezoning a part of the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 4 south, Range
2016- 16     9 west, from C-3 to A
26
BC
Ord.  11-28- Rezoning Lot 42 in the replat of Lots 42 and 43 in High Pointe Centre north
2016- 16     Section 2, Phase 2, as per plat thereof from C-4 to PUD/C-4
27
BC
Ord.  11-28- Rezoning certain real estate known as Lot 5 in A and B Industrial Park from M-
2016- 16     1 to M-2
28
BC
Ord.  11-28- Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 33, Township 6 south, Range 9
2016- 16     west from A to C-4
29
BC           Rezoning part of Lot 2 in Martin Bell subdivision, as per plat thereof and
Ord.  3-13-  being part of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
2017- 17     Township 6 south, Range 9 west form R-1 to PUD/R-1
06
BC
Ord.  4-10-  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 27, Township 6 south, Range 9
2017- 17     west, Ohio Township from A to R-1.
10
BC
Ord.  5-8-17 Rezoning part of the Parcel 3 in Engelbrecht Minor Subdivision also known as
2017-        Park Place Drive from PUD/C-4 to PUD/R-2.
12
CC
Ord.  7-10-  Rezoning part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 27,
2017- 17     Township 6 south, Range 9 west, Ohio Township from Agricultural district to R-2
16
CC
Ord.  7-10-  Rezoning Lot 17 and 18 in Oak Wood Park from R-MH to R-1D
2017- 17
17
CC
Ord.  8-28-  Rezoning Lots 5 through 33 in the Sunshine States Subdivision are hereby
2017- 17     rezoned from R-1A to A
20
CC
Ord.  9-13-  Rezoning Lot 74 in Lexington Subdivision, a planned residential unit
2017- 17     development, from R2-B to PUD/R-2B
21
CC
Ord.  9-13-  Rezoning part of the east half of the Southeast Quarter of Section 21, Township
2017- 17     6 south, Range 9 west in Ohio Civil Township from A to C-4
22
CC
Ord.  9-14-  Rezoning part of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 32,
2017- 17     Township 3 south, Range 9 west, Ohio Township from R-1A to C-4
23
CC
Ord.  9-25-  Rezoning Lots 2, 3, 4 and 5 in the High Pointe Centre north Section 1D from C-
2017- 17     4 to PUD w/C-4
25
CC
Ord.  10-10- Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 32,
2017- 17     Township 6 south, Range 9 west from C-1 to C-4
27
CC
Ord.  10-25- Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 21, Township 6 south, Range 9
2017- 17     west, from Agricultural District to C-4
28
CC
Ord.  11-13- Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 22,
2017- 17     Township 6 south, Range 9 west, from C-4 to PUD/C-4
29
CC           Rezoning certain real estate in part o the southwest quarter of the southeast
Ord.  12-11- quarter of Section 18, Township 6 south, Range 8 west in Book Township and part
2017- 17     of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter and part of the northwest
35           quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 6 south, Range 8 west
             in Ohio Township from M-2 to R-1
BC           Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 36, Township 5 South, Range 8
Ord.  1-8-18 West of the Second Principal Meridian, Boon Township from Agricultural District
2018-        to C-3
01
BC           Rezoning part of Lot 7 and Part of Lot 8 in Epworth Gardens, as per plat
Ord.  1-8-18 thereof, recorded in Plat File 2, page 59 in the Office of the Recorder of
2018-        Warrick County from C-1 to C-2
02
BC
Ord.  2-12-  Rezoning a part of the northwest quarter of Section 31, Township 5 South, Range
2018- 18     8 West from Agricultural District to C-4
03
BC           Rezoning a part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 27,
Ord.  3-12-  Township 6 South, Range 9 West, in the county and being in Lot 1 of the amended
2018- 18     plat of Gardner Subdivision as shown in Plat File 1, Page 401 in the Office of
06           the Recorder of Warrick County, Indiana, from R-0 to C-1
CC
Ord.  5-14-  Rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 31, Township
2018- 18     5 South, Range 8 West, in the county, from A to C-4
10
CC
Ord.  5-14-  Rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section
2018- 18     26, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, in the county, from A to C-3
11
CC           Amending the boundaries of the R-O and R-1A, as shown on the county zoning
Ord.  5-15-  district maps, as to the following part of the southeast quarter of the
2018- 18     northwest quarter and part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section
12           23, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, in the county
CC           Rezoning a part of the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 17,
Ord.  6-12-  Township 6 South, Range 8 West in Boon Township, being part of Parcel No. 9 of
2018- 18     the property conveyed to Maken Corp. recorded in Deed File 2, Card 18453 in the
15           office of the Recorder of the county, from M-2 to PUD w/R-1
CC           Rezoning a part of Block 1 and Lot 18 of John Bull Addition, as per plat
Ord.  6-12-  thereof, recorded in Miscellaneous File 1, Card 306 in the Recorder’s Office,
2018- 18     being a part of the southeast quarter of Section 29, Township 5 South, Range 8
16           West of the Second Principal Meridian, Boon Township, from Agriculture District
             to C-3
CC
Ord.  7-9-18 Rezoning Lot 80-C in Triple Crown Estates, Replats Lots 80 and 81, Plat File 1
2018-        Card 421 in the office of the County Recorder from C-1 to C-2
017
CC           Rezoning Part of Lot 1 in Nicholson Hills Subdivision recorded in Document
Ord.  8-27-  Number 2016R-01060 4 in the office of the County Recorder, lying in part of the
2018- 18     south half of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range 8 West in Anderson Township,
22           from R-MH to Con District
CC-   9-10-  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 14,
2018- 18     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A to PUD/R-1 District
24
             Rezoning the west half of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
CC-   9-10-  Section 25, Township 4 South, Range 8 West, containing 20 acres, more or less,
2018- 18     and also the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the northwest
25           quarter of Section 25, Township 4 South, Range 8 West, containing ten acres,
             more or less, from M-2 to A District
CC
Ord.  11-7-  Rezoning lots three and four in Epworth Lincoln Subdivision as per plat
2018- 18     thereof, recorded as Instrument No. 2016R-00511 2 from AG to C-1
028
CC
Ord.  9-14-  Rezoning a part of the southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 6 South, Range
2018- 18     9 West, from A to C-1
029
CC
Ord.  11-14- Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 36,
2018- 18     Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township, Warrick County, from A to C-1
30
BC           Rezoning part of the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 24,
Ord.  1-22-  Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township, Warrick County, from M-1 to
2019- 19     Agricultural
01
BC
Ord.  4-11-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 17,
2019- 19     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, Warrick County, from A to M-1
07
BC           Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 26,
Ord.  4-22-  Township 6 South, Range 9 West and part of the southwest quarter of the
2019- 19     northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township,
09           from A to PUD/R-2
BC
Ord.  4-22-  Rezoning Lot 1 of Roslin Industrial Park from M-2 to C-4
2019- 19
10
BC
Ord.  5-13-  Rezoning part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 26, Township
2019- 19     6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township from R-2B to M-2
11
BC
Ord.  6-10-  Rezoning part of Lot 2 in Martin Bell Subdivision, containing approximately
2019- 19     4.473 acres, from PUD/R-1 to PUD/R-2
12
BC           Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 13,
Ord.  7-22-  Township 6 South, Range 9 West, containing approximately 3.366 acres, from
2019- 19     Agricultural District to C-3 Highway Commercial District
16
CC           Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 32,
Ord.  10-14- Township 6 South, Range 9 West lying in Ohio Township, containing approximately
2019- 19     1.084 acres, from C-4 with a use and development commitment to C-4 with an
21           amended use and development commitment
CC           Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 14,
Ord.  10-14- Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Warrick County, from Agricultural (A) to
2019- 19     Neighborhood Commercial (C-1)
22
CC           Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 21,
Ord.  10-28- Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Warrick County, containing approximately 18.57
2019- 19     acres, from Agricultural District to C-3 Highway Commercial District
25
CC
Ord.  11-12- Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 35,
2019- 19     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Warrick County, from C-3 to R-1B
27
CC           Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 22,
Ord.  12-9-  Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, containing approximately 2.6789
2019- 19     acres, from R-2B to PUD/R-2B
30
CC
Ord.  12-9-  Rezoning parcel #2 of the Epworth Road Minor Subdivision and parcel two of
2019- 19     Gateway Center Minor 2, from A District to M-1 District
31
CC
Ord.  12-9-  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 29,
2019- 19     Township 6 south, Range 9 West, from A District to M-1 District
32
BC    2-10-  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 11, Township 4 south, Range 9
Ord.  20     west, from M-2 District to A District
20-02
BC
Ord.  3-9-20 Rezoning Lot 3 of Victoria National Club Commons from C-2 District to PUD w/C-
2020-        2 District
06
BC
Ord.  4-27-  Rezoning Block 13 of the plat of Folsomville from R-1A and C-4 District to A
2020- 20     District
08
BC
Ord.  6-22-  Rezoning .298 acres in the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of
2020- 20     Section 17, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from A District to M-1 District
09
BC
Ord.  7-13-  Rezoning Parcel One of Stradtner Minor Subdivision, containing .569 acres, from
2020- 20     AG District to C-3 District
10
BC
Ord.  7-13-  Rezoning All of Tract 2 and Tract 3 in Arvin Minor Subdivision, containing
2020- 20     29.418 acres, from AG District to R- 1A District
11
BC
Ord.  7-13-  Rezoning Lot 93 in Broadview Subdivision Section C from R-3 District to R- 1A
2020- 20     District
12
CC
Ord.  9-14-  Rezoning 11.609 acres in the southwest quarter of Section 33, Township 6 South,
2020- 20     Range 9 West, from R-1A District to R-1 District
18
BC
Ord.  11-9-  Rezoning Lots 3 and 4 in A & B Subdivision from M-1 District to M- 2 District
2020- 20
27
BC
Ord.  11-9-  Rezoning Lot 2 in 4B Subdivision from R-1A District to R- 1A/PUD District
2020- 20
28
BC
Ord.  12-14- Rezoning Lot 1 in Anchor Lake Development from A & F-P Districts to PUD/R-1D
2020- 20     District
30
BC
Ord.  12-14- Rezoning Lots 13, 14 and 15 in the Corrected Plat of Bellmoore Landing Section
2020- 20     1 from C-4 District to PUD w/C-4 District
31
BC
Ord.  12-14- Rezoning 9.311 acres in the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
2020- 20     Section 35 from A District to R-1 District
32
BC           Rezoning 35.19 acres being part of a tract of land conveyed to Maken
Ord.  12-29- Corporation, recorded as Parcel 10 in Deed File 2, Card 18453, being part of
2020- 20     the northwest quarter of Section 20, Township 5 South, Range 8 West, Ohio Civil
33           Township from M-2 District to PUD w/R-1 District
BC           Rezoning 1.85 acres in part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
Ord.  5-10-  of Section 26, and part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
2021- 21     Section 27, all in Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township, Warrick
21           County, Indiana from A District to C-2 District
BC           Rezoning 1.31 acres in part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter
Ord.  6-14-  of Section 29, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, Warrick County
2021- 21     Indiana from A District to C-4 District
23
BC           Rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of section 21, township 6 south, range
Ord.  9-13-  9 west of the second principal meridian, Ohio Township, Warrick County from A
2021- 21     District to PUD/R-2B
30
BC           Rezoning a part of the northwest quarter and a part of the southwest quarter of
Ord.  9-13-  section 10, township 5 south, range 8 west of the second principal meridian,
2021- 21     Boon Township, Warrick County from Agriculture District to PUD/R1-D District
31
BC
Ord.  9-13-  Rezoning part of the east half of section 30, township 6 south, range 7 west in
2021- 21     Boon Township, Warrick County from AG and FP District to PUD-R1D District
32
BC           Rezoning part of the south half of the south half of the southwest quarter of
Ord.  10-12- the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio
2021- 21     Township, Warrick County from M-2 General Industrial to R-1A One Family
36           Dwelling
BC
Ord.  12-13- Rezoning Lot 19 in the Town of Folsomville, Warrick County from M-2 General
2021- 21     Industrial to A Agricultural
37
BC           Rezoning part of Lot 1 in High Pointe Centre North Section 4 PUD and part of
Ord.  - -22  Lot 40 of High Pointe Centre North Section 2, Phase 2 from C-4 and PUD w/C-4 to
22-02        PUD w/C-4
BC    2-15-
Ord.  22     Rezoning Lot 5 in Peachwood of Warrick Place VII from M-2 to PUD/C-4
22-03
CC
Ord.  4-11-  Rezoning part of Outlot 1 in Corrected Plat of Sudamar Heights Subdivision,
2022- 22     from C-3, C-4 & A, to PUD/C-3
10
CC
Ord.  4-25-  Rezoning Lot 6 in Stratman- Johnson PUD Amended, from PUD/R-1D to PUD/A
2022- 22
11
CC
Ord.  5-16-  Rezoning part of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 22,
2022- 22     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from A to PUD/R-2
13
CC
Ord.  5-16-  Rezoning part of the West Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 8, Township
2022- 22     6 South, Range 9 West, from A to M-2
14
CC
Ord.  7-25-  Rezoning part of the Southeast Quarter of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 9
2022- 22     West, from A to C-4
17
CC           Rezoning part of the Northwest Quarter of Section 20, Part of the Northeast
Ord.  8-22-  Quarter of Section 19, Part of the South Half of the Southwest Quarter of
2022- 22     Section 17 and Part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of
18           Section 18, all in Township 6 South, Range 8 West, from M-2 to R-1
CC
Ord.  9-12-  Rezoning Lot 4 in Warrick Research & Industrial Center No. l, from M-2 to PUD/
2022- 22     C-4
19
CC
Ord.  10-10- Rezoning part of Lots 27 and 28 in Sweat’s Subdivision, from C-4 and R-1A to
2022- 22     PUD/R-2B
23
BC           Rezoning part of Lot 2 in Martin Bell Subdivision, part of the vacated right-
Ord.  1-10-  of-way for Wyatt Court and Cora Court, and part of the northwest quarter of the
2023- 23     southeast quarter of Section 22, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from R-1 to
01           PUD/R-1
BC
Ord.  3-14-  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 14,
2023- 23     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from R-1 to C-4
03
BC
Ord.  3-14-  Rezoning part of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 20, Township
2023- 23     4 South, Range 9 West, from A and R-1 to M-1
04
BC
Ord.  7-24-  Rezoning Lots 7 and 8, Warrick Research and Industrial Center NO 3, from M-2 to
2023- 23     M-3
15
BC
Ord.  8-14-  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 32,
2023- 23     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from R-1A to C-4
16
BC
Ord.  10-9-  Rezoning Lot 7 in Elberfeld Industrial Park Major Subdivision, from M-2 to A
2023- 23
21
BC           Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter and part of the
Ord.  11-14- northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 32, Township 4 South,
2023- 23     Range 9 West, from M-2 to A; and part of the northwest quarter of the southwest
23           quarter of Section 32, Township 4 South, Range 9 West, from M-2 to A
BC           Rezoning part of the east half of Section 1, Township 6 South, Range 8 West and
Ord.  11-14- part of the west half of Section 6, Township 6 South, Range 7 West, from A,
2023- 23     CON, R-1A, C-4, and M-2 to A
24
BC
Ord.  12-13- Rezoning the parcel at 6085 Augusta Drive, from R-2 to R-2B
2023- 23
25
BC
Ord.  12-13- Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 32,
2023- 23     Township 4 South, Range 9 West, from M-2 to R2
26
BC
Ord.  2-12-  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 16,
2024- 24     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from A to R-1A
01
BC
Ord.  3-11-  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 25,
2024- 24     Township 6 South, Range 9 West, from R-1 to PUD/A
03
BC           Rezoning Lot 39 in Wyngate Subdivision Section “A”, replat of Lots 17, 18, and
Ord.  5-13-  39, a planned residential unit development, being part of Section 34, Township
2024- 24     6 South, Range 9 West, from R-O to R-1/PUD
05
BC
Ord.  5-30-  Rezoning Block 13 in the plat of Folsomville, Indiana, from A to M-2
2024- 24
07
BC           Rezoning part of the west half of the east half of the Northeast Quarter of
Ord.         Section 19, part of the west half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 19, part
2024- 9-9-24 of the west half of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section
13           18, all in Township 6 South, Range 8 West, Ohio Civil Township, from M-2 to PUD
             w/R-1
BC           Rezoning part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 18,
Ord.  9-9-24 Township 6 South, Range 8 West, part of the west half of the Southeast Quarter
2024-        of the Southeast Quarter of Section 18, Township 6 South, Range 8 West, all in
14           Boon Township, from M-2 to C-4
BC           Rezoning part of Parcel 1 of the Orville Grimm Parcelization Plat, being part
Ord.  10-9-  of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 28, Township 6
2024- 24     South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township; and Parcel 1 of the Orville Grimm 2
15           Parcelization Plat, from A to PUD with R-3
BC           Rezoning part of the north half of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest
Ord.  10-9-  Quarter of Section 20, Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township, from A
2024- 24     to C-4
16
BC           1) Rezoning Lots 14, 15, 16 and 17 in Gateway Business Part, Section 2, being
Ord.  11-13- part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 28, Township
2024- 24     6 South, Range 9 West, lying in Ohio Township, from C-4 to PUD with R-2B; and
20
             2) Rezoning Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 in Gateway Business Part, Section
           2, being part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 28,
             Township 6 South, Range 9 West, lying in Ohio Township, from R-O to PUD with R-
             2B
CC    2-10-  Rezoning part of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 22,
Ord.  25     Township 6 South, Range 9 West from A to C-4
25-01
CC    2-10-  Rezoning part of Tract 2 in Gateway Center Minor Subdivision from A and R-2B to
Ord.  25     C-4
25-02
CC    2-10-  Rezoning part of the East Half of the Southeast Quarter of Section 20, Township
Ord.  25     6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Township, from A to C-4
25-03
CC           Rezoning part of the East Half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 20 and part
Ord.  4-15-  of the North Half of Section 21, all in Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio
2025- 25     Township, from A to C-4
07
CC           Rezoning part of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 29,
Ord.  4-15-  Township 6 South, Range 9 West of the 2nd P.M., lying in Ohio Township, from A
2025- 25     to M-1
08
CC
Ord.  7-15-  Rezoning part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 32,
2025- 25     Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township from Agriculture to R-1
09
            
 
TABLE VII: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
BC
Ord.  1-7-85 Vacating a certain platted roadway in Epworth Gardens
1985-
1
BC
Ord.  1-7-85 Vacating part of Tyring Road, a public right-of-way in Castle Hills Subdivision
1985-        Part Two
2
BC           Vacating all that portion of South Heights Court and East View Court westerly
Ord.  2-15-  of and adjacent to the west right-of-way of Pfafflin Lake Boulevard in Lakevale
1985- 85     Estates
8
BC
Ord.  5-28-  Vacating portions of platted streets in the plat of Folsomville
1985- 85
11
BC
Ord.  6-2-86 Vacating part of Country Road adjoining Lots 6, 7, 8 and 9 in Country Meadows
1986-        Subdivision
6
BC
Ord.  7-17-  Vacating a portion of a drainage easement in Powers Place Subdivision and
1987- 87     accepting a storm water drainage easement in Powers Place
14
BC
Ord.  3-7-88 Vacating a public utility easement in Bethany Hills Subdivision
1988-
7
BC
Ord.  2-6-89 Vacating part of Boonville-Princeton Road
1989-
2-A
BC
Ord.  5-22-  Vacating portions of Bell Oaks Drive and portions of public utility easements
1989- 89     in Bell Oaks Subdivision
07
BC
Ord.  2-26-  Vacating an undeveloped public way shown as North Street on the original plat
1990- 90     of Yankeetown
6
BC
Ord.  5-13-  Vacating a public right-of-way which is part of the southwest quarter of
1991- 91     Section 35, Township 6 south, Range 8 west
17
BC
Ord.  12-2-  Vacating the public utility easement between Lots 39 and 40 of Stonehaven
1991- 91     Subdivision
36
BC
Ord.  9-13-  Vacating portions of the dedicated public right-of-way and portions of the
1993- 93     public utility easements and restrictions in Cypress Acres Subdivision
17
BC
Ord.  3-28-  Vacating portion of Brownwood Drive in Tanglewood Subdivision
1994- 94
4
BC
Ord.  4-11-  Vacating a public utility easement in Old Stonehouse Estates unit 5 “The Cove”
1994- 94
5
BC
Ord.  4-11-  Vacating three public utility easements and one drainage easement in Lakevale
1994- 94     Subdivision Section B
6
BC
Ord.  5-23-  Vacating all drainage and public utility easements and Willow Hill Lane and
1994- 94     Annie V. Lane in Sharon Ridge Estate Subdivision
8
BC
Ord.  6-13-  Vacating six portions of public road right-of-ways in Lakevale Estates
1994- 94     Subdivision sections A and B-replat east of Newburgh
9
BC
Ord.  6-13-  Vacating utility and drainage easements lying between Lots 1 and 2 in the
1994- 94     corrected plat of Twin Lakes Subdivision
10
BC
Ord.  6-13-  Vacating five portions of public road rights-of-way and public utility and
1994- 94     drainage easements in Heritage Place Third Addition
11
BC
Ord.  2-22-  Vacating part of a drainage easement in Lots 41 and 42 in Paradise Lake
1995- 95     Subdivision
4
BC
Ord.  9-11-  Vacating part of a drainage easement in Lots 24 and 25 in Lost Lake Subdivision
1995- 95
17
BC
Ord.  9-25-  Vacating part of a public right-of-way in Pine Lake Estates
1995- 95
19
BC
Ord.  10-23- Vacating the public utilities and drainage easements covering part of Lot 5 in
1995- 95     Autumn Ridge Estates
20
BC
Ord.  11-27- Vacating part of Scales Road
1995- 95
22
BC
Ord.  4-28-  Vacating Rolling Meadow Drive
1997- 97
5
BC
Ord.  7-14-  Vacating part of Roth Drive East
1997- 97
7
BC
Ord.  7-28-  Vacating part of a road in Pidgeon Township, extending to County Road 1075 E.
1997- 97
8
BC
Ord.  7-28-  Vacating a public utility easement in Lakevale Estates
1997- 97
9
BC
Ord.  8-11-  Vacating part of a public right-of-way in Quail Crossing Golf Community, Phase
1997- 97     IA
10
BC
Ord.  9-8-97 Vacating a public utility and drainage easement on Trinity Drive in Newburgh
1997-
11
BC
Ord.  12-1-  Vacating a portion of a public street in Elliott Estates Subdivision
1997- 97
21
BC
Ord.  12-15- Vacating a roadway situated between Lot 7 and Lot 8 of Sunnymeade Subdivision,
1997- 97     Section "B," and known as Ivy Street
22
BC
Ord.  3-9-98 Vacating Purdue Road from Outer Lincoln Road to Vann Road
1998-
01
BC
Ord.  4-27-  Vacating a portion of a public utilities easement and drainage easement in Lot
1998- 98     160, Kingston/ Eastbrooke Section E Subdivision
02
BC
Ord.  7-27-  Vacating a portion of the drainage and public utility easement in Autumn Ridge
1998- 98     Estates II Subdivision
8
BC
Ord.  1-11-  Vacating a part of the cul-de-sac located at the intersection of Parkridge Road
1999- 99     and Pfafflin Woods Drive in Lakevale Estates section “D”
01
BC           Vacating a public right-of-way commencing at the northeast corner of the
Ord.  6-28-  northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 29, Township 6 South,
1999- 99     Range 9 West
10
BC
Ord.  11-22- Vacating a certain platted public utility and drainage easement beginning at
1999- 99     the southeast corner of Lot #14 of Ashbury Parke Subdivision
31
BC
Ord.  10-25- Vacating a 50-foot easement, being a part of Monticello Drive in the replat of
1999- 99     Colonial Hills “Section B”
36
BC
Ord.  2-28-  Vacating part of a public right-of-way in Lake Newburgh Subdivision
2000- 00
4
BC
Ord.  3-27-  Vacating part of a public right-of-way known as May Lane
2000- 00
7
BC
Ord.  4-10-  Vacating a certain public utility easement in Lake Newburgh Subdivision and
2000- 00     relocating it
11
BC
Ord.  7-10-  Vacating a public way known as Oak Street between Blocks 3 and 4
2000- 00
13
BC           Vacating a public way known as Center Street west of Lots 1 and 5 in Block 10
Ord.  7-10-  in the unincorporated Town of Eames and east of the land designated as the
2000- 00     “Park” in the Town of Eames
14
BC           Vacating a public road right-of-way (remainder of right-of-way from Centennial
Ord.  7-10-  Drive that comes off Epworth and currently ends in a cul- de-sac next to the
2000- 00     parking area for Gateway)
15
BC
Ord.  7-10-  Vacating a public utility easement in Lot 2 of Warrick Place Subdivision
2000- 00
16
BC
Ord.  9-13-  Vacating public road right-of-way on Stacer Road
2000- 00
20
BC
Ord.  10-25- Vacating a 15 foot easement in Lots 13 and 14 in Crescent Heights Subdivision
2000- 00     Section A
23
BC
Ord.  10-25- Vacating a portion of a platted public utility easement in Lot 338 in Lakeridge
2000- 00     Crossing Subdivision
24
BC
Ord.  5-9-01 Vacating a public utility easement in a part of Lot 30 of Quail Crossing Golf
2001-        Community, Phase I
06
BC
Ord.  6-13-  Vacating part of a public right-of-way of Boston Drive in Heritage Place 3d
2001- 01     Addition
13
BC
Ord.  7-10-  Vacating Lot 3 of Heritage Place Third Addition Subdivision (Heritage Community
2002- 02     Park)
06
BC
Ord.  11-13- Providing for the partial vacation of Vann Road
2002- 02
10
BC
Ord.  5-14-  Vacating a portion of a cul-de-sac adjacent to Lot 16 in the Country Cove
2003- 03     Subdivision
06
BC
Ord.  5-14-  Vacating a right-of-way for Stephen Circle in Orchard Heights Subdivision
2003- 03
07
BC
Ord.  5-14-  Vacating a 15-foot public utility easement on Lots 3 and 4 in Lakevale Estates
2003- 03
08
BC
Ord.  5-14-  Vacating a 12-foot drainage easement on Lot 4 in Warrick Place III Subdivision
2003- 03
09
BC
Ord.  5-14-  Vacating a public utility easement for part of Lot 55 located in Old Stone
2003- 03     House Estates
10
BC
Ord.  6-11-  Vacating a 10-foot public utility easement lying in Lots 23 through 31 in
2003- 03     Brookelyn Ridge Subdivision
11
BC
Ord.  6-11-  Vacating a right-of-way for Edward Avenue in Orchard Heights Subdivision
2003- 03
12
BC
Ord.  7-9-03 Vacating a portion of a public utility easement for part of Lot 5 in Halston
2003-        Manor Subdivision
13
BC
Ord.  7-23-  Vacating certain public ways or public places commonly known as Fruitwood Lane
2003- 03
16
BC
Ord.  9-24-  Vacating a ten foot public utility easement on Lot 13 of Heritage Place 3rd
2003- 03     Addition and vacating a right-of-way of Boston Drive
17
BC
Ord.  12-10- Vacating a public road right-of-way commonly known as Gateway Boulevard
2003- 03
18
BC
Ord.  1-14-  Vacating a 6 foot Public Utility Easement lying in Lot #1 of Warrick Place
2004- 04
01
BC
Ord.  3-17-  Vacating a 12 foot drainage easement near Shadow Creek Lane in Boon Civil
2004- 04     Township
04
BC
Ord.  5-13-  Vacating a sewer utility easement for the High Pointe Centre in Ohio Township
2004- 04
09
BC
Ord.  5-4-04 Vacating a restricted public utility easement on High Pointe Drive in Ohio
2004-        Township
10
BC
Ord.  1-12-  Vacating part of Lot 24 in Lakeridge Crossing, Section A
2005- 05
02
C            Vacating a ten-foot public utility easement and three feet of the adjoining
Ord.  5-11-  public utility and drainage easement on the east side of Lot 62 in Quail
2005- 05     Crossing Phase III Subdivision
05
BC
Ord.  5-11-  Vacating one public utility easement in The Reserve Subdivision Section B
2005- 05
06
BC
Ord.  8-24-  Vacating a part of the north half of the southeast quarter of the northeast
2005- 05     quarter of Section 28, Township 6 South, Range 9 West
15
BC
Ord.  8-26-  Vacating part of the 12-foot public utility and drainage easement located along
2005- 05     the west line of Lot 16 in Highpointe Center Section E # 2
16
BC
Ord.  10-12- Vacating part of the variable width public utility and drainage easement
2005- 05     located along the east line of Lot 59 in River Ridge III
20
BC
Ord.  3-8-06 Vacating part of Lot 2 in I-164 Commercial Park
2006-
03
BC
Ord.  10-11- Vacating part of a public right-of-way commonly known as Lake Newburgh Drive,
2006- 06     within Lake Newburgh Subdivision
17
BC           Vacating the north 361.31 feet of a 20-foot-wide public utility easement that
Ord.  1-10-  runs from north to south for 1,029.5 feet on the common line of Lots 5 and 6 in
2007- 07     Paradise Estates Subdivision
02
BC
Ord.  2-28-  Vacating all of the variable width public utility easement located on the north
2007- 07     side of Lots 11 through 16 in Julianne Estates
04
BC           Vacating public utility and drainage easement for Lot 32 in Wyngate
Ord.  8-8-07 Subdivision, Section B, part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter
2007-        of Section 34, Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township
07
BC           Vacating part of a drainage easement for Lot 36 in Water’s Edge Phase II
Ord.  9-26-  Subdivision, part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 16, Township 5 South, and
2007- 07     Range 9 West in Campbell Township
26
BC
Ord.  9-26-  Vacating the western half (ten feet) of a 20-foot public utility and drainage
2007- 07     easement on Lot 31 of Rolling Hills Manor No. 2, Section B Subdivision
27
BC
Ord.  11-14- Vacating a 12-foot storm sewer easement on Lot 6 of the replat of Lots 5 and 6
2007- 07     in Warrick Place Subdivision
29
BC
Ord.  12-12- Vacating the northern half (12 feet, six inches) of the existing 25-foot public
2007- 07     utility and drainage easement on Lot 43 in Triple Crown Estates Subdivision
30
BC           Vacating five easements located within the boundaries of Engelbrecht Place
Ord.  6-11-  Section 2, Phases 1 and 2, of which easements are now a part of Orchard View
2008- 08     Condominiums P.U.D. Section 1, all of which is located in Section 23, Township
05           6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio Township
BC           Vacating two easements located within the boundaries of Warrick County
Ord.  6-25-  Industrial Park Section 2C, located in Section 33, Township 5 South, Range 8
2008- 08     West in Boon Township.
06
BC
Ord.  8-24-  Vacating an easement located on part of Lot 2A as shown on the plat of Warrick
2009- 09     County Industrial Park Section 2C.
08
BC
Ord.  9-14-  Vacating the right-of-way for Branson Lane in Weyerbacher’s 2nd Subdivision.
2009- 09
24
BC           Vacating all that part of the existing right-of-way for Seven Hills Road
Ord.  6-28-  (County Road 750N) in the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section
2010- 10     28, Township 4 South, Range 9 West, lying south of the proposed right-of-way
05           for relocated Seven Hills Road
BC           Vacating part or all of six temporary offsite drainage and public utility
Ord.  6-13-  easements on the plat of Arbor Pointe Section 1, part of the west half of the
2011- 11     southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, in Ohio
13           Township
BC
Ord.  7-7-11 Vacating the right-of-way known as Ivy Street, located between Angel Drive and
2011-        Oak Street and between Lots 39 and 40 in Sunnymeade Subdivision Section B
14
BC
Ord.  9-12-  Vacating two utility and drainage easements on Lot 6 of Sunrise Estates
2011- 11     Subdivision in Ohio Township
19
BC           Vacating the west 180 feet or 40 foot wide right-of-way of Walnut Street lying
Ord.  2-13-  between Lots 24 and 25 in Clark’s enlargement to the town of Taylorville, new
2012- 12     Selvin, Indiana
07
BC
Ord.  2-13-  Vacating the east 15 feet of the east 50 foot right-of-way of Asbury Cemetery
2012- 12     Road, and Lot 5 and 6 in the Corrective Plat of Three Lakes Estates
08
BC           Vacating certain public utility easements and right-of-ways in Paradise Park,
Ord.  8-12-  commonly known as 7007, 7022, 7033, 7110, 7111, 7155, 7260 and 7190 Parker
2013- 13     Drive, Newburgh, Indiana
21
BC           Vacating ten foot drainage easement and a new dedication of a ten foot drainage
Ord.  11-12- easement located within the boundary of Lot 77B of the replat of Lot 77A, 77B
2013- 13     and 77C in the replat of Lot 78 and Lot 77 of Triple Crown Estates
27
BC           Vacating a drainage easement on Lot 72 in the corrected plat of the replat of
Ord.  2-10-  Lakevale Estates, Section B, commonly known as 6255 Pfafflin Lake Blvd.,
2014- 14     Newburgh, Indiana
05
BC
Ord.  2-9-15 Vacating that part of a public way located on real estate commonly known as
2015-        5800 Jenner Road, 5811 Jenner Road, and Jenner Road, Newburgh, Indiana
01
BC
Ord.  3-23-  Vacating a portion of Glenview Drive and the public utility and drainage
2015- 15     easements within Lot 76 of Lexington Subdivision
04
BC
Ord.  8-24-  Vacating a drainage easement in Englebrecht Place Section 2, Phase 2, now a
2015- 15     part of Orchard View Condominium PUD Section 1
20
BC
Ord.  10-26- Vacating portions of public ways located in the Warrick County Industrial Park
2015- 15     Subdivision in Boon Township
24
BC
Ord.  12-28- Vacating easement located in Part 19A in The Estates at Victoria Replat of Lots
2015- 15     4, 18 & 19
32
BC
Ord.  12-28- Vacating a 20-foot wide public utility easement located on the common line
2015- 15     between Lots 14 and 15, 10 feet on each side of the line, in Remington Ridge
33
BC
Ord.  5-23-  Vacating a portion of a drainage easement located within Lot 165 in Old Hickory
2016- 16     Estates #5
09
BC
Ord.  7-11-  Vacating a public utility easement for Lot 2 in Dazey Acres 2 Subdivision
2016- 16
12
BC
Ord.  7-25-  Vacating a portion of the drainage easement on Lots 76 and 88 in Bellevue,
2016- 16     Section 1 in Ohio Township
14
BC
Ord.  7-25-  Vacating a 6- foot wide public utility easement on Lots 52 through 59,
2016- 16     inclusive, and 98 in Bellevue, Section 1 in Ohio Township
15
BC           Vacating the east 6-feet of a 12-foot public utility easement on the west side
Ord.  11-14- Lot 10 of the corrected plat of Sunrise Manor and Acacia Residential
2016- 16     Development
21
BC
Ord.  11-28- Vacating part of Lots 2 and 3 in the corrected plat of Bellmoore Landing
2016- 16
25
BC           Vacating public ways from part of Lots 1, 2, and 6 in Warrick Trail Apartment
Ord.  1-23-  Homes P.U.D. which is part of the southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 6
2017- 17     South, Range 9 west
02
BC
Ord.  4-10-  Vacating public ways from part of Lots 5 and 6 in Warrick Trail Apartment Homes
2017- 17     P.U.D.
09
BC
Ord.  5-22-  Vacating a public utility easement identified as part of Lot 25 in Lincolnwood
2017- 17     Estates Phase II subdivision
13
BC           Vacating three drainage easements, two public utility easements, a portion of a
Ord.  6-12-  Lakeside Maintenance and Storm Drainage easement, and three drainage and
2017- 17     underground public utility easements all located within the Orchard View
14           Condominiums - P.U.D.
BC
Ord.  8-14-  Vacating portions of public utility easements in the Epworth Lincoln
2017- 17     Subdivision
18
CC
Ord.  8-28-  Vacating parts of a public utility easement in the Lexington Subdivision
2017- 17
19
BC
Ord.  11-27- Vacating all of the Lake Maintenance and Storm Drainage Easement platted on Lot
2017- 17     2 of Grimm Road Commercial
32
CC
Ord.  5-29-  Vacating a public utility easement located within Part of Lot 5 in the Replat
2018- 18     Lots 5 and 6 of Warrick Place
13
CC
Ord.  8-13-  Vacating a public utility easement in Sharon Hills Estates Section B-1
2018- 18
19
CC
Ord.  12-10- Vacating certain public ways or public places within the county commonly known
2018- 18     as 10399 and 10401 Ashton Court, Newburgh, Indiana
32
BC
Ord.  2-11-  Vacating certain public ways or public places within the county, commonly known
2019- 19     as French Road
04
BC
Ord.  4-22-  Vacating three tracts being parts of a public utility easement and a drain
2019- 19     easement on the Plat of Glendale Planned Residential Unit Development
08
BC
Ord.  8-12-  Vacating an easement and the right-of-way of Holly Lane, located in Epley
2019- 19     Acres, Warrick County
17
BC           Vacating a public way described as part of Lot 1 in Paradise Estates, a
Ord.  8-26-  subdivision of part of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 6 South,
2019- 19     Range 8 West, Boon Civil Township
19
BC           Vacating a public way described as part of the east half of the northeast
Ord.  3-9-20 quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 4 South, Range 9 West,
2020-        of the 2nd Principal Meridian in Greer Township
05
BC           Vacating a 12-foot wide public utility easement being part of Lot 7 in the
Ord.  8-24-  Replats of Lots 3, 4 and 5 of Warrick Place Subdivision, being a part of the
2020- 20     South Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 23, Township 6 South, Range 9
16           West, Ohio Township
BC           Vacating the south 45 feet of Lot 101 in Twin Oaks, Section C, a subdivision of
Ord.  9-28-  part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter in Section 26, Township
2020- 20     6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Civil Township
21
BC           Vacating parts of 12-foot drainage easements on Lot 2 in Epworth Lincoln
Ord.  9-28-  Subdivision, being a part of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter in
2020- 20     Section 29, Township 6 South, Range 9 West, Ohio Civil Township
22
BC    11-5-  Vacating part of Lot 7 in Hidden Trail Court Subdivision, located in the
Ord.  20     southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 5 South,
20-25        Range 8 West in Boon Township
BC           Vacating a 12-foot wide drainage easement located in Lots 13, 14 and 15 in the
Ord.  11-9-  Corrected Plat of Bellmoore Landing Section 1, being part of the south half of
2020- 20     the southwest quarter of Section 22, Township 6 South, Range 9 West in Ohio
26           Civil Township
BC
Ord.  12-14- Vacating a certain public utility and drainage easement within Lot 1 and 2 of
2020- 20     Spring Lake Subdivision in Boon Township
29
BC
Ord.  9-13-  Vacating part of Jenner Road, lying in section 8 in township 6 south, range 8
2021- 21     west in Boon Township, Warrick County
29
BC
Ord.  - -22  Vacating a portion of a public utility and drainage easement along the western
2022-        edge of Lots 9, 10 and 11 of Bethany Hills Subdivision.
09
BC
Ord.  10-24- Vacating portions of the right-of-way for Bayberry Drive in Framewood Estates
2022- 22
24
BC
Ord.  12-18- Vacating part of the right-of-way for Wyatt Court and Cora Court in Spring
2022- 22     Creek Subdivision
25
BC
Ord.  1-27-  Vacating certain public ways described as part of the southeast quarter of
2023- 23     Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 9 West
02
BC
Ord.  3-27-  Vacating certain easements within Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Deer Creek
2023- 23
05
BC
Ord.  2-26-  Vacating an existing, 15-foot drainage easement on Lot 18 in the Hidden Trail
2024- 24     Court Subdivision
02
BC           Vacating a portion of the right-of-way of Rabbit Run Drive lying southeast of
Ord.  11-13- and adjacent to the southeast corner of Lot 14 in Gateway Business Park,
2024- 24     Section 2, being part of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of
19           Section 28, Township 6 South, Range 9 West lying in Ohio Township
BC
Ord.  11-25- Vacating a portion of the right-of-way of Prospect Drive located in the north
2024- 24     half of Section 19, Township 6 South, Range 8 West, Ohio Civil Township
22
BC
Ord.  11-25- Vacating certain drainage easements in part of Lots 4 through 8 of The Enclave
2024- 24     at Oak P.U.D.
23
BC
Ord.  3-24-  Vacating a portion of a 25-foot drainage easement in Keith’s Ridge in Warrick
2025- 25     County
05
BC
Ord.  8-11-  Vacating a 30-foot public utility easement on Lots 18 and 19 in Wren Lake No. 2
2025- 25     Subdivision
10
            
 
TABLE VIII: STREET NAME CHANGES
 
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
BC
Res.  9-13-  Approving a change in name of road from Centennial Drive to Gateway Boulevard.
1999- 99
8
BC
Ord.  8-25-  Approving a change in name of road from Plank Road to Old Plank Road.
2004- 04
11
BC           Approving additions and corrections to the Official Warrick County Road Name
Ord.  9-26-  Map and Street and Road Index, which are located in the Auditor’s Office and
2007- 08     the Area Planning Office.
28
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to County Council Resolutions
References to Board of County Commissioners Resolutions
References to County Council Ordinances
References to Board of County Commissioners Ordinances
References to Department of Stormwater Management Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Section Code Section
I.C. Section                Code Section
1-1-1-5                     10.04
1-1-1-7                     10.12
1-1-1-8                     10.06
1-1-4-5                     10.05
1-1-5-1                     10.11
1-1-6-1                     10.08
3-14-1.5-1 et seq.          30.04
3-5-2-40.1                  31.11
3-7-12-1 et seq.            34.01
3-7-12-10                   34.01
3-11-1.5-2                  34.02
4-21.5-3 et seq.            135.20
4-21.5-3-7                  150.53
5-1.5-2-2.5                 33.64
5-3-1                       31.08,
                            33.86
5-3-1 et seq.               32.05
5-10.1-1-1 et seq.          31.06
5-10.3-1 et seq.            31.06
5-11-1-27                   39.10
5-11-10 et seq.             39.05
5-11-10-1.6                 37.26
5-11-10-1.6(d)(3)           39.05
5-11-10-1.6(d)(4)           39.05
5-14-1.5                    30.16
5-14-1.5-5                  130.09
5-14-1.5-5(d)               35.31,
                            35.32
5-14-3 et seq.              39.08
5-14-3-2                    37.40
5-14-3-3                    37.40
5-14-3-3(e)                 37.40
5-14-3-3.6                  37.40
5-14-3-3.6(e)               37.40
5-14-3-4                    37.40
5-14-3-6                    37.40
5-14-3-8(b)                 37.12
5-14-3-8(h)                 37.12
5-14-3-8(i)                 37.12
5-14-3-8(j)                 37.40
5-14-3-8(k)                 37.40
5-14-3-8.3                  37.12
5-14-3-8.5                  37.40
5-14-3-8.5(b)               37.40
5-22                        31.08
5-22-3-3                    31.08
5-22-5                      31.08
5-22-5-4                    31.08
5-22-5-5                    31.08
5-22-6                      31.08
5-22-6-1                    31.08
5-22-7                      31.08
5-22-7-2                    31.08
5-22-7-3                    31.08
5-22-7-7                    31.08
5-22-7-8                    31.08
5-22-7-9                    31.08
5-22-7-10                   31.08
5-22-7-11 through 5-22-7-13 31.08
5-22-7-11                   31.08
5-22-7-12                   31.08
5-22-7-13                   31.08
5-22-8-2                    31.08
5-22-8-3                    31.08
5-22-9                      31.08
5-22-9-6                    31.08
5-22-9-7                    31.08
5-22-9-10                   31.08
5-22-10                     31.08
5-22-10-3                   31.08
5-22-10-4                   31.08
5-22-10-5                   31.08
5-22-10-6                   31.08
5-22-10-7                   31.08
5-22-10-8                   31.08
5-22-10-9                   31.08
5-22-10-10                  31.08
5-22-10-11                  31.08
5-22-10-12                  31.08
5-22-10-13                  31.08
5-22-10-14                  31.08
5-22-10-15                  31.08
5-22-10-16                  31.08
5-22-10-17                  31.08
5-22-11                     31.08
5-22-11-1-3                 31.08
5-22-11-2                   31.08
5-22-12                     31.08
5-22-12-1-3                 31.08
5-22-13                     31.08
5-22-13-2                   31.08
5-22-15-21                  31.08
5-22-16-6                   31.08
5-22-17                     31.08
5-22-17-1                   31.08
5-22-17-2                   31.08
5-22-17-4                   31.08
5-22-17-6                   31.08
5-22-17-10                  31.08
5-22-18-2                   31.08
5-22-18-3                   31.08
6-1.1-5.5-4                 37.09
6-1.1-5.5-4.5               37.09
6-1.1-12.1 et seq.          36.30
6-1.1-12.1                  151.01,
                            151.02
6-1.1-12.1-1                151.01
6-1.1-12.1-3                36.32
6-1.1-12.1-3(a)             36.32
6-1.1-12.1-3(e)             36.31
6-1.1-12.1-4.5              36.33,
                            36.34
6-1.1-12.1-4.5(g)           36.33,
                            36.34
6-1.1-12.1-5                36.32
6-1.1-12.1-5(b)             36.32
6-1.1-12.1-5(e)             36.32
6-1.1-12.1-5.1              36.36
6-1.1-12.1-5.5              36.33,
                            36.34
6-1.1-12.1-5.6              36.36
6-1.1-12.1-5.9              36.36
6-1.1-12.1-7                36.31
6-1.1-12.1-4.5              151.01
6-2.5                       36.20
6-2.5-1-3                   36.20
6-3.5-4-1 et seq.           71.02
6-3.5-4-2(b)                71.02
6-3.5-5-1 et seq.           71.01
6-3.5-5-4                   71.01
6-3.6-9-15                  37.11
6-9-18                      36.20
6-9-18-3                    33.92,
                            36.20
6-9-18-5                    33.90,
                            33.99
6-9-18-6                    33.96
7.1-5                       37.41
7.1-5-12 et seq.            39.03
7.1-5-12-8                  39.03
8-1.5-5 et seq.             33.80
                            33.80,
8-1.5-5                     33.84,
                            33.85
8-1.5-5-4.5                 33.81
8-1.5-5-4.5(d)              33.83
8-16-3                      37.01
9-13-2-1                    157.02
9-13-2-58                   70.05
9-13-2-60                   70.05
9-13-2-77                   70.05
9-20 et seq.                70.05
9-21-5-6                    70.01
9-22-1 et seq.              157.03
9-29-4-2                    32.02
9-29-11-1                   37.19
9-30-5                      37.41
9-30-6-8.7                  37.41
10-14-3                     35.16,
                            35.37
10-14-3-1                   35.02
10-14-3-2                   35.02
10-14-3-12                  30.16,
                            35.30
10-14-3-17                  35.02,
                            35.03
10-14-3-17(c)               35.15
10-14-3-17(d)               35.15
10-14-3-17(d)(2)(A)         35.16
10-14-3-17(d)(2)(B)         35.16
                            35.02,
10-14-3-17(h)               35.17,
                            35.18
10-14-3-17(i)               35.17
10-14-3-17(j)(5)            35.34
10-14-3-22                  35.04,
                            35.34
10-14-3-24                  35.34
10-14-3-26                  35.17
10-14-3-27                  35.02
10-14-3-27(a)               35.17
10-14-3-27(b)               35.17
10-14-3-27(c)               35.17
10-14-3-29                  30.16,
                            35.35
                            35.02,
10-14-3-29(a)               35.30,
                            35.31
10-14-3-31                  35.34,
                            35.38
10-19-2-1                   35.02
11-8-8-21                   32.04
11-12-5-1 et seq.           38.01
11-12-6                     37.02,
                            37.07
13-17-9                     133.02
13-20-10                    54.03
14-16-1                     73.01,
                            73.08
14-16-1-8                   73.03
14-16-1-20(c)               73.01
14-16-1-21                  73.04
14-16-1-23                  73.05
14-16-1-23(a)(7)            73.09
14-16-1-24                  73.06
14-34                       54.08
16-18-2-179(b)              132.06
16-18-2-282                 132.06
16-20-2-16                  135.02
16-37-1-9(b)                37.38
16-41-25-9                  130.05
16-41-37-4                  39.03
16-42-5-32                  134.01,
                            134.02
16-42-5-32(e)               134.02
16-42-5.3 et seq.           134.01,
                            137.02
16-42-5.3-7(c)              134.02
16-42-19                    37.41
20-42-2-4.5                 37.15
20-42-2-4.5(b)              37.15
20-42-2-4.5(c)              37.15
20-42-2-4.5(d)              37.15
20-42-2-4.5(e)              37.15
22-9-1-4 et seq.            91.02
22-9.5-1 et seq.            91.01
22-9.5-2-2                  91.02
22-9.5-2-3                  91.02
22-9.5-2-4                  91.02
22-9.5-2-8                  91.02
22-9.5-2-9                  91.02
22-9.5-2-11                 91.02
22-9.5-2-13                 91.02
22-9.5-3 et seq.            91.10
22-9.5-3                    91.03
22-9.5-4-8                  91.11
22-9.5-5                    91.02
22-9.5-5-1                  91.03
22-9.5-6                    91.02,
                            91.11
22-12                       150.53
22-12-1-4                   150.03
22-12-1-5                   150.03
22-12-1-7                   150.03
22-12-1-14                  150.03
22-12-1-16                  150.03
22-12-1-17                  150.03
22-12-1-18                  150.03
22-12-1-22(b)(12)           150.41
22-12-1-24                  150.03
22-12-1-26                  150.03
22-12-7                     150.05
22-13                       150.53
22-13-2-3(b)                150.40
22-13-2-6                   150.04
22-13-2-7                   150.53
22-13-2-7(b)                150.40
22-13-2-9                   150.04
22-13-2-11                  150.05
22-14                       150.53
22-15                       150.53
22-15-3                     150.16
22-15-4                     150.04
31-2 et seq.                33.111
31-37-1-2                   33.111
32-25-2-9                   150.03
32-29-7-3(c)                32.03
32-29-7-3(h)                32.03
32-30-6-6                   157.01
32-30-6-9                   157.03
32-30-6-11                  157.03
32-34                       35.38
33-39-8-5                   37.16
33-40-7-5                   33.116
33-40-7-9                   33.116
35-41-1-6                   33.111
35-41-1-8                   39.16
35-46-3 et seq.             131.21,
                            131.22
35-46-3-3                   39.16
35-46-3-6                   37.23
35-47-2                     39.16
35-47-8-1                   39.16
35-47-8-3                   39.16
35-48-4                     37.41
36-1-2-10                   157.03
36-1-3-8(a)(10)             10.99
36-1-5-4                    150.40,
                            150.41
36-1-6-2                    53.17,
                            54.11
36-1-6-9                    150.53
36-1-8.5                    39.09
36-1-8-5                    37.11
36-1-8-5.1                  37.11
36-1-8.5-2                  39.09
36-1-12                     31.08
36-1-12 et seq.             31.08
36-1-12-4.9                 31.08
36-1-20.2 et seq.           31.11
36-2-2                      35.02
36-2-2-8                    35.31,
                            35.32
36-2-2-8(b)                 35.32
36-2-3-4(a)                 30.15
36-2-4-3                    35.02
36-2-4-8                    37.04
36-2-5-2                    37.04
36-2-5-3(a)                 35.17
36-2-6-3                    39.05
36-2-6-4.5                  39.05
36-2-7-10(b)(5)             37.35
36-2-7-10(b)(6)             37.35
36-2-7-10(b)(9)             37.35
36-2-7-10(c)                37.35
36-2-7-10(f)                37.43
36-2-7-10.1                 37.43
36-2-7-10.1(c)              37.43
36-2-7-10.1(f)              37.43
36-2-7-10.1(h)              37.43
36-2-7-10.1(j)              37.43
36-2-13-5.6                 32.04
36-2-14-22.3                31.11
36-7-1-500 et seq.          154.004
36-7-3 et seq.              154.050,
                            154.060
36-7-4                      56.01
36-7-4-405(2)               154.011
                            154.011,
                            154.023,
36-7-4-411                  154.024,
                            154.035,
                            154.120
36-7-4-700 et seq.          154.003,
                            154.004
36-7-4-701(b)               154.011
36-7-4-1015                 154.018
36-7-7-1 et seq.            153.01
36-7-7-4                    153.01
36-7-8-9                    150.53
36-7-9                      156.02
36-7-9-2                    156.01
36-7-9-4                    156.01
36-7-10.1-3(a)              157.03
36-7-12 et seq.             37.44
36-7-12-18.5                37.44
36-7-12-25                  37.44
36-7-14.3(a)                33.25
36-7-14-3(b)                33.25
36-7-14-39                  36.31
36-8-3-20                   32.01
36-8-10-5                   31.11
36-8-10-6                   32.06
36-8-10-10                  33.65
36-8-10-11                  33.72
36-8-16                     90.01
36-9-25-11                  55.09
                            54.03,
36-9-27                     54.08,
                            56.05
36-9-33-2                   136.01
36-10-3-3(A)                33.01
36-10-3-9                   33.05
36-10-3-10                  33.08
36-10-3-11                  33.08
36-10-3-12                  33.08
36-10-3-14                  33.10
36-10-3-17(C),(D)           33.09
                            
 
REFERENCES TO COUNTY COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS
CC Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
CC Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
—         6-10-75     31.06
1986-3      9-2-86      T.S.O. III
1988-03     5-12-88     T.S.O. III
1989-1      5-11-89     T.S.O. III
1989-2      6-15-89     T.S.O. III
1990-1      12-6-90     33.35 -
                        33.40
1991-1A     7-11-91     T.S.O. III
1991-2      9-3-91      T.S.O. III
1992-19     12-3-92     T.S.O. III
1992-22A    12-3-92     T.S.O. III
1994-2      1-6-94      T.S.O. III
1994-5      6-2-94      151.01,
                        151.02
1994-9      7-7-94      T.S.O. III
1994-10     7-7-94      T.S.O. III
1995-4      4-13-95     T.S.O. III
1995-13     8-3-95      T.S.O. V
1995-14     8-16-95     T.S.O. III
1996-2      1-4-96      T.S.O. III
1996-4      5-2-96      T.S.O. III
1996-6      6-6-96      T.S.O. III
1996-9      9-5-96      90.01 -
                        90.07
1997-2      1-2-97      T.S.O. III
1998-02     11-12-98    T.S.O. III
1998-3      1-8-98      33.36
1998-2      2-12-98     T.S.O. III
1998-5      5-7-98      T.S.O. III
1998-8      8-6-98      T.S.O. III
1998-9      8-6-98      T.S.O. III
1998-10     10-7-98     T.S.O. III
1999-03     2-4-99      T.S.O. I
1999-5      4-8-99      T.S.O. III
1999-7      8-5-99      T.S.O. III
1999-9      12-2-99     T.S.O. I
2000-4      6-1-00      T.S.O. III
2000-5      7-6-00      T.S.O. III
2000-6      7-6-00      T.S.O. III
2000-8      11-2-00     T.S.O. III
2000-9      11-2-00     T.S.O. III
2000-10     12-7-00     T.S.O. III
2000-11     12-7-00     T.S.O. III
2001-02     1-5-01      T.S.O. III
2001-03     2-8-01      T.S.O. III
2001-04     4-5-01      T.S.O. III
2001-05     5-3-01      T.S.O. III
2001-06     6-7-01      T.S.O. III
2002-01     2-13-02     33.36
2002-02     10-3-02     T.S.O. V
2003-01     3-6-03      T.S.O. III
2003-02     3-6-03      T.S.O. III
2003-03     4-3-03      T.S.O. III
2003-04     4-3-03      T.S.O. III
2003-05     4-3-03      T.S.O. III
2003-06     4-3-03      T.S.O. III
2004-02     3-11-04     T.S.O. III
2004-03     3-11-04     T.S.O. III
2004-04     3-11-04     T.S.O. III
2004-05     3-11-04     T.S.O. III
2005-02     4-7-05      T.S.O. I 
2005-11     12-8-05     T.S.O. III
2006-01     1-6-06      T.S.O. III
2006-07     5-4-06      36.30 -
                        36.36
2006-08     5-4-06      T.S.O. I
2007-4      6-7-07      T.S.O. III
2008-04     2-14-08     T.S.O. III
2008-05     4-10-08     T.S.O. III
2008-09     6-5-08      T.S.O. III
2008-10     7-10-08     T.S.O. III
2008-11     8-7-08      T.S.O. III
2009-01-2   5-7-09      T.S.O. III
2009-02     6-4-09      T.S.O. III
2010-03     7-8-10      T.S.O. III
2010-04     7-8-10      T.S.O. III
2010-05     8-5-10      T.S.O. III
2010-06     8-5-10      T.S.O. III
2010-07     12-2-10     T.S.O. III
2011-01     1-6-11      T.S.O. III
2011-03     5-5-11      T.S.O. III
2011-04     6-2-11      T.S.O. III
2011-05     6-2-11      T.S.O. III
2011-06     7-7-11      T.S.O. III
2011-08     10-6-11     T.S.O. III
2011-09     11-3-11     T.S.O. III
2012-01     4-12-12     T.S.O. III
2012-02     5-3-12      T.S.O. III
2013-01     1-3-13      T.S.O. III
2013-02     2-7-13      T.S.O. III
2015-01     1-8-15      T.S.O. III
2015-02     1-8-15      T.S.O. III
2015-05     3-12-15     T.S.O. III
2015-06     3-12-15     T.S.O. III
2015-7      4-2-15      T.S.O. III
2015-8      4-2-15      T.S.O. III
2015-09     5-7-15      T.S.O. III
2015-10     7-9-15      T.S.O. III
2015-11     7-9-15      T.S.O. III
2015-12     8-6-15      T.S.O. III
2015-13     8-6-15      T.S.O. III
2015-14     9-3-15      T.S.O. III
2016-01     1-7-16      T.S.O. III
2016-02     2-4-16      T.S.O. III
2016-03     10-6-16     37.15
2017-01     1-5-17      T.S.O. V
2018-07     6-14-18     T.S.O. III
2018-09     7-5-18      T.S.O. III
2018-11     10-4-18     T.S.O. III
2018-12     11-1-18     T.S.O. III
2018-17     9-24-18     39.11
2020-01     1-2-20      T.S.O. III
2020-02     2-6-20      T.S.O. III
2020-12     11-5-20     T.S.O. III
2020-13     12-3-20     T.S.O. III
2021-02     2-4-21      T.S.O. III
2021-03     3-4-21      T.S.O. III
2021-08     6-3-21   30.16
2021-11     9-2-21      T.S.O. III
2021-13     10-7-21     T.S.O. III
2022-05     4-7-22      T.S.O. III
2022-06     4-7-22      T.S.O. III
2022-08     7-7-22      T.S.O. III
2022-09     8-4-22      T.S.O. III
2022-11     9-1-22      T.S.O. III
2022-12     10-6-22     T.S.O. III
2024-03     3-7-24   T.S.O. III
2024-04     3-7-24      39.06
2024-6      4-4-24      T.S.O. III
2024-07     6-6-24   131.55
2024-10     8-8-24      30.17
2024-13     10-3-24     T.S.O. III
2024-14     10-3-24     T.S.O. III
2024-15     10-3-24     39.06
2024-16     11-7-24     T.S.O. III
2024-17     11-7-24     T.S.O. III
2025-01     1-14-25     T.S.O. III
2025-03     2-4-25      T.S.O. III
                       
 
REFERENCES TO BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS RESOLUTIONS
BC Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
BC Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
1986-2      3-14-86     T.S.O. I
1986-5      6-13-86     37.05
1986-4      7-7-86      30.02
1986-5      7-10-86     37.05
1987-6      9-18-87     39.03
1987-8.1    10-16-87    T.S.O. IV
1987-8.2    10-26-87    T.S.O. IV
1988-6      2-22-88     T.S.O. I
1988-7      3-28-88     T.S.O. I
1988-9      3-28-88     T.S.O. I
1988-14     8-22-88     T.S.O. II
1989-12     7-24-89     T.S.O. I
1990-4      2-5-90      T.S.O. I
1990-8      4-23-90     T.S.O. I
1990-16     12-3-90     33.35 -
                        33.40
1990-1      12-6-90     33.35 -
                        33.40
1991-2      1-1-91      33.50 -
                        33.52
1991-06     2-4-91      T.S.O. I
1992-1      1-6-92      39.04
1992-13     6-22-92     T.S.O. I
1993-7      4-26-93     153.02
1993-8      6-28-93     37.01
1994-3      10-24-94    T.S.O. V
1994-5      11-28-94    T.S.O. IV
1996-4      6-24-96     T.S.O. IV
1996-7      9-9-96      T.S.O. IV
1996-8      10-28-96    39.02
1997-05     5-12-97     T.S.O. V
1998-3      1-12-98     33.36
1998-6      6-8-98      T.S.O. III
1998-9      8-24-98     T.S.O. I
1998-11     8-24-98     33.50
1998-14     10-26-98    T.S.O. I
1998-16     10-13-98    T.S.O. V
1998-18     12-31-98    T.S.O. I
1999-4      3-29-99     T.S.O. IV
1999-5      4-26-99     T.S.O. IV
1999-7      8-23-99     T.S.O. IV
1999-8      9-13-99     T.S.O. VIII
1999-9      9-27-99     T.S.O. I
1999-10     11-22-99    T.S.O. I
2000-04     9-13-00     T.S.O. I
2000-06     12-18-00    52.01
2001-06     6-13-01     T.S.O. I
2001-08     9-12-01     31.09
2002-03     2-14-02     33.36
2002-07     5-1-02      T.S.O. I
2004-04     4-21-04     T.S.O. I
2004-06     9-15-04     T.S.O. I
2005-06     3-16-05     T.S.O. I
2006-07     12-20-06    T.S.O. V
2009-3      1-26-09     35.39
2009-7      3-23-09     T.S.O. V
2009-9      4-26-09     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2009-10     6-8-09      T.S.O. V
2009-11     6-8-09      Ch. 72, Sch. I
2009-12     6-8-09      Ch. 72, Sch. I
2009-13     8-10-09     T.S.O. I
2009-14     10-19-09    153.02
2010-11     8-23-10     T.S.O. V
2011-09     10-10-11    Ch. 72, Sch. I
2012-07     6-11-12     31.11
2012-08     6-11-12     31.10
2012-11     7-9-12      Ch. 72, Sch. I
2013-03     1-28-13     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2013-05     4-22-13     T.S.O. V
2014-04     2-10-14     31.11
2014-07     5-27-14     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2014-08     10-13-14    Ch. 72, Sch. I
2014-09     10-27-14    Ch. 72, Sch. I
2014-10     12-8-14     31.12
2015-04     1-12-15     39.09
2015-06     3-9-16      37.14
2015-07     5-26-15     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2015-09     7-27-15     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2015-10     10-26-15    Ch. 72, Sch. I
2016-10\    10-10-16    T.S.O. V
2016-11     11-14-16    Ch. 72, Sch. I
2016-12     11-28-16    31.08
2017-05     1-23-17     32.06
2017-11     4-10-17     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2017-13     5-22-17     T.S.O. I
2018-05     1-22-18     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2018-06     1-22-18     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2018-07     2-12-18     31.15
2018-10     5-24-18     T.S.O. I
2018-12     5-14-18     T.S.O. I
2019-03     3-25-19     T.S.O. I
2019-04     5-13-19     T.S.O. I
2019-05     6-10-19     153.02
2019-08     10-28-19    T.S.O. I
2020-08     8-6-20      T.S.O. III
2020-09     9-3-20      T.S.O. III
2020-20     11-23-20    Ch. 72, Sch. I
2021-06     4-26-21     T.S.O. I
2021-07     5-24-21     30.04
2021-11     8-23-11     T.S.O. V
2021-12     9-13-21     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2021-13     9-13-21     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2021-15     10-25-21    Ch. 72, Sch. I
2022-01     2-15-22     T.S.O. III
2022-02     2-15-22     T.S.O. III
2024-02     2-12-24     153.02
2024-04     3-25-24     T.S.O. I
2024-07     5-13-24     T.S.O. I
2024-09     10-28-24    T.S.O. III
2024-10     10-28-24    T.S.O. III
2024-11     10-28-24    T.S.O. III
2024-12     12-23-24    T.S.O. III
                       
 
REFERENCES TO COUNTY COUNCIL ORDINANCES
CC Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
CC Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
—         11-18-74    T.S.O. V
PB-1982-1   11-18-82    33.01 -
                        33.12
1986-1      3-24-86     36.01
1986-5      7-10-86     37.05
1988-1      2-11-88     31.03
1989-2      3-23-89     36.10,
                        36.11
1989-5      8-10-89     T.S.O. V
1989-7      11-7-89     31.04
1992-20     7-21-92     T.S.O. V
1995-4      4-24-95     T.S.O. V
1998-4      11-5-98     37.08
1998-5      11-5-98     37.07
1999-1      11-4-99     36.20
2000-1      3-3-00      36.11
2000-2      3-2-00      71.01
2000-3      3-2-00      71.02
2001-04     9-6-01      31.03
2002-01     10-3-02     37.09
2003-02     11-6-03     37.11
2004-01     2-5-04      37.11
2004-02     2-5-04      31.03
2004-05     9-2-04      33.60 -
                        33.73
2005-01     11-3-05     31.03
2006-1      4-13-06     37.39
2007-1      1-4-07      37.40
2008-01     5-1-08      37.12
2008-04     9-4-08      31.03
2009-02     5-7-09      39.06
2009-02     6-4-09      39.06
2011-01     4-14-11     T.S.O. V
2013-01     8-1-13      71.02
2015-02     7-9-15      T.S.O. I
2016-01     10-6-16     37.11
2017-01     6-1-17      36.20
2017-03     10-5-17     37.16
2017-17     7-10-17     T.S.O. VI
2017-19     8-28-17     T.S.O. VII
2017-20     8-28-17     T.S.O. VI
2017-21     9-13-17     T.S.O. VI
2017-22     9-13-17     T.S.O. VI
2017-23     9-14-17     T.S.O. VI
2017-25     9-25-17     T.S.O. VI
2017-27     10-10-17    T.S.O. VI
2017-28     10-25-17    T.S.O. VI
2017-29     11-13-17    T.S.O. VI
2018-01     2-22-18     36.20
2018-06     3-12-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-017    7-9-18      T.S.O. VI
2018-19     8-13-18     T.S.O. VII
2018-21     8-27-18     36.12
2018-22     8-27-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-24     9-10-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-25     9-10-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-028    11-7-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-029    9-14-18     T.S.O. VI
2019-04     9-5-19      37.21
2020-05     12-3-20     33.119 -
                        33.121
2022-02     8-4-22      31.03
2022-10     4-11-22     T.S.O. VI
2022-11     4-25-22     T.S.O. VI
2022-12     5-9-22      36.12
2022-13     5-16-22     T.S.O. VI
2022-14     5-16-22     T.S.O. VI
2022-17     7-25-22     T.S.O. VI
2022-18     8-22-22     T.S.O. VI
2022-19     9-12-22     T.S.O. VI
2022-21     9-12-22     36.12
25-01       2-10-25     T.S.O. VI
25-02       2-10-25     T.S.O. VI
25-03       2-10-25     T.S.O. VI
2025-07     4-15-25     T.S.O. VI
2025-08     4-5-25      T.S.O. VI
                       
 
 
REFERENCES TO BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS ORDINANCES
BC Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
BC Ord. No.     Date Passed Code Section
—             8-6-62      153.01
—             6-13-64     Ch.155
—             9-6-66      153.03
72-1            5-6-72      50.02
                            50.15 -
1978-11         11-6-78     50.23,
                            50.99
1979-20         12-17-79    70.04,
                            70.99
ES-1-82         4-6-82      71.02
WT-1-82         4-6-82      71.01
CO-1982-1       10-15-82    31.01,
                            31.99
CO-1982-2       12-6-82     32.01
1984-4          2-6-84      70.01,
                            70.99
                            134.01 -
                            134.03,
1984-5          2-27-84     134.05 -
                            134.07,
                            134.99
1984-7          5-7-84      Ch. 72, Sch. I
—             5-11-84     30.03
1985-1          1-7-85      T.S.O. VII
1985-2          1-7-85      T.S.O. VII
1985-6          2-4-85      Ch. 72, Sch. I
1985-7          2-4-85      31.02
1985-8          2-15-85     T.S.O. VII
1985-10         4-1-85      34.01
1985-11         5-28-85     T.S.O. VII
—             6-13-85     T.S.O. I
1986-6          6-2-86      T.S.O. VII
                            134.01 -
1986-11         11-14-86    134.03,
                            134.06
1987-9          6-1-87      38.01
1987-14         7-17-87     T.S.O. VII
1987-17         10-5-87     T.S.O. V
1988-7          3-7-88      T.S.O. VII
1988-10         4-25-88     32.02
1989-2-A        2-6-89      T.S.O. VII
1989-2-B        2-27-89     Ch. 72, Sch. I
1989-6          5-1-89      70.05,
                            70.99
1989-07         5-22-89     T.S.O. VII
1989-8          6-5-89      Ch. 72, Sch. I
1989-15         8-7-89      37.37
1989-21         11-6-89     31.05
1990-6          2-26-90     T.S.O. VII
1990-20         5-7-90      50.01
1990-22         7-23-90     37.03
1990-23         8-27-90     131.50
1990-24         8-27-90     Ch. 72, Sch. I
1990-27         12-3-90     33.25
1990-28         12-26-90    Ch. 72, Sch. I
1991-2          1-28-91     Ch. 72, Sch. I
1991-6          2-4-91      Ch. 72, Sch. I
1991-13         4-8-91      30.01
1991-17         5-13-91     T.S.O. VII
1991-14         7-22-91     37.38
1991-15         7-22-91     134.02
                            92.25 -
1991-22         8-12-91     92.33,
                            92.99
1991-36         12-2-91     T.S.O. VII
1992-3          1-27-92     37.04
                            131.01,
                            131.10,
                            131.13,
                            131.20,
                            131.21,
                            131.23 -
                            131.26,
1992-2          2-10-92     131.30 -
                            131.33,
                            131.40 -
                            131.42,
                            131.50,
                            131.51,
                            131.53,
                            131.99
1992-17         7-2-92      T.S.O. I
1992-20         7-27-92     Ch. 72, Sch. I
1992-21         8-3-92      37.36
                            70.01 -
1992-24         12-7-92     70.03,
                            70.99
1993-17         9-13-93     T.S.O. VII
1994-1          1-1-94      30.15
1994-4          3-28-94     T.S.O. VII
1994-5          4-11-94     T.S.O. VII
1994-6          4-11-94     T.S.O. VII
1994-8          5-23-94     T.S.O. VII
1994-10         6-13-94     T.S.O. VII
1994-9          6-13-94     T.S.O. VII
1994-11         6-13-94     T.S.O. VII
1994-12         6-27-94     110.01
1994-13         6-27-94     152.01 -
                            152.08
1994-14         6-27-94     132.01
1994-15         6-27-94     132.02
1994-16         7-11-94     38.02
1994-21         12-12-94    T.S.O. IV
—             2-13-95     92.01
1995-3          2-22-95     92.01
1995-4          2-22-95     T.S.O. VII
                            91.01 -
                            91.08,
1995-5          2-22-95     91.10,
                            91.11,
                            91.99
                            35.02 -
                            35.04,
                            35.15 -
                            35.19,
1995-6          2-22-95     35.31 -
                            35.34,
                            35.36 -
                            35.38,
                            35.97 -
                            35.99
—             3-13-95     36.12
1995-8          4-10-95     T.S.O. IV
1995-09         5-17-95     T.S.O. IV
1995-13         8-28-95     34.02
1995-14         9-11-95     36.12
1995-17         9-11-95     T.S.O. VII
1995-18         9-11-95     37.35
1995-19         9-25-95     T.S.O. VII
1995-20         10-23-95    T.S.O. VII
1995-22         11-27-95    T.S.O. VII
1995-23         12-11-95    Ch. 72, Sch. I
—             2-26-96     T.S.O. VI
—             3-25-96     T.S.O. VI
—             4-22-96     T.S.O. VI
—             5-28-96     T.S.O. VI
—             6-24-96     T.S.O. VI
—             7-22-96     T.S.O. VI
—             9-23-96     T.S.O. VI
—             10-28-96    T.S.O. VI
—             11-25-96    T.S.O. VI
—             12-23-96    T.S.O. VI
1997-2          1-27-97     37.02
1997-03         1-27-97     92.01
—             2-24-97     T.S.O. VI
—             3-10-97     T.S.O. VI
—             4-3-97      T.S.O. VI
                            92.10 -
1997-4          4-14-97     92.15,
                            92.99
—             4-28-97     T.S.O. VI
1997-5          4-28-97     T.S.O. VII
1997-7          7-14-97     T.S.O. VII
1997-8          7-28-97     T.S.O. VII
1997-9          7-28-97     T.S.O. VII
1997-10         8-11-97     T.S.O. VII
1997-11         9-8-97      T.S.O. VII
1997-13         9-8-97      37.38
1997-14         9-8-97      132.02
1997-18         12-1-97     39.03
                            40.01 -
1997-19         12-1-97     40.05,
                            40.07,
                            40.08
1997-21         12-1-97     T.S.O. VII
1997-22         12-15-97    T.S.O. VII
1998-01         3-9-98      T.S.O. VII
1998-02         4-27-98     T.S.O. VII
                            135.01 -
1998-3          4-27-98     135.20,
                            135.99
                            51.01,
1998-4          5-11-98     92.45 -
                            92.50,
                            92.99
1998-6          6-22-98     31.07
1998-7          6-22-98     31.08
1998-8          6-27-98     T.S.O. VII
1998-10         8-24-98     T.S.O. IV
1998-13         10-13-98    37.06
1998-15         11-23-98    31.06
1999-01         1-11-99     T.S.O. VII
1999-2          2-8-99      37.07
1999-9          9-13-99     110.02
1999-10         6-28-99     T.S.O. VII
1999-12         7-26-99     Adopting Ordinance
1999-31         11-22-99    T.S.O. VII
1999-35         9-27-99     38.02
1999-36         10-25-99    T.S.O. VII
                            51.01,
1999-37         10-25-99    92.46,
                            92.49,
                            92.50
2000-1          1-10-00     37.02
2000-2          4-1-00      39.15
2000-3          4-1-00      39.16
2000-4          2-28-00     T.S.O. VII
2000-5          2-28-00     132.01
2000-6          2-28-00     132.02
2000-7          3-27-00     T.S.O. VII
2000-11         4-10-00     T.S.O. VII
2000-13         7-10-00     T.S.O. VII
2000-14         7-10-00     T.S.O. VII
2000-15         7-10-00     T.S.O. VII
2000-16         7-10-00     T.S.O. VII
2000-19         9-13-00     Adopting Ordinance
2000-20         9-13-00     T.S.O. VII
2000-21         9-13-00     33.41
2000-23         10-25-00    T.S.O. VII
2000-24         10-25-00    T.S.O. VII
2001-06         5-9-01      T.S.O. VII
2001-13         5-23-01     T.S.O. VII
2001-18         12-5-01     34.02
2002-01         1-16-02     36.12
2002-02         1-23-02     39.16,
                            39.99
                            92.10 -
2002-03         2-13-02     92.15,
                            92.99
2002-05         4-17-02     37.10
2002-06         7-10-02     T.S.O. VII
2002-07         8-7-02      39.05
2002-08         8-7-02      39.05
2002-10         11-13-02    T.S.O. VII
2002-11         11-20-02    36.12
2002-13         11-20-02    31.07
2003-03         2-19-03     132.03
2003-04         2-19-03     132.02
2003-06         5-14-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-07         5-14-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-08         5-14-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-09         5-14-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-10         5-14-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-11         6-11-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-12         6-11-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-13         7-9-03      T.S.O. VII
                            150.01 -
                            150.05,
                            150.15 -
                            150.23,
                            150.30,
2003-14         7-15-03     150.31,
                            150.40,
                            150.41,
                            150.50 -
                            150.53,
                            150.99
                            131.32,
2003-15         7-16-03     131.33,
                            131.40,
                            131.42
2003-16         7-23-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-17         9-24-03     T.S.O. VII
2003-18         12-10-03    T.S.O. VII
2004-01         1-14-04     T.S.O. VII
2004-03         2-18-04     38.02
2004-04         3-17-04     T.S.O. VII
2004-09         5-13-04     T.S.O. VII
2004-10         5-4-04      T.S.O. VII
2004-11         8-25-04     T.S.O. VII
2004-13         10-14-04    T.S.O. I
2004-14         11-10-04    36.12
2004-15         11-17-04    132.04
2004-17         12-15-04    37.04
2005-02         1-12-05     T.S.O. VII
2005-04         4-20-05     37.38
2005-05         5-11-05     T.S.O. VII
2005-06         5-11-05     T.S.O. VII
2005-12         6-15-05     132.05
2005-14         8-17-05     33.25
2005-15         8-24-05     T.S.O. VII
2005-16         8-26-05     T.S.O. VII
2005-17         8-24-05     32.03
2005-18         8-21-05     34.03
2005-19         10-12-05    36.12
2005-20         10-12-05    T.S.O. VII
2006-03         3-8-06      T.S.O. VII
2006-04         4-12-06     39.03
                            154.001 -
                            154.004,
                            154.010 -
                            154.024,
                            154.035 -
                            154.039,
                            154.050,
                            154.060,
                            154.070 -
2006-05         3-20-06     154.078,
                            154.090 -
                            154.102,
                            154.120 -
                            154.123,
                            154.130 -
                            154.137,
                            154.154 -
                            154.149,
                            Ch. 154, App. A,
                            B
                            156.01,
2006-08         6-28-06     156.02,
                            156.03
2006-11         7-26-06     150.18
2006-12         7-26-06     33.80 -
                            33.87
                            53.01 -
                            53.04,
                            53.06 -
2006-13         7-26-06     53.10,
                            53.12 -
                            53.21,
                            53.99
2006-17         10-11-06    T.S.O. VII
2006-18         1-4-07      37.40
2006-19         12-20-06    37.37
2007-02         1-10-07     T.S.O. VII
2007-04         2-28-07     T.S.O. VII
                            35.01 -
                            35.04,
                            35.15 -
                            35.19,
2007-06         6-20-07     35.30 -
                            35.34,
                            35.36 -
                            35.38,
                            35.97 -
                            35.99
2007-07         8-8-07      T.S.O. VII
2007-19         9-12-07     154.038
2007-20         9-12-07     154.132
2007-21         9-12-07     154.004
2007-22         9-12-07     154.022
2007-23         9-12-07     154.016
2007-24         9-12-07     154.038
2007-25         9-12-07     154.038
2007-26         9-26-07     T.S.O. VII
2007-27         9-26-07     T.S.O. VII
2007-28         9-26-07     T.S.O. VIII
2007-29         11-14-07    T.S.O. VII
2007-30         12-12-07    T.S.O. VII
2008-01         2-13-08     36.12
2008-05         6-11-08     T.S.O. VII
2008-06         6-25-08     T.S.O. VII
2008-09         10-22-08    36.12
                            133.01 -
2008-10         12-17-08    133.06,
                            133.99
2009-01         1-1-09      31.01
2009-03         1-12-09     T.S.O. VI
                            73.01 -
2009-04         5-18-09     73.13,
                            73.99
2009-05         5-11-09     T.S.O. VI
2009-06         7-13-09     T.S.O. VI
2009-07         8-10-09     31.07
2009-08         8-24-09     T.S.O. VII
2009-24         9-14-09     T.S.O. VII
2009-25         9-14-09     T.S.O. VI
2009-26-1       9-28-09     T.S.O. VI
2009-26-2       11-9-09     T.S.O. VI
2009-27         11-23-09    31.04
2009-30         12-28-09    31.01
2010-04         6-28-10     T.S.O. VI
2010-05         6-28-10     T.S.O. VII
2010-09         7-26-10     37.38
2010-12         10-11-10    T.S.O. VI
2010-13         10-11-10    T.S.O. VI
2010-15         11-8-10     T.S.O. VI
2010-16         11-22-10    T.S.O. VI
2010-17         12-6-10     154.004
2010-18         12-20-10    154.004,
                            Ch. 154, App. C
2010-19         12-20-10    150.15,
                            150.17
2011-04         2-14-11     132.06
2011-05         2-14-11     T.S.O. VI
2011-06         2-14-11     31.04
2011-07         2-28-11     T.S.O. VI
2011-08         4-11-11     T.S.O. VI
2011-09         5-9-11      154.004
2011-11         5-9-11      154.004
2011-13         6-13-11     T.S.O. VII
2011-14         7-7-11      T.S.O. VII
2011-15         7-11-11     T.S.O. VI
2011-16         7-11-11     154.020
2011-18         7-25-11     37.41
2011-19         9-12-11     T.S.O. VII
2011-20         8-22-11     T.S.O. VI
2011-21         9-12-11     32.01
2011-22         9-16-11     T.S.O. VI
2011-23         9-16-11     T.S.O. VI
2011-24         9-16-11     T.S.O. VI
2011-25         9-12-11     Ch. 72, Sch. II
2011-26         10-24-11    T.S.O. VI
2011-27         10-24-11    34.04
2011-28         11-28-11    T.S.O. VI
2012-04         1-9-12      154.071
2012-05         1-9-12      154.093
2012-07         2-13-12     T.S.O. VII
2012-08         2-13-12     T.S.O. VII
2012-09         3-12-12     T.S.O. VI
2012-10         3-12-12     T.S.O. VI
2012-11         3-12-12     T.S.O. VI
2012-12         3-12-12     T.S.O. VI
2012-13         3-12-12     T.S.O. VI
2012-14         3-12-12     T.S.O. VI
                            111.01 -
2012-16         4-9-12      111.07,
                            111.99
2012-17         5-14-12     T.S.O. VI
2012-19         5-29-12     33.80 -
                            33.87
2012-21         6-25-12     31.07
2012-25         8-27-12     91.02
2012-26         8-27-12     T.S.O. VI
2012-27         8-27-12     33.80 -
                            33.87
2012-28         9-10-12     132.04,
                            132.07
2012-29         9-24-12     32.03
2012-31         11-13-12    T.S.O. VI
2013-02         2-11-13     T.S.O. VI
2013-03         2-11-13     T.S.O. VI
2013-04         3-11-13     T.S.O. VI
2013-05         3-11-13     154.004
2013-06         6-24-13     154.012
2013-07         6-10-13     154.018
2013-08         6-10-13     154.149
2013-18         6-24-13     39.03
                            37.38,
2013-19         7-22-13     134.01,
                            134.02
2013-20         7-9-13      T.S.O. VI
2013-21         8-12-13     T.S.O. VII
2013-22         8-12-13     T.S.O. VI
2013-23         8-12-13     T.S.O. VI
2013-25         10-15-13    135.18
2013-27         11-12-13    T.S.O. VII
2013-28         11-12-13    T.S.O. VI
2013-29         11-12-13    154.022
2013-30         12-9-13     30.01,
                            30.15
2014-05         2-10-14     T.S.O. VII
2014-06         2-24-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-09         3-24-14     31.07
2014-10         3-24-14     37.13
2014-11         4-14-14     39.08
2014-12         4-29-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-13         5-12-14     31.07
2014-14         5-13-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-15         5-13-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-16         6-9-14      110.02,
                            110.03
2014-17         6-23-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-18         6-23-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-19         6-23-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-20         7-14-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-21         7-14-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-22         7-28-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-23         8-11-14     37.42
2014-24         8-11-14     T.S.O. VI
2014-25         10-13-14    T.S.O. VI
2014-26         10-13-14    T.S.O. VI
2014-28         1-14-15     T.S.O. VI
2014-29         1-14-15     T.S.O. VI
2014-31         12-22-14    39.01
2015-01         2-9-15      T.S.O. VII
2015-02         2-9-15      T.S.O. VI
2015-03         2-9-15      39.07
2015-04         3-23-15     T.S.O. VII
2015-05         3-23-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-06         3-23-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-07         3-23-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-08         3-23-15     35.02,
                            35.35
2015-09         4-13-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-10         4-13-15     32.04
2015-11         4-27-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-13         5-11-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-14         5-11-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-17         6-8-15      T.S.O. VI
2015-18         8-10-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-19         8-10-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-20         8-24-15     T.S.O. VII
2015-21         9-28-15     136.01,
                            136.02
2015-22         10-12-15    T.S.O. VI
2015-23         10-12-15    154.004
2015-24         10-26-15    T.S.O. VII
2015-25         10-26-15    T.S.O. VI
2015-26         11-9-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-27         11-9-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-28         11-9-15     T.S.O. VI
2015-29         11-23-15    136.10,
                            136.99
2015-30         12-14-15    T.S.O. VI
2015-32         12-28-15    T.S.O. VII
2015-33         12-28-15    T.S.O. VII
2016-01         1-25-16     150.15
2016-02         2-8-16      T.S.O. VI
2016-03         3-28-16     T.S.O. VI
2016-R-06       5-9-16      T.S.O. VI
2016-07         5-9-16      T.S.O. VI
2016-08         5-9-16      39.10
2016-09         5-23-16     T.S.O. VII
2016-10         6-13-16     131.31,
                            131.99
2016-11         6-13-16     T.S.O. VI
2016-12         7-11-16     T.S.O. VII
2016-13         7-11-16     T.S.O. VI
2016-14         7-25-16     T.S.O. VII
2016-15         7-25-16     T.S.O. VII
2016-16         9-12-16     T.S.O. VI
2016-20         10-10-16    32.05
2016-21         11-14-16    T.S.O. VII
2016-22         11-14-16    T.S.O. VI
2016-25         11-28-16    T.S.O. VII
2016-26         11-28-16    T.S.O. VI
2016-27         11-28-16    T.S.O. VI
2016-28         11-28-16    T.S.O. VI
2016-29         11-28-16    T.S.O. VI
2016-30         12-12-16    31.08
2016-31         12-12-16    91.01 -
                            91.11
2017-01         1-9-17      91.01 -
                            91.11
2017-02         1-23-17     T.S.O. VII
2017-03         2-27-17     31.13
2017-05         3-13-17     31.14
2017-06         3-13-17     T.S.O. VI
2017-09         4-10-17     T.S.O. VII
2017-10         4-10-17     T.S.O. VI
2017-11         4-24-17     37.16
2017-12         5-8-17      T.S.O. VI
2017-13         5-22-17     T.S.O. VII
2017-14         6-12-17     T.S.O. VII
2017-18         8-4-17      T.S.O. VII
2017-24         9-25-17     39.05
2017-26         10-10-17    31.08
2017-30         11-27-17    31.08
2017-31         11-27-17    31.07
2017-32         11-27-17    T.S.O. VII
2017-33         12-11-17    33.90 -
                            33.101
2017-34         12-11-17    37.43
2018-01         1-8-18      T.S.O. VI
2018-02         1-8-18      T.S.O. VI
2018-03         2-12-8      T.S.O. VI
2018-04         2-26-18     37.38
2018-05         2-12-18     37.17
                            157.01 -
2018-07         4-23-18     157.03,
                            157.99
2018-10         5-14-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-11         5-14-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-12         5-15-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-13         5-29-18     T.S.O. VII
2018-14         6-11-18     37.17
2018-15         6-12-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-16         6-12-18     T.S.O. VI
2018-18         7-23-18     37.43
2018-20         8-27-18     37.18
2018-23         9-10-18     37.19
                            131.01,
                            131.10 -
                            131.27,
                            131.30 -
2018-26         9-24-18     131.34,
                            131.40 -
                            131.42,
                            131.50 -
                            131.54,
                            131.99
2018-31         11-26-18    31.04
2018-32         12-10-18    T.S.O. VII
                            131.12,
                            131.23,
                            131.24,
2018-34         12-10-18    131.32 -
                            131.34,
                            131.42,
                            131.54,
                            131.99
2019-01         1-22-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-02         1-24-19     36.12
2019-03         1-28-19     36.12
Amended 2019-03 2-11-19     36.12
2019-04         2-11-19     T.S.O. VII
2019-05         3-25-19     37.20
2019-06         3-25-19     157.03
2019-07         4-11-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-08         4-22-19     T.S.O. VII
2019-09         4-22-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-10         4-22-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-11         5-13-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-12         6-10-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-13         6-10-19     155.01
2019-14         6-10-19     31.04
2019-15         6-10-19     37.37
2019-16         7-22-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-17         8-12-19     T.S.O. VII
2019 -18        8-12-19     154.012
2019-19         8-26-19     T.S.O. VII
2019-20         9-9-19      37.44
2019-21         10-14-19    T.S.O. VI
2019-22         10-14-19    T.S.O. VI
2019-24         10-24-19    33.110 -
                            33.118
2019-25         10-28-19    T.S.O. VI
2019-27         11-12-19    T.S.O. VI
2019-29         11-25-19    37.22
2019-30         12-9-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-31         12-9-19     T.S.O. VI
2019-32         12-9-19     T.S.O. VI
2020-01         1-27-10     39.03
20-02           - -         T.S.O. VI
2020-03         2-10-20     39.99
2020-04         2-10-20     37.23
2020-05         3-9-20      T.S.O. VII
2020-06         3-9-20      T.S.O. VI
2020-08         4-27-20     T.S.O. VI
2020-09         6-22-20     T.S.O. VI
2020-10         7-13-20     T.S.O. VI
2020-11         7-27-20     Ch. 72, Sch. I
2020-12         7-13-20     T.S.O. VI
2020-13         7-13-20     155.01
2020-14         7-13-20     155.01
2020-15         7-13-20     11.01 -
                            11.04
2020-16         8-24-20     T.S.O. VII
2020-17         8-24-20     112.01 -
                            112.08
2020-18         9-14-20     T.S.O. VI
2020-20         9-28-20     31.04
2020-21         9-28-20     T.S.O. VII
2020-22         9-28-20     T.S.O. VII
2020-23         10-12-20    155.01
2020-24         10-12-20    155.01
20-25           11-5-20     T.S.O. VII
2020-26         11-9-20     T.S.O. VII
2020-27         11-9-20     T.S.O. VI
2020-28         11-9-20     T.S.O. VI
2020-29         12-14-20    T.S.O. VII
2020-30         12-14-20    T.S.O. VI
2020-31         12-14-20    T.S.O. VI
2020-32         12-14-20    T.S.O. VI
2020-33         12-29-20    T.S.O. VI
2020-34         12-28-20    Ch. 72, Sch. II
2021-01         1-11-21     154.022
2021-02         1-11-21     154.071
2021-03         1-11-21     154.078
2021-04         1-11-21     154.093
2021-05         1-11-21     154.093
2021-06         1-11-21     154.093
2021-07         1-11-21     154.094
2021-08         1-11-21     154.096
2021-09         1-11-21     154.096
2021-10         1-11-21     154.096
2021-11         1-11-21     40.03
2021-12         1-25-21     40.06
2021-13         2-8-21      37.24
2021-14         2-8-21      39.13
2021-15         3-8-21      37.25
2021-16         4-12-21     36.12
2021-17         4-12-21     37.26
2021-18         4-12-21     39.05
                            131.12,
                            131.32,
2021-19         4-26-21     131.34,
                            131.42,
                            131.99
2021-21         5-10-21     T.S.O. VI
                            70.05,
2021-22         5-24-21     70.08,
                            70.09,
                            Ch. 72, Sch. II
2021-23         6-14-21     T.S.O. VI
                            70.01 -
2021-27         8-9-21      70.09,
                            70.99,
                            Ch. 72, Sch. II
2021-28         8-9-21      39.05
2021-29         9-13-21     T.S.O. VII
2021-30         9-13-21     T.S.O. VI
2021-31         9-13-21     T.S.O. VI
2021-32         9-13-21     T.S.O. VI
2021-34         9-13-21     37.27
                            131.01,
                            131.10 -
                            131.27,
                            131.30 -
2021-35         9-27-21     131.34,
                            131.40 -
                            131.42,
                            131.50 -
                            131.54,
                            131.99
2021-36         10-12-21    T.S.O. VI
2021-37         12-13-21    T.S.O. VI
2021-038        12-13-21    155.01
2021-39         12-13-21    155.01
2021-40         12-13-21    155.01
2021-41         12-13-21    155.01
2021-42         12-13-21    30.15
2021-43         12-13-21    30.01
2022-01         1-24-22     70.08
22-02           - -22       T.S.O. VI
22-03           2-15-22     T.S.O. VI
2022-04         2-14-22     154.004
2022-05         2-14-22     154.004
2022-06         2-14-22     154.004
2022-07         2-14-22     154.004
2022-08         2-14-22     40.06
2022-09         - -22       T.S.O. VII
2022-15         5-23-22     37.28
                            35.20,
                            35.50,
2022-16         6-27-22     35.60 -
                            35.63,
                            35.99
2022-22         9-12-22     31.14
2022-23         10-10-22    T.S.O. VI
2022-24         10-24-22    T.S.O. VII
2022-25         12-18-22    T.S.O. VII
2023-01         1-10-23     T.S.O. VI
2023-02         1-27-23     T.S.O. VII
2023-03         3-14-23     T.S.O. VI
2023-04         3-14-23     T.S.O. VI
2023-05         3-27-23     T.S.O. VII
                            157.01 -
2023-06         4-10-23     157.03,
                            157.99
2023-08         4-24-23     37.38
                            134.01 -
2023-09         4-24-23     134.07,
                            134.99
                            137.01 -
2023-10         5-8-23      137.03,
                            137.99
2023-11         6-26-23     155.01
2023-12         6-26-23     155.01
2023-13         6-26-23     155.01
                            158.01 -
                            158.07,
2023-14         7-24-23     158.99,
                            App. A,
                            App. B
2023-15         7-24-23     T.S.O. VI
2023-16         8-14-23     T.S.O. VI
2023-17         9-11-23     155.01
2023-18         9-11-23     155.01
2023-19         9-11-23     155.01
2023-21         10-9-23     T.S.O. VI
2023-22         10-9-23     39.05
2023-23         11-14-23    T.S.O. VI
2023-24         11-14-23    T.S.O. VI
2023-25         12-13-23    T.S.O. VI
2023-26         12-13-23    T.S.O. VI
                            131.01,
                            131.10 -
                            131.27,
                            131.30 -
2023-27         12-27-23    131.34,
                            131.40 -
                            131.42,
                            131.50 -
                            131.54,
                            131.99
2024-01         2-12-24     T.S.O. VI
2024-02         2-26-24     T.S.O. VII
2024-03         3-11-24     T.S.O. VI
2024-04         3-11-24     31.08
2024-05         5-13-24     T.S.O. VI
                            53.01 -
2024-06         5-13-24     53.21,
                            53.99
2024-07         5-30-24     T.S.O. VI
2024-08         5-29-24     39.12
                            54.01 -
2024-09         7-8-24      54.22,
                            54.99
                            92.25,
                            92.27,
                            92.29,
                            92.30,
2024-10         8-26-24     92.45,
                            92.46,
                            92.49,
                            92.50,
                            Ch. 92, App. A
                            37.38,
                            41.01,
                            41.02,
                            50.99,
                            132.01,
2024-11         8-26-24     132.02,
                            132.04,
                            132.05,
                            132.07,
                            134.02,
                            134.99,
                            135.18
2024-12         9-9-24      155.01
2024-13         9-9-24      T.S.O. VI
2024-14         9-9-24      T.S.O. VI
2024-15         10-9-24     T.S.O. VI
2024-16         10-9-24     T.S.O. VI
                            41.01,
2024-17         10-9-24     130.01 -
                            130.11,
                            130.99
2024-18         10-28-24    159.01 -
                            159.03
2024-19         11-13-24    T.S.O. VII
2024-20         11-13-24    T.S.O. VI
2024-21         11-13-24    150.42
2024-22         11-25-24    T.S.O. VII
2024-23         11-25-24    T.S.O. VII
2025-05         3-24-25     T.S.O. VII
2025-09         7-15-25     T.S.O. VI
2025-10         8-11-25     T.S.O. VII
                            56.01 -
                            56.37,
2025-11         8-11-25     56.98,
                            56.99, Apps.
                            A -
                            F
2025-12         9-8-25      155.01
2025-13         9-8-25      155.01
2025-14         9-8-25      155.01
                           
 
REFERENCES TO DEPARTMENT OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCES
 
SWM Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                         33.85,
2007-01      8-29-07     55.01 -
                         55.10
2008-01      4-9-08      55.02,
                         55.05
                        
 
