WINGATE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-02, passed 3-8-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes,
titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Wingate
Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances,” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content.
      (2)   These descriptive headings are for organizational purposes only and
do not affect the meaning, application, or construction of the law they
precede.
      (3)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council.
      COUNTY. Montgomery County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver, and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers, or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      TOWN. The Town of Wingate, Indiana.
      TOWNSHIP. Coal Creek Township, Indiana.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing, or other modes
of representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter, or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that chapter,
subchapter, or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties, or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority, or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers, and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture, or
liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings, and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published and subsequently amended, the previous code
section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, §      ).”
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into, or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Definitions
   
30.02   Quorum and meetings
   
30.03   Special meeting
   
30.04   Open Door Law
   
30.05   Action of Council, committees, rules of order
   
30.06   Presentation of old and new business
   
30.07   General rules for conduct of business
   
30.08   Organization
   
30.09   Compensation
   
30.10   Terms
§ 30.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Wingate, Indiana.
   OPEN DOOR LAW. I.C. 5-14-1.5 as the same exists on the effective date of
this code or as may be amended, recodified, or reenacted hereafter.
   PRESIDENT. President of the Town Council of Wingate, Indiana.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)
§ 30.02 QUORUM AND MEETINGS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council
shall meet in regular session at 6:00 p.m. on the second Tuesday of each month
at the Town Hall, and at such other times and places as the Council may from
time to time determine and select by motion or upon special call by the
President, as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The annual meeting for adoption of the annual budget and tax rates
shall be held at either a special or regular meeting as may be convenient and
as required by law.
   (C)   The Council shall conduct all other business of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-1)
§ 30.03 SPECIAL MEETING.
   (A)   The President, on his or her own initiative, may, at any time, call a
special meeting of the Council.
   (B)   If, in the judgment of the President, the purpose of the meeting is to
meet an immediate emergency confronting the town or a part thereof, the meeting
may be called by oral contact with the other members of the Council and the
Clerk-Treasurer, with further oral notice to the news media as required under
the Open Door Law, being I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 et seq. Such oral contact or notice
may be held in person, or via telephonic or electronic means.
   (C)   If the purpose of such meeting is not an immediate emergency under
division (B) above, such meeting may be called by giving the other members of
the Council and the Clerk-Treasurer, and the news media, 48 hours’ oral or
written notice prior to the convening of such meeting. Such oral contact or
notice may be held in person, or via telephonic or electronic means.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-2)
§ 30.04 OPEN DOOR LAW.
   All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open Door Law, being
I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 et seq., including, but not limited to, the following
requirements.
   (A)   Notices. Notices as required by the Open Door Law shall be given to
the Crawfordsville Journal Review at Crawfordsville, Indiana. In the event of a
special meeting, the same notice shall be given to the media as shall be given
members of the Council.
   (B)   Date. The news media identified in division (A) above shall be
notified of the regular meetings yet to be held by the Council as of the
effective date of this code within ten days of that effective date, and shall
thereafter be notified annually of such regular meetings, not later than
January 15.
   (C)   Agenda. The meetings of the Council will generally not be subject to a
written agenda, but governed by the general order of business as set forth
hereafter; however, in the event any meeting shall be convened or held upon the
basis of a written agenda, a copy thereof shall be furnished to the news media
in accordance with the Open Door Law.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-3)
§ 30.05 ACTION OF COUNCIL, COMMITTEES, RULES OF ORDER.
   Business coming before the Council shall be acted upon directly by the
Council, but may be referred to an appropriate committee by a majority
affirmative vote of the Council members then present, such committee to report
action on the matter or matters at such times, places, and manners as the
Council may direct. Such standing or special committees shall exist and
function as may from time to time be established by the majority affirmative
vote of the Council members then present, and the President of the Council
shall be an ex officio member of all such committees. All procedures, motions,
or conduct of meetings of the Council shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of
Order, unless the same be suspended by an affirmative majority vote of the
members then present.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-5)
§ 30.06 PRESENTATION OF OLD AND NEW BUSINESS.
   When the roll is called for presentation of old or new business, each member
of the Council shall present to the Council all old or new business which he or
she wishes the Council to consider at the meeting. Any business not presented
on such roll call may be placed before the Council by the majority affirmative
vote of the members then present.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-6)
§ 30.07 GENERAL RULES FOR CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   The following general rules shall apply to the conduct of all business at a
meeting of the Council.
   (A)   Limit on discussion. The President may reasonably limit debate or
discussion on any issue or matter before the Council, and his or her decision
to limit the same shall be final.
   (B)   Public comment. Any member of the public shall be permitted to address
the Council on any subject properly placed before the Council for discussion,
but only after all members of the Council have made their own addresses,
remarks, comments, or presentations regarding the subject. Any member of the
public shall be permitted to address the Council on any matter pertaining to
the town or town business, whether or not a member of the Council has presented
the same for consideration, but only after all other business of the meeting
has been concluded.
   (C)   Record of attendance. At all meetings of the Council, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall secure a written roll call of all persons present by roll-call
or by a sign-in book, indicating thereon whether such persons appear as
officials of the town, employees of the town, agents of the town, or members of
the public, and in the latter case, whether the member of the public has
identified a specific purpose or purposes of such attendance.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-7)
§ 30.08 ORGANIZATION.
   At the first meeting of the Council after December 31, but in no event after
January 15 in the succeeding year, the Council shall convene for the purpose of
organizing itself for the year as follows.
   (A)   President. At the organizational meeting, the Council shall elect from
its membership a President for a period of one year, or the remainder of his or
her term of office as a member of the Council, whichever is the shorter period.
The results of such election shall be made part of the official minutes of the
meeting.
   (B)   Other officers. The Council may elect from its membership such
additional officers as it deems convenient to the conduct of its business, and
may do so either at the organization meeting or any other meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-8)
§ 30.09 COMPENSATION.
   The Council members receive such compensation for their service as may be
provided by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-5)
§ 30.10 TERMS.
   The Town Board Council elected in 2023 shall serve terms of three years,
with terms ending in 2026. Council members elected thereafter shall serve terms
of four years, with each election taking place in an even-numbered year.
(Res. 2023-02, passed 8-8-2023)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Nepotism policy
   
31.02   Compensation
   
31.03   Travel expenditures
   
31.04   Discretion
Town Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.15   Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.16   General duties
   
31.17   Custodian of records
   
31.18   Licenses and fees
   
31.19   Deputy
   
31.20   Bond
   
31.21   Council meetings, reports
Town Marshal
   
31.35   Establishment
   
31.36   Qualifications, appointment
   
31.37   Employment, compensation
   
31.38   Council meetings, reports
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 NEPOTISM POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   The town finds that it is necessary and desirous to adopt a
policy of conduct with regard to nepotism in the employment with the town and
in contracting with the town in order to continue to be able to provide local
government services to its residents and to comply with the new laws effective
July 1, 2012, known as I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21, respectively.
      (2)   On September 1, 2015 the town shall have a nepotism and a
contracting with a unit policy that complies with the minimum requirements of
I.C. 36-1-20.2 (hereinafter “nepotism policy”) and I.C. 36-1-21 (hereinafter
“contracting with a unit by a relative policy”), and implementation of those
policies will begin on that date.
      (3)   The town nepotism policy is hereby established effective September
1, 2015, by adopting the minimum requirements and provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2,
and including all future supplements and amendments thereto which become law
from time to time, and making them a part hereof as if fully set out herein. A
copy of I.C. 36-1-20.2 in effect on July 1 is attached to the resolution from
which this section is derived for reference.
      (4)   The town contracting with a unit by a relative policy is hereby
established effective September 1, 2015, by adopting the minimum requirements
and provisions of I.C. 36-1-21, and including all future supplements and
amendments thereto which become law from time to time, and making them a part
hereof as if fully set out herein. A copy of the I.C. 36-1-21 in effect on July
1 is attached to the resolution from which this section is derived for
reference.
      (5)   The town finds that both I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21
specifically allow a unit to adopt requirements that are “more stringent or
detailed” and that more detailed requirements are advisable.
      (6)   The town therefore finds that a single member of the legislative
body cannot act for the body to make work assignments, compensation,
grievances, advancement, or a performance evaluation without prior authority of
a majority of that body, and therefore, without such authority by the majority
of that body he or she will not be in the direct line of supervision.
      (7)   The town finds that a single member of a governing body with
authority over employees in the town cannot act for that governing body to make
work assignments, determine compensation, hear or file grievances, and evaluate
advancement or performance without prior authority of a majority of that body
when a statute provides that a majority is needed to act, and therefore,
without such authority by the majority, the single member will not be in the
direct line of supervision.
      (8)   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the town are
hereby directed to cooperate fully in the implementation of the policies
created by this section and demonstrating compliance with these same policies.
      (9)   (a)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance, and certifications connected with the nepotism policy is a
violation of town employment rules and may result in the transfer or
discipline, including termination, of an employee or some other curative
action.
         (b)   An elected or appointed official of the town who fails to abide
by or cooperate with the implementation, compliance, and certifications of
either the nepotism policy may be subject to further action allowed by law.
      (10)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance, and certifications connected with the contracting with unit by a
relative policy is a violation and may result in the discipline, including
termination, of an employee or some other curative action. An elected or
appointed official of the town who fails to abide by or cooperate with the
implementation, compliance, and mandated certifications of the contracting with
unit by a relative policy may be subject to further action allowed by law.
      (11)   (a)   The policies created by this section are hereby directed to
be implemented by any of the following actions:
            1.   Posting a copy of this section in its entirety in at least one
of the locations in the town where it posts employer posters or other notices
to its employees;
            2.   Providing a copy of this section to its employees and elected
and appointed officials;
            3.   Providing or posting a notice of the adoption of this section;
or
            4.   Any such other action or actions that would communicate the
policies established by this section to its employees and appointed officials.
         (b)   Upon taking any of these notification actions, these policies
are deemed implemented by the town.
      (12)   Two copies of I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21, and as supplemented
or amended, shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for the
town for public inspection as may be required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.
   (B)   All other provisions of the town code and employment policies not in
conflict with this section shall remain in full force and effect.
(Res. 2015-3, passed 8-26-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see I.C. 36-4-6-11 and 36-5-2-9.4
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
   Annually, on or before December 31, the Council shall enact an ordinance
fixing, for the coming calendar year, the wages, salaries, or other
compensation of all officials and employees of the town. Such annual
compensation ordinance need not be printed as or physically incorporated into
this code, but shall be of the same force and effect as if printed as or
physically incorporated herein. If the Council fails to timely enact such an
ordinance, compensation for the succeeding year shall remain the same as for
the year in which the meeting for passage of the ordinance was required to have
been timely held.
(Prior Code, § 2-10-1)
§ 31.03 TRAVEL EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   Officials and employees of the town are authorized and directed to
attend meetings, conferences, training sessions and other gatherings in the
furtherance of town business at which his or her attendance is required by law
or deemed highly beneficial to the business of the town, and which have been
approved by the Council at a Council meeting.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OFFICIAL.
         (a)   Any person elected to an office of the town and qualified to
serve in the same;
         (b)   Any employee of the town; and
         (c)   Any person elected to an office of the town during the period
between the date of his or her election and the date he or she shall take
office.
   (C)   When a town official attends such meetings, conferences, training
sessions, or gatherings with approval of the Council, he or she shall be
entitled to be reimbursed for:
      (1)   His or her mileage to and from the same at the standard mileage
rate per United States Internal Revenue Service guidelines together with
parking expenses for his or her vehicle, if by his or her private automobile,
or the actual cost of available public transportation, whichever is less; and
      (2)   Any meeting registration fees incurred.
(Prior Code, § 2-10-2)
§ 31.04 DISCRETION.
   When the code provides that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of a town officer, this shall be construed and held to
give such officer discretion only in determining whether the same has been
complied with, and no such provision shall be construed or held as giving the
officer power to determine what the laws shall be; to require conditions not
prescribed by laws; to enforce laws in an arbitrary or capricious manner; or,
to enforce laws in a discriminatory manner with respect to race, sex, religion,
or ethnic origin.
(Prior Code, § 2-10-4)
TOWN CLERK-TREASURER
§ 31.15 CLERK-TREASURER.
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall perform the duties of his or her office as
required and provided by law and this code.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-1)
§ 31.16 GENERAL DUTIES.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall attend the meetings of the Council and keep an
official record of its proceedings. He or she shall keep and preserve the
papers, documents, and records of the town, receive all moneys due the town,
and make and execute warrants disbursing or paying town funds. He or she shall
make a monthly accounting to the Council of the town’s finances.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-2)
§ 31.17 CUSTODIAN OF RECORDS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the custodian of the town’s official records,
its papers, documents, and business records.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-3)
§ 31.18 LICENSES AND FEES.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue all licenses and permits provided for by
this code, and shall collect all fees therefor, which shall be deposited into
the town’s General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4)
§ 31.19 DEPUTY.
   (A)   The Council may, by ordinance, establish the office of Deputy Clerk-
Treasurer. The Deputy Clerk-Treasurer shall have all powers, duties, and
authority of the Clerk-Treasurer, but shall undertake and perform the same only
under the direction and control of the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer may, at his or her discretion, limit such
duties and the manner of their performance, but may not expand such duties
beyond the scope of this code or the law.
      (2)   The ordinance which establishes such office may specify or contain
other provisions with respect to the Deputy Clerk-Treasurer’s qualifications
for office, compensation, and term of office.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-6)
§ 31.20 BOND.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall post a bond as required by state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-7)
§ 31.21 COUNCIL MEETINGS, REPORTS.
   In addition to his or her duties under this code, ordinances, and laws, and
in addition to any term or condition of his or her employment contract, the
Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be available and obliged to attend any and all
Council meetings at the request of the Council, and to submit such reports as
may be requested by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-8)
TOWN MARSHAL
§ 31.35 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of Town Marshal. The Town Marshal shall
be responsible for enforcing this code, town ordinances, and laws. He or she
may, during the term of his or her appointment as Town Marshal, enforce such
other laws in such other jurisdictions as may be required by employment with
any law enforcement agency, but such enforcement shall not be conducted on
behalf of the town but on behalf of such other agency.
(Prior Code, § 2-7-1)
§ 31.36 QUALIFICATIONS, APPOINTMENT.
   The Town Marshal is and shall at all times be qualified to, and legally
capable of, acting as a “law enforcement officer” as the term is defined by
I.C. 5-2-1-2(1), as the same exists on the effective date of this code or as
may be hereafter recodified, under the laws of the state and the United States.
The Town Marshal shall be appointed and employed by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-7-2)
§ 31.37 EMPLOYMENT, COMPENSATION.
   Upon appointment of the Town Marshal, he or she shall be presented with a
certificate in a form approved by the Council and conforming to law and with a
contract stating the terms of his or her employment, which terms shall be those
as from time to time hereafter are agreed to and set by the Council and
consistent with law. The Town Marshal shall be paid such compensation in
amounts and at times determined by the Council in accordance with law. In the
event of the voluntary or involuntary termination of his or her appointment,
the Town Marshal shall be deemed paid on a monthly basis, and his or her
compensation shall be prorated to the end of the month during which the
termination occurs, but in no event shall he or she be paid for any month
during which no services are provided to the town. The compensation of the Town
Marshal shall be in addition to any compensation he or she may receive as a
town employee.
(Prior Code, § 2-7-3)
§ 31.38 COUNCIL MEETINGS, REPORTS.
   In addition to his or her duties to enforce this code, ordinances, and laws,
and in addition to any term or condition of his or her employment contract, the
Town Marshal shall be available and obliged to perform any and all lawful
duties as assigned by the town, attend any and all Council meetings at the
request of the Council, and to submit such reports as may be requested by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-7-4)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Electronic funds transfers
   
32.02   Credit card accounts
   
32.03   Deposit, investment, and reinvestment of funds
   
32.04   Payment of certain claims in advance of Council approval
   
32.05   Unpaid checks
Capital Asset Policy
   
32.20   Purpose
   
32.21   Classification of assets
   
32.22   Capitalization thresholds
   
32.23   Prospective reporting
   
32.24   Retroactive reporting
   
32.25   Estimated useful lives of depreciable assets
   
32.26   Depreciation method/convention
   
32.27   Retirements
   
32.28   Responsibility for property record maintenance
Fund Creation
   
32.40   ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFERS.
   (A)   The town/Wingate Utilities is hereby authorized to use electronic fund
transfers for official business of the town.
   (B)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and responsible for:
      (1)   Selecting the financial institution(s) to be used by the town for
electronic fund transfers;
      (2)   Executing the application and agreement with the selected financial
institution(s) for the town;
      (3)   Overseeing the use of electronic fund transfers for official town
business;
      (4)   Maintaining the agreement and the relationship between the town and
the financial institution(s);
      (5)   Establishing appropriate security procedures for passwords, codes,
controls, and other authorizations to protect and preserve the funds and assets
of the town; and
      (6)   Reviewing all transactions and confirmations in connection with the
use of electronic fund transfers for property authorization, documentation,
itemization, and purpose.
   (C)   (1)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall not draw a warrant for an
electronic fund transfer unless:
         (a)   There is a fully itemized invoice or bill for each expense;
         (b)   Each invoice or bill is approved by the town employee or
representative receiving the goods or services;
         (c)   The invoice or bill is filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer;
         (d)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer audits and certifies before payment
that the invoice or bill is true and correct; and
         (e)   Payments of the invoice or bill is allowed by the Town Council
on the accounts payable register.
      (2)   All electronic fund transfers must be for official business of the
town and shall not be personal in nature.
   (D)   Electronic fund transfers shall include automated clearinghouse
payments (ACH), wire transfers, direct deposit, online banking transactions,
telephone transfers, and other electronically authorized or implemented
transfers or payments.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the town shall comply
with all other requirements regarding the payment of claims by a political
subdivision.
(Res. 2021-01, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 32.02 CREDIT CARD ACCOUNTS.
   The below-referenced department and elected officials are authorized to
maintain and use the number of credit cards with corresponding credit limits as
shown below. The Acting Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to apply in the town’s
name to the bank for such Visa and/or Mastercard charge credit cards for
commercial and business use by the town’s officers and employees. Further, the
town is authorized and empowered to pay all indebtedness incurred by the use of
such credit cards, whether such use is authorized or unauthorized, Further, the
bank is authorized to rely upon this resolution until written notice of its
revocation is delivered to the bank and that the authority granted by this
section will apply with equal force and effect to the successors in office to
the officers herein named.
 
Custodian       Billing Address   Credit Limit
Clerk-Treasurer P.O. Box 253      $1,000
Town of Wingate Wingate, IN 47994
Marshal         P.O. Box 253      $1,000
Town of Wingate Wingate, IN 47994
 
(Res. 2020-01, passed 6-16-2020)
§ 32.03 DEPOSIT, INVESTMENT, AND REINVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is hereby authorized to deposit, invest, and
reinvest moneys, as determined and identified by the Clerk-Treasurer, in the
following designated financial institutions: Fountain Trust Company and/or any
other financial institution identified eligible by the State Board of
Depositories.
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-9-2018)
§ 32.04 PAYMENT OF CERTAIN CLAIMS IN ADVANCE OF COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   (A)   In accordance with I.C. 36-5-4-12, notwithstanding any provision of
this section, expenditures may not take place without an appropriation of funds
for that purpose.
   (B)   Upon complying with the provisions of I.C. 5-11-10-1.6(c), the Town
Clerk-Treasurer may make claim payments in advance of Town Council approval for
the following claims:
      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from:
         (a)   The United States government; or
         (b)   An agency or a political subdivision of the United States
government.
      (2)   License fees or permit fees;
      (3)   Insurance premiums;
      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      (5)   Federal grant programs, if:
         (a)   Advance funding is not prohibited; and
         (b)   The contracting party provides sufficient security for the
amount advanced.
      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
      (7)   Maintenance agreements or service agreements;
      (8)   Lease agreements or rental agreements;
      (9)   Principal and interest payments on bonds;
      (10)   Payroll;
      (11)   State, federal, or county taxes;
      (12)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency circumstances,
including credit card payments, payments on installment agreements, or accounts
arising in the ordinary course of the town’s business which must be paid in
order to avoid a late fee or penalty; and
      (13)   Expenses described in an ordinance.
   (C)   Each payment under this section must be supported by a fully itemized
claim. A majority of the Council shall review and allow or disallow the claim
at the next regular Town Council meeting.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-9-2018)
§ 32.05 UNPAID CHECKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      UNPAID CHECK. Any check, draft, or promissory note made payable to or
endorsed and delivered to the town or any agency or department thereof, for
payment due the town or for receipt of cash to the maker or last endorser, or
any thereof, which is returned to the town unpaid or not honored by the bank or
institution on which it was written.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)
   (B)   As a courtesy to the maker or endorser, the town shall forward any
unpaid check, one time, to the bank or institution on which it was written for
collection. Notwithstanding this section, each person making or endorsing and
delivering an unpaid check to the town shall be liable to the town in the
amount of $30 as a fee for processing the same, together any and all other sums
due the town under law. The Clerk-Treasurer shall forward any unpaid check to
the Prosecuting Attorney or the Town Attorney for proceedings thereon.
(Prior Code, § 2-10-3)
CAPITAL ASSET POLICY
§ 32.20 PURPOSE.
   This capital asset policy will be effective for capital assets beginning in
2023. The purpose of this policy is to facilitate the preparation of financial
statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.21 CLASSIFICATION OF ASSETS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPITAL ASSETS. Personal and real property used in the operations of the
town that have an expected estimated useful life beyond a single period.
CAPITAL ASSETS are to include any item that falls into one of the following
categories:
      (1)   Land;
      (2)   Building and building improvements;
      (3)   Improvements other than buildings;
      (4)   Machinery and equipment;
      (5)   General infrastructure (roads, bridges, rights-of-way, water/sewer
lines, storm drains, street lighting, sidewalks); or
      (6)   Construction in progress.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.22 CAPITALIZATION THRESHOLDS.
   (A)   To be considered a capital asset for financial reporting purposes, an
item (other than land) must be at or above the capitalization threshold and
have a unit historical cost of $50,000 or more.
   (B)   The capitalization threshold for the following classes of assets shall
be:
      (1)   Machinery, equipment, and vehicles: $5,000;
      (2)   Buildings and building improvements: $100,000;
      (3)   Improvements other than buildings: $50,000; and
      (4)   Infrastructure: $250,000.
   (C)   With regard to improvements and buildings and general infrastructure,
a capital outlay must be significant and increase capacity, increase
efficiency, or extend the asset’s estimated useful life beyond the original
expectation.
   (D)   A change in capacity increases the level of service provided by the
asset. A change in efficiency increases the level of service but, without
increasing the size of the asset or the change, maintains the same level of
service at a lower cost. For example, an addition to a building provides
increased square footage, hence, the capacity is increased and the capital
outlay is capitalized. Widening a road with additional lanes increases capacity
and hence, the capital outlay is capitalized. An extended estimated useful life
involves a significant alteration, structural change, or improvement.
   (E)   While substantial repairs and renovations will be reviewed for
potential capitalization, it is anticipated that most will be expenses in the
current year. These expenses often merely restore the asset to the original
service potential but do not necessarily improve the asset.
   (F)   All land, including rights-of-way, is capitalized at the time of
acquisition, regardless of historical costs or fair value if donated.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.23 PROSPECTIVE REPORTING.
   Capital assets are recorded at historical cost, which includes any ancillary
charges necessary to place the asset into its intended location and condition
for use. Ancillary charges include, for example, freight and transportation
charges, site preparation costs, and professional fees. Engineering costs
(internal and external) include related preliminary project and environmental
studies; project estimating, design, and planning (drawings and
specifications); and construction engineering, construction management,
construction inspection, and project payment. Donated capital assets are
recorded at their estimated fair value at the time of acquisition.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.24 RETROACTIVE REPORTING.
   (A)   When actual historical cost source data was unavailable, estimated
historical cost was developed utilizing a normal costing approach. With this
method of estimating historical cost, a current replacement cost was
ascertained.
   (B)   An appropriate cost index (including Consumer Price Index and Federal
Highway Price Trends) corresponding to an estimated date of acquisition/
construction was then applied to “deflate” the replacement cost to an estimated
historical cost.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.25 ESTIMATED USEFUL LIVES OF DEPRECIABLE ASSETS.
   (A)   Capital assets have estimated useful lives extending beyond a single
reporting period (one year) and are depreciated using the straight-line method
with no allowance for salvage value.
   (B)   The estimated useful lives currently used were developed with the
input of knowledgeable staff and reflect our government’s experience with these
assets.
      (1)   Land and rights-of-way:
         (a)   Buildings and improvements to buildings: 50 years; and
         (b)   Machinery and equipment: five years.
      (2)   Vehicles:
         (a)   Automobiles: five years;
         (b)   Light trucks: eight years; and
         (c)   Heavy trucks: 15 years.
      (3)   Improvements other than buildings:
         (a)   Paths and trails: 15 years;
         (b)   Parking lots: 15 years;
         (c)   Retaining walls: 15 years;
         (d)   Lighting systems: 15 years;
         (e)   Plazas and pavilions: 25 years;
         (f)   Fencing: 15 years; and
         (g)   Water features: 15 years.
      (4)   General infrastructure:
         (a)   Roads: 50 years;
         (b)   Bridges: 75 years;
         (c)   Water/sewer lines: 50 years;
         (d)   Street lighting: 25 years;
         (e)   Storm drains: 50 years; and
         (f)   Sidewalks: 15 years.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.26 DEPRECIATION METHOD/CONVENTION.
   Depreciation will be calculated using the straight-line method and full-year
convention. No salvage value or residual value will be recognized.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.27 RETIREMENTS.
   (A)   Retirements apply to all capital assets, including land, buildings,
machinery and equipment, vehicles, and general infrastructure. When an asset is
disposed of, scrapped, sold, subject to demolition, and the like, it is to be
removed from the property record and the appropriate reduction will be made to
historical cost, accumulated depreciation, and net book value amounts.
   (B)   Retirements will reflect the actual historical cost of the asset when
the amount is ascertainable. When historical cost is not ascertainable, an
estimated historical cost will be determined.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.28 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY RECORD MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer will ensure that reporting for capital assets is
being exercised by establishing a capital asset inventory, both initially and
periodically in subsequent years. The Clerk-Treasurer will further ensure that
the capital asset report will be updated annually to reflect improvements,
additions, retirements, and transfers and to reflect the new annual capital
asset balance for financial reporting purposes and the annual and accumulated
depreciation calculations and net book value amounts.
   (B)   Day-to-day stewardship of property is the expressed responsibility of
the department utilizing the property. Town departments have the responsibility
to report improvements, additions, retirements, and transfers in detail to the
Clerk-Treasurer in a timely manner.
(Res. 2023-01, passed 5-16-2023)
FUND CREATION
§ 32.40 ARP CORONAVIRUS LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY FUND.
   (A)   Pursuant to State Examiner Directive 2021-1, the Town Council does
hereby create Fund Number 176, which is a special, non-reverting fund
designated as the ARP Coronavirus Fiscal Recovery Fund.
   (B)   Any moneys deposited into said fund may only be utilized for the
following purposes:
      (1)   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or its negative economic impacts, including
assistance to households, small businesses, and nonprofits, or aid to impacted
industries such as tourism, travel, and hospitality;
      (2)   To respond to workers performing essential work during the COVID-19
public health emergency by providing premium pay to eligible workers of the
town that are performing such essential work, or by providing grants to
eligible employers that have eligible workers who perform essential work;
      (3)   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of the town due to the COVID-19 public health emergency
relative to revenues collected in the most recent full fiscal year of the town
prior to the public health emergency; and/or
      (4)   To make necessary investments in water, sewer, or broadband
infrastructure.
   (C)   Funds must be appropriated, disbursed pursuant to the plan outlined
herein, and disbursed pursuant to the normal claims process in I.C. 5-11-10-
1.6.
   (D)   The Town Council hereby establishes the ARP Plan. The plan shall
require the Town Council hold a public hearing to discuss the use of the funds
prior to the appropriation of said funds.
(Ord. 2021-001, passed 5-12-2021)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES; WATER, WASTEWATER, AND STORM WATER
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES; WATER, WASTEWATER, AND STORM WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Purpose; establishment
   
50.002   Definitions
   
50.003   Prohibited disposal
   
50.004   Prohibited discharge
   
50.005   Obligation to connect
   
50.006   Private sewage disposal system
   
50.007   Termination of service
   
50.008   Sewer building permits
   
50.009   Regulations for sewer connection
   
50.010   Action on prohibited discharge
   
50.011   Measurements
   
50.012   Damaging sewers
   
50.013   Inspection of private property
   
50.014   Safety rules
   
50.015   Enforcement
   
50.016   Bonds
   
50.017   Service rates
   
50.018   Description of works
   
50.019   Funds
   
50.020   Operational responsibilities
   
50.021   Financial responsibilities
   
50.022   Maintenance responsibilities of the Wastewater Department
   
50.023   Maintenance responsibilities of the Storm Water Department
   
50.024   User responsibilities
   
50.025   Enforcement, violations, and exemptions
   
50.026   Funding
   
50.027   Water meter tampering
Backflow and Cross-Connection Control
   
50.035   Responsibility
   
50.036   Definitions
   
50.037   Water system requirements
   
50.038   Compliance
   
50.039   Inspections
   
50.040   Discontinuance of service
   
50.041   Installation of backflow prevention assembly
   
50.042   Type of protective assembly
   
50.043   Approval of backflow prevention assembly
   
50.044   Adoption of standards by reference
   
50.045   Duty to test and repair
   
50.046   Certification of testers
   
50.047   Rules incorporated by reference
Septic Tank and Graywater Lagoon Systems
   
50.060   Purpose
   
50.061   Definitions
   
50.062   Mandatory septic tank use
   
50.063   Town-managed graywater lagoon systems
   
50.064   Town maintenance responsibilities for septic tanks
   
50.065   Property Owner Responsibilities
   
50.066   Violation and enforcement
   
50.067   Exemptions
   
50.068   Funding
Rates and Charges
   
50.090   Solid waste collection rates per sewer meter
   
50.091   Waterworks rates and charges
   
50.092   Sewage works rates and charges
   
50.093   Storm water utility fee
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 PURPOSE; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. This chapter establishes “Wingate Utilities” as a unified
entity to manage the town’s water, wastewater, and storm water services for
households, commercial users, and industrial users, consisting of the Water
Utility, Wastewater Utility, and Storm Water Utility. It delineates the
separate operational and financial responsibilities of each department,
mandates the use of town-provided septic tanks and town-managed graywater
lagoon systems for wastewater management, establishes permit and connection
fees for wastewater services, acknowledges a storm water fee as established by
Ordinance 2015-2, and recognizes that water and wastewater rates are set
through periodic rate ordinances.
   (B)   Establishment.
      (1)   Creation. The town hereby establishes Wingate Utilities as the
municipal utility department responsible for managing the town’s water,
wastewater, and storm water services for households, commercial users,
industrial users, institutional users, and governmental users.
      (2)   Structure. Wingate Utilities shall consist of three systems:
         (a)   The Water Department, responsible for the operation,
maintenance, and management of the town’s water supply, treatment, and
distribution systems;
         (b)   The Wastewater Department, responsible for the operation,
maintenance, and management of the town’s wastewater collection, treatment, and
disposal systems, including septic tanks and graywater lagoon systems; and
         (c)   The Storm Water Department, responsible for the operation,
maintenance, and management of the town’s storm water drainage and treatment
systems, also referred to as the Department of Storm Water Management.
      (3)   Governance. Wingate Utilities shall be governed by the Town Council
of Wingate, which serves as the directors of the Department of Storm Water
Management for the Storm Water Department, in accordance with I.C. 8-1.5-3-
3 and I.C. 8-1.5-5-4. The Town Council may appoint a utility board or designate
an administrator to oversee the operations of the water and wastewater systems.
      (4)   Unified branding. The water, wastewater, and storm water systems
shall operate under the unified name “Wingate Utilities” for all public-facing
communications, billing, and administration purposes, while maintaining
separate operational and financial records as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any non-governmental, non-residential, or non-institutional
user operating within the town’s jurisdictional boundaries that utilizes water,
wastewater, or storm water services, discharging less than the equivalent of
2,500 gallons per day of sanitary waste.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such
pollutants, and in fact, does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree
(generally 40% or greater).
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any non-commercial and non-industrial user of the town’s
sewage works owned and operated by the town.
   GRAYWATER LAGOON SYSTEM. A system designed to treat and dispose of graywater
(wastewater from sources such as laundry, showers, sinks, or commercial
processes, excluding toilet waste) through a lagoon or pond, constructed and
managed by Wingate Utilities’ Wastewater Department.
   HOUSEHOLD. Any residential dwelling unit, including single-family homes,
duplexes, or other residential structures, occupied or intended for occupancy,
primarily discharging normal domestic sewage.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as
herein defined.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. 
      (1)   Any non-governmental, non-residential user of the town’s sewage
works which discharges more than the equivalent of 2,500 gallons per day of
sanitary wastes, and which is identified in a Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented under one of the following divisions:
         (a)   Division A: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing;
         (b)   Division B: Mining;
         (c)   Division D: Manufacturing;
         (d)   Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and
Sanitary Service;
         (e)   Division I: Services; or
         (f)    Or discharging wastewater containing toxic pollutants or
substances that may interfere with sewage treatment processes, as defined in
this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Any non-governmental user of the town’s sewage works which
discharges waste water to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants
or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases, in sufficient quantity, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
systems or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which
constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or
creates hazards in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INSPECTOR. The person or persons duly authorized by the town to inspect and
approve the installation of sewers and their connection to the public sewer
system.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any non-governmental user of the town’s sewage works,
which is engaged principally in providing services relating to healthcare or
education.
   LOCAL CAPITAL COSTS or LCC. Those expenditures by the town or its Waste
Water Department for purchase of land, buildings, or components thereof,
equipment and other capital items, the source of which expenditures are tax
dollars or revenues.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. Any industrial user of the sewerage works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 5,000 gallons or more per average workday;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has, in its waste, toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Water Pollution Control Act, being 33
U.S.C. § 1317, as amended; or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the
wastes, to have a significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on the treatment works or upon the quality of
affluent from the treatment works.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Wastes discharged from residences or housing units,
not exceeding 200 mg/l B.O.D. or 250 mg/l suspended solids.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Those expenses of the sewage utility, exclusive
of capital costs.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, controlled by public authority.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works, to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works was designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A customer discharging waste from a building or structure
primarily used for the purpose of human habitation and principally discharging
normal domestic sewage.
   SANITARY BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping to the
sanitary drainage system inside the walls of any building, which receives the
discharge from soil or waste stacks and branches and conveys the same to a
point three feet outside the building walls where it connects with its
respective building sewer.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries sewage and excludes intentional
admission of storm, surface, or groundwater.
   SEPTIC TANK. A water-tight, underground tank designed to collect and hold
solid waste from wastewater, provided and installed by Wingate Utilities’
Wastewater Department.
   SEWAGE. Water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions, and industrial establishments as well as such ground, surface,
and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STORM DRAIN. Sometimes referred to as STORM SEWER, a sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORM WATER DEPARTMENT. The division of Wingate Utilities, also referred to
as the Department of Storm Water Management, responsible for the management of
storm water runoff, including drainage systems, retention facilities, and
compliance with IDEM storm water regulations.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the municipal sewage works for the
town or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that float on the surface of, or are in suspension
in, water, sewage, or other liquids, removable by laboratory filtering.
   TAP-ON FEE. A charge for connecting a building sewer to the wastewater
system, designed to compensate for inspection and local capital costs.
   TOWN. The Town of Wingate, Indiana, or its designated representatives.
   USER CLASSES. Refer to the division of waste water treatment customers by
waste characteristics and process or discharge similarities. There may be as
many as five classes of users, i.e., domestic, commercial, industrial,
institutional, and governmental.
   UTILITY. The Combined Water and Wastewater Utility of the Town of Wingate,
as established by this chapter.
   WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT. The division of Wingate Utilities responsible for the
collection, treatment, and disposal of wastewater, including septic tanks and
graywater lagoon systems.
   WATER DEPARTMENT. The division of Wingate Utilities responsible for the
treatment, distribution, and management of potable water.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WINGATE UTILITIES. The unified municipal utility department of the Town of
Wingate, comprising the Water Department, Wastewater Department, and Storm
Water Department. See definition of UTILITY above.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-4) (Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.003 PROHIBITED DISPOSAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the town, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste;
   (B)   Discharge to any natural outlet within said town, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of said town, any sewage or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this subchapter; and
   (C)   To construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank cesspool,
or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, except as
provided by the code.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-5) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.004 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.
   (A)   No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or allow or cause the
placement, depositing, or discharge of any of the following substances,
compounds, items, mixtures, or things into any sanitary sewer, regardless of
whether the same be described below, or be in combination with one another,
with water, or with any other substance:
      (1)   Any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial
process water. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated to be storm sewers, to
natural outlets, or in such other manner as approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural
outlet;
      (2)   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or any other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
      (3)   Any toxic or poisonous solid, liquid, or gas in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with any other substance or waste, to
pose a substantial risk of:
         (a)   Injuring persons or animals;
         (b)   Interfering with any sewage treatment process;
         (c)   Creating a public nuisance; or
         (d)   Creating any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant.
      (4)   Any waters, wastes, or substances having pH lower than five and
one-half, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing obstruction
to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewage works. Such waters, wastes, or substances include, but are not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, manure, hair and flesh,
paper or plastic dishes, paper or plastic cups, paper or plastic milk
containers, whether or not the same are whole or have passed through any device
used to grind, tear, or cut; and/or
      (5)   Any of the following substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it
appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent the same can: harm the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or; otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance:
         (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F or
65°C;
         (b)   Any fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F or 65°C;
         (c)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded by a device
equipped with a motor of at least three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric).
The installation and connection of such device shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Superintendent;
         (d)   Any strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions whether or not neutralized;
         (e)   Any iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or
toxic substances; or wastes exerting a chlorine requirement to such an extent
that the same as received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials;
         (f)   Any phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent
as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements
of any law governing such discharge to the receiving waters;
         (g)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable law;
         (h)   Any waters or wastes having pH in excess of nine or lower than
five;
         (i)   Materials which exert or cause unusual concentrations of inert
solids, suspended solids, or dissolved solids including, but not limited to
Fuller’s earth, lime slurries, lime residues, sodium chloride, and sodium
sulfate;
         (j)   Materials which exert or cause excessive discoloration,
including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
         (k)   Materials which exert or cause unusual BOD, chemical oxygen
demand, or chlorine requirements so as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works;
         (l)   Materials which exert or cause unusual volume of flow or
concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein;
         (m)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed by the Water
Department, or which are amenable thereto only by rendering sewage treatment
plant effluent unable to meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; and
         (n)   Anything exceeding the standards applicable thereto now or
hereafter established by any government agency having jurisdiction over the
activities or any activity of the Water Department.
   (B)   In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of the treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-6) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.005 OBLIGATION TO CONNECT.
   The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or any other purpose, situated within the town and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located a
public sanitary or combined sewer of the town that is within 100 feet of the
property line, is required at his or her own expense to install suitable
facilities for water, sewer, and drainage therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer or water system in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter, within 90 days after receiving official
notice to do so. No person within the town shall use water, sewer, or drainage
facilities not provided by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-7) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.006 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   Where required. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not
available for connection under §
50.005, the owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or any other purpose, situated within the town is
required at his or her own expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities to a private sewage disposal system
complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Permit application. Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit issued by
the Town Council. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
prescribed by the Council, and shall be accompanied by any plans,
specifications, and other information as may hereafter be deemed necessary by
the Town Council. A tap-on fee of $2,000 shall be paid to the town at the time
of the application is filed.
   (C)   Permit effective.
      (1)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered.
      (2)   The inspection shall be made within three days of the receipt of
notice by the Superintendent, provided that if the third day is a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, the inspection shall occur on the following day that
is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
   (D)   Specifications. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private
sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board
of Health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area to be served
thereby is less than 15,000 square feet, or such other area as may be required
by any applicable law. No septic tank or cesspool shall discharge to any
natural outlet.
   (E)   Obligation to connect. At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, the owner
of the property shall at his or her own expense make a direct connection to the
public sewer in compliance with this section. Further, the owner shall at his
or her own expense ensure that any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private
sewage disposal facilities are thereafter abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and
filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
   (F)   Operation. The owner shall at his or her sole expense operate and
maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all
times.
   (G)   Health Officer. No statement contained in this section shall be
construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
a public official charged with the duty of preserving, promoting, or protecting
public health.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-8) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.007 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   Upon being notified by a customer of a desire to terminate service, the
Water Department shall proceed to terminate water service as soon as reasonably
possible, and effective with the date of actual disconnection the customer’s
current water billing shall continue until the last day of the month in which
disconnection occurs. Under no circumstances will sewage be disconnected, and
all persons shall remain liable for sewage billings.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-9)
§ 50.008 SEWER BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person not employed by the town or the Water
Department shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter,
or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a
written permit issued by the Water Department.
   (B)   Classes of permits. There shall be two classes of sewer building
permits: a Class I permit, for residential and commercial service; and a Class
II permit, for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either
case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a form prescribed
by the Town Council, together with any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A
permit and inspection fee of $100 for a Class I permit and $200 for a Class II
permit shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer at the time the application is
made.
   (C)   Costs and expense. All costs and expense incident to the installation
and connection of a sewer under a Class I or Class II permit shall be borne by
the owner, who shall save, hold harmless, and indemnify the town from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the owner’s work
with respect to the sewer.
   (D)   Tap-on fee. Any person performing work under a Class I or Class II
permit and who requests a new connection to the sewage works shall, at the time
to making such request, pay a tap-on fee as determined by the Town Council, and
the fee shall be available for inspection.
   (E)   Separate sewers required. A separate and independent sewer shall be
provided for every building. If one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constricted to the
rear building, the sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building/sewer combination.
   (F)   Found sewers. Sewer connections, pipes, or appurtenances found or
already existing on property may be used by new buildings only when the same
are determined, on examination by the Water Department, to meet all the
requirements of this section and the laws.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-10)
§ 50.009 REGULATIONS FOR SEWER CONNECTION.
   (A)   Compliance with codes and regulations.
      (1)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other requirements of the building and
plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the town.
      (2)   In the absence of specific laws or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the latest
edition of the A.S.T.M and S.P.C.F. Manual of Practice shall apply.
   (B)   Elevation. Whenever possible, the sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
   (C)   Downspouts. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (D)   Conformity to law. The connection of the sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the town, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the latest edition to the A.S.T.M. and the
W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and
water-tight. Deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
   (E)   Inspection. The applicant for the Class I or Class II permit shall
notify the Water Department when the sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the said Superintendent or his or her representative.
   (F)   Excavation. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
   (G)   Connection dates. All services for connection to be performed by the
Water Department shall be done on Monday through Friday, inclusive, and it is
specifically determined that no such work shall be performed on any Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.010 ACTION ON PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Potential actions. If any waters or other fluids are proposed to be
discharged, deposited, or placed in the public sewers which contain or possess
any substances or characteristics enumerated in §
50.004, and in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or property, or constitute a public
nuisance, the Superintendent may reject the wastes; require pretreatment to an
acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; require control over
the quantities and rates of discharge; require payment to cover the added cost
of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges; and, take or require any other action described below.
   (B)   Pretreatment or equalization. If the Superintendent permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the
plans and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws. Where pretreatment treatment or flow-equalizing
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, the same shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her
own expense.
   (C)   Use of interceptors.
      (1)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be used when, in the
opinion of the said Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amount, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
      (2)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent, sand shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. Where interceptors are required, the same shall be
obtained and used in satisfactory and effective manner by the owner at his or
her own expense.
   (D)   Manhole. The Superintendent may require the owner of any property
serviced by a sewer carrying industrial wastes to install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with the owner at his or her expense,
and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
   (E)   Limitation. No statement contained in this section shall be construed
as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the town for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-12)
§ 50.011 MEASUREMENTS.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water and
wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-13)
§ 50.012 DAMAGING SEWERS.
   No person not employed by the Water Department or acting under its control
shall intentionally, knowingly, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part
of the municipal sewage works.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-14) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.013 INSPECTION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Superintendent, or any other duly authorized employee of the town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private property for the purposes of inspecting, observing, measuring,
sampling, and testing to ensure proper compliance with this subchapter and to
otherwise maintain the integrity and proper function of the sewers,
connections, or municipal sewage works.
   (B)   Said persons shall have no authority to inquire into any matter which
has no direct bearing on these purposes. In the event such entry is onto
private property as to which the town holds an easement, such entry and
inspection shall be done in full and strict accordance with the terms of the
duly easement.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-15)
§ 50.014 SAFETY RULES.
   While performing entries and inspections on commercial property, the
Superintendent or employees of the town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the owner and the owner shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the town’s employees; further, the town shall
indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by town employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the owner and growing out of the inspection, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe
conditions.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-16)
§ 50.015 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of this subchapter except §
50.004 shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. Further, any person violating
any of the provisions of this subchapter shall become liable to the town for
any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation,
including enforcement costs and reasonable attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-17) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.016 BONDS.
   While some ordinances or parts of ordinances previously enacted by the town
have been incorporated in this code, some parts of prior ordinances may have
been lost, or destroyed; the integrity of those ordinances and records relating
to the issuance of bonds for the said sewage works are hereby ratified and
confirmed, and the same shall remain in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-18)
§ 50.017 SERVICE RATES.
   (A)   (1)   The town shall continually maintain in effect charges for the
use of and the service rendered by said works, to be paid by the owner of each
and every lot, parcel of real estate or building that is connected with and
uses said sewage works by or through any part of the sewerage system of the
town, or that in any way uses or is served by such works; that such rates or
charges shall be sufficient in each year for the payment of the proper and
reasonable expenses of operation, repair, replacement and maintenance of the
works, and for the payment of the sums required to be paid into the Sewage
Works Sinking Fund by this chapter and applicable law.
      (2)   Such rates or charges shall, if necessary, be changed and
readjusted from time to time so that the revenues therefrom shall always be
sufficient to meet the expenses of operation, repair, and maintenance, and said
requirements of the Sewage Works Sinking Fund. The rates or charges so
established shall apply to any and all use of such works by and service
rendered to the town and all departments thereof as the charges accrue.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-19)
   (B)   Rates shall be set by the Town Council and available for inspection at
the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-20)
§ 50.018 DESCRIPTION OF WORKS.
   Said sewage works, consisting of lands, easements, rights-of-way,
interceptor and local sewers, lift stations, advanced wastewater treatment
facilities, including extended aeration and phosphate removal, and other
necessary appurtenances, shall be acquired and constricted in accordance with
the plans, specifications and estimates heretofore prepared which are now on
file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, and which are hereby adopted and
approved, and by reference made a part of this code as fully as if the same
were attached hereto or incorporated herein.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-21)
§ 50.019 FUNDS.
   (A)   Operation and Maintenance Fund. There is hereby created a fund to be
known as the “Operation and Maintenance Fund,” to which fund there shall be
credited as of the last day of each calendar month a sufficient amount of the
revenues of the sewage works so that the balance in said fund shall be
sufficient to pay the expenses of operation, repair and maintenance for the
then next succeeding two calendar months. The moneys credited to this fund
shall be used for the payment of the reasonable and proper operation, repair,
and maintenance expenses of the sewage works on a day-to-day basis, but none of
the moneys in such fund shall be used for depreciation, replacements,
improvements, extensions, or additions. Any balance in said fund in excess of
the expected expenses of operation, repair, and maintenance for the next
succeeding month may be transferred to the Sewage Works Sinking Fund if
necessary to prevent a default in the payment of principal or interest on the
outstanding bonds.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-22)
   (B)   Sinking Fund. There is hereby created a sinking fund for the payment
of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds which by their terms are
payable form the revenue of the sewage works, and the payment of any fiscal
agency charges in connection with the payment of bonds and interest coupons,
which fund shall be designated the “Sewage Works Sinking Fund.” There shall be
set aside and deposited in said Sinking Fund, as available, and as hereinafter
provided a sufficient amount of the net revenues of said sewage works (defined
as gross revenues exclusive of recovered grant amounts form industrial users as
required by the Environmental Protection Agency, after deduction only for the
payment of the reasonable expenses of operation, repair and maintenance) to
meet the requirements of the Bond and Interest Account and of the Debt Service
Reserve Account hereby created in said Sewage Works Sinking Fund. Such payment
shall continue until the balance in the Bond and Interest Account, plus the
balance in the Debt Service Reserve Account hereinafter created, equal the
principal of and interest of all of the then outstanding bonds to the final
maturity thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-23)
   (C)   Improvement Fund. After meeting the requirements of the Operation and
Maintenance Fund, and the Sewage Works Sinking Fund, any excess revenues may be
transferred or credited to a fund designated the “Sewage Works Improvement
Fund,” and said fund shall be used for improvements, replacements, additions,
and extensions of the sewage works. Moneys in the Sewage Works Improvement Fund
shall be transferred to the Sewage Works Sinking Fund, if necessary, to prevent
a default in the payment of principal and interest on the then outstanding
bonds or, if necessary, to eliminate any deficiencies in credits to or minimum
balance in the Debt Service Reserve Account of the Sewage Works Sinking Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-24)
   (D)   Separate accounts. The Sewage Works Sinking Fund shall be deposited in
and maintained as a separate bank account or accounts apart from all other bank
accounts of the town. The Operation and Maintenance Fund and the Sewage Works
Improvement Fund may be maintained in a single bank account, or accounts, but
such bank account, or accounts, shall likewise be maintained separate and apart
from all other bank accounts of the town and apart from the Sewage Works
Sinking Fund bank account or accounts. All moneys deposited in said bank
accounts shall be deposited, held, and secured as public funds in accordance
with the public depository laws of the state; provided that moneys therein may
be invested in obligations in accordance with the applicable laws as amended or
supplemented, and in the event of such investment the income therefrom shall
become a part of the funds invested and shall be used only as provided in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-25)
§ 50.020 OPERATIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Water Department.
      (1)   Functions. The Water Department shall manage the sourcing,
treatment, storage, and distribution of potable water to all users within the
town’s jurisdictional boundaries, in compliance with State Department of Health
standards and other applicable regulations.
      (2)   Infrastructure. The Water Department shall maintain all water-
related infrastructure, including treatment plants, distribution lines, and
meters, separate from wastewater and storm water infrastructure.
      (3)   Service standards. The Water Department shall ensure continuous,
safe, and reliable water service, with regular testing and reporting as
required by state and federal law. Service levels shall accommodate the varying
demands of all user classes.
   (B)   Wastewater Department.
      (1)   Functions. The Wastewater Department shall manage the collection,
treatment, and disposal of wastewater from all users, including the provision
and maintenance of septic tanks and the construction, operation, and
maintenance of graywater lagoon systems, in compliance with IDEM standards (327
I.A.C. § 3).
      (2)   Septic tank requirements.
         (a)   All users shall utilize a septic tank provided by the Wastewater
Department for the collection of wastewater solids, unless granted an exemption
under §
50.025(D).
         (b)   No user shall install or maintain a privately owned septic tank
unless granted an exemption by the Town Council.
         (c)   The Wastewater Department shall install septic tanks in
compliance with IDEM and State Department of Health regulations, subject to the
user’s payment of a permit fee as outlined in this section.
         (d)   For commercial, industrial, and institutional users, septic
tanks shall be sized and designed to accommodate the specific wastewater volume
and characteristics of the user, as determined by the Wastewater Department.
      (3)   Graywater lagoon systems.
         (a)   All users shall utilize a graywater lagoon system constructed
and managed by the Wastewater Department for the treatment and disposal of
graywater, unless granted an exemption under §
50.025(D).
         (b)   Graywater lagoon systems receive only graywater, with septic
tanks handling toilet waste and other solids. For commercial, industrial, and
institutional users, the composition of graywater shall comply with IDEM
discharge standards.
         (c)   The Wastewater Department shall design and construct graywater
lagoon systems to meet the specific needs of each user type, ensuring capacity
for varying wastewater volumes.
      (4)   Sewer connection requirements.
         (a)   Users with property abutting a public sanitary or combined sewer
within 100 feet of the property line shall connect to the public sewer within
90 days of receiving official notice, at their own expense, in accordance with
the town’s building and plumbing codes.
         (b)   Where a public sewer is unavailable, users shall install a
private sewage disposal system, subject to a permit and approval by the
Wastewater Department, in compliance with State Board of Health
recommendations.
         (c)   Private sewage disposal systems shall not discharge to any
natural outlet and must comply with minimum area requirements (e.g., 15,000
square feet for subsurface soil absorption facilities).
         (d)   When a public sewer becomes available, users with private
systems shall connect to the public sewer and abandon private facilities,
cleaning, and filling them with gravel or dirt at their own expense.
      (5)   Prohibited discharges.
         (a)   No user shall discharge storm water, surface water, groundwater,
roof runoff, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process
water into sanitary sewers. Such discharges shall be directed to storm drains
or natural outlets with approval from the Wastewater Department Superintendent.
         (b)   Prohibited substances include flammable or explosive materials,
toxic or poisonous substances, corrosive materials (pH <5.5 or >9.0), high-
temperature liquids (>150°(F)), excessive grease or oils (>100 mg/l),
unshredded garbage, and other materials that may harm sewers or treatment
processes, as specified in the town’s municipal code.
      (6)   Pretreatment and control.
         (a)   Industrial users discharging incompatible pollutants or
excessive waste shall install pretreatment or flow-equalization facilities,
subject to the Superintendent’s approval, at the user’s expense.
         (b)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be installed by users
when deemed necessary by the Superintendent, except for private dwellings, and
maintained at the user’s expense.
         (c)   Industrial users may be required to install control manholes for
monitoring and sampling, constructed and maintained at the user’s expense.
         (d)   The Wastewater Department shall maintain all wastewater-related
infrastructure, including septic tanks, graywater lagoon systems, public
sewers, and associated piping, separate from water and storm water
infrastructure.
      (7)   Storm Water Department.
         (a)   Functions. The Storm Water Department , also referred to as the
Department of Storm Water Management, shall manage the collection, conveyance,
and treatment of storm water runoff from all users, in compliance with IDEM
storm water regulations (327 I.A.C. § 15), the town’s Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer System (MS4) program, if applicable, and the Storm Water Study Plan
adopted under Resolution 2015-1.
         (b)   Infrastructure. The Storm Water Department shall maintain all
storm water-related infrastructure, including drainage ditches, culverts,
retention ponds, and treatment facilities, separate from water and wastewater
infrastructure.
         (c)   Compliance. The Storm Water Department shall ensure compliance
with federal and state storm water regulations, including the Clean Water Act
and IDEM’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits,
with specific attention to industrial users’ storm water discharge
requirements.
      (8)   Permit and connection fees for wastewater.
         (a)   Septic tank permit fee. All users shall be responsible for a
one-time permit fee to cover the cost of the septic tank provided and installed
by the Wastewater Department. The fee amount shall be determined by the Town
Council based on user type and system requirements and published in the town’s
fee schedule. The fee must be paid prior to installation.
         (b)   Private sewage disposal permit fee. Users installing private
sewage disposal systems where public sewers are unavailable shall obtain a
permit from the Wastewater Department, with a fee of $50, payable at the time
of application.
         (c)   Sewer connection permit fees. Users connecting to public sewers
shall obtain a sewer building permit, with fees of $100 for Class I
(residential and commercial) and $200 for Class II (industrial), payable to the
Clerk-Treasurer at the time of application.
         (d)   Tap-on fee. Users requesting a new connection to the public
sewer system shall pay a tap-on fee, as determined by the Town Council and
published in the town’s fee schedule, to cover inspection and local capital
costs.
         (e)   Coordination. The water, wastewater, and storm water systems
shall coordinate as needed to ensure efficient utility services, particularly
for users with high water, wastewater, or storm water demands, but each
department shall maintain distinct operational protocols and staff
responsibilities.
(Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.021 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Separate accounts.
      (1)   Utilities shall maintain separate financial accounts for the Water
Department, Wastewater Department, and Storm Water Department, as required by
I.C. 8-1.5-3-4 and I.C. 8-1.5-5-6, to prevent cross-subsidization and ensure
transparency.
      (2)   Revenues from water rates, wastewater fees, septic tank permit
fees, sewer connection fees, tap-on fees, storm water fees, and other sources
shall be allocated to the respective department’s account based on the service
provided and user type.
   (B)   Water Department funding. The Water Department shall be funded
primarily through water rates charged to all users, as established by periodic
rate ordinances adopted by the Town Council in accordance with I.C. 8-1.5-3-8.
Rates may vary by user type to reflect usage levels and shall be published in
the town’s fee schedule. Additional funding may include grants, bonds, or other
revenues designated for water-related purposes.
   (C)   Wastewater Department funding.
      (1)   The Wastewater Department shall be funded primarily through
wastewater service fees, septic tank permit fees, sewer connection permit fees,
and tap-on fees charged to all users, as established by periodic rate
ordinances adopted by the Town Council in accordance with I.C. 8-1.5-3-8, and
published in the town’s fee schedule.
      (2)   The Wastewater Department shall cover the costs of septic tank
inspection, pumping, repairs, and replacements, as well as the construction,
inspection, and maintenance of graywater lagoon systems, unless damage is due
to user misuse or negligence.
      (3)   A Sewage Works Sinking Fund shall be maintained to meet bond
obligations and debt service requirements, as required by the town’s municipal
code.
      (4)   An Operation and Maintenance Fund and a Sewage Works Improvement
Fund may be maintained in a single bank account, separate from the Sewage Works
Sinking Fund and other town accounts, to support ongoing operations, repairs,
replacements, and improvements.
      (5)   Excess revenues, after meeting Operation and Maintenance and
Sinking Fund requirements, shall be transferred to the Sewage Works Improvement
Fund for improvements, replacements, additions, or extensions of the wastewater
system.
   (D)   Storm Water Department Funding.
      (1)   The Storm Water Department shall be funded primarily through storm
water fees charged to all users, as established by Ordinance 2015-2 and set by
the Town Council under I.C. 8-1.5-5-7. Fees may vary based on impervious
surface area or other criteria specified in the town’s fee schedule.
      (2)   Additional funding may include grants, bonds, or other revenues
designated for storm water management, including funds from the Community
Development Block Grant referenced in Resolution 2015-1.
   (E)   Reporting. Financial reports for each department, including complete
operating income and expense statements, shall be maintained and made available
for public inspection, with copies provided to bondholders within 90 days of
the fiscal year’s end, in accordance with the town’s municipal code.
(Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.022 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Septic tanks.
      (1)   Inspection. The Wastewater Department shall inspect each user’s
septic tank at least once every three to five years to assess condition and
ensure proper functioning, with inspection frequency adjusted for commercial,
industrial, and institutional users based on wastewater volume or regulatory
requirements.
      (2)   Pumping. The Wastewater Department shall arrange and cover the cost
of pumping each septic tank as needed, based on inspection findings, but no
less frequently than every three to five years.
      (3)   Repairs and replacements. If an inspection reveals the need for
repairs or replacement, the Wastewater Department shall undertake such actions
at no direct cost to the user, unless damage is due to misuse or negligence as
determined by the town.
      (4)   Scheduling. The Wastewater Department shall notify users in writing
at least 30 days in advance of scheduled inspections or pumping activities.
Users shall provide reasonable access to the septic tank.
   (B)   Graywater lagoon systems.
      (1)   Inspection. The Wastewater Department shall inspect the graywater
lagoon system at least once every three to five years to ensure proper
functioning and environmental safety, with inspection frequency adjusted for
commercial, industrial, and institutional users as needed.
      (2)   Maintenance. The Wastewater Department shall perform necessary
maintenance, including desilting, vegetation control, and structural repairs,
at no direct cost to the user, unless damage is due to misuse or negligence as
determined by the town.
      (3)   Scheduling.
         (a)   The Wastewater Department shall notify users in writing at least
30 days in advance of scheduled inspections or maintenance activities.
         (b)   Users shall provide reasonable access to the system.
   (C)   Public sewers.
      (1)   The Wastewater Department shall maintain public sanitary and
combined sewers, ensuring they remain free of blockages and compliant with IDEM
standards.
      (2)   Inspections and repairs shall be conducted as needed, with users
responsible for maintaining private building sewers to the point of connection
with the public sewer.
(Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.023 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE STORM WATER DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Infrastructure maintenance. The Storm Water Department shall maintain
all storm water infrastructure, including drainage ditches, culverts, retention
ponds, and treatment facilities, to ensure effective management of storm water
runoff and compliance with IDEM regulations, as guided by the Storm Water Study
Plan adopted under Resolution 2015-1.
   (B)   Inspection. The Storm Water Department shall conduct periodic
inspections of storm water systems, with frequency determined by the town’s MS4
program or IDEM requirements, to identify and address issues such as blockages
or pollution.
   (C)   Repairs. The Storm Water Department shall undertake necessary repairs
to storm water infrastructure at no direct cost to users, unless damage is due
to user actions (e.g., unauthorized modifications) as determined by the town.
   (D)   Scheduling. The Storm Water Department shall notify users in writing
at least 30 days in advance of scheduled inspections or maintenance activities
affecting their property. Users shall provide reasonable access to storm water
infrastructure.
(Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.024 USER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Access. All users (households, commercial users, industrial users,
institutional users, and governmental users) shall ensure that septic tanks,
graywater lagoon systems, public sewers, and storm water infrastructure are
accessible for inspection, maintenance, and repair activities conducted by
Wingate Utilities.
   (B)   Proper use.
      (1)   Users shall avoid disposing of non-biodegradable materials,
chemicals, or excessive grease into septic tanks, graywater lagoon systems, or
public sewers, as these may cause damage or system failure.
      (2)   Users shall ensure that only graywater is directed to graywater
lagoon systems, and that toilet waste and other solids are directed to septic
tanks or public sewers. Commercial, industrial, and institutional users shall
comply with IDEM regulations for wastewater discharge, including pretreatment
requirements.
      (3)   Users shall prevent unauthorized discharges (e.g., pollutants,
flammable materials, or high-temperature liquids) into sanitary sewers or storm
water systems, in compliance with IDEM and Clean Water Act regulations.
      (4)   Industrial users shall install and maintain pretreatment
facilities, interceptors, or control manholes as required by the Wastewater
Department Superintendent, at their own expense.
   (C)   Reporting. Users shall promptly report any signs of system failure,
such as septic tank backups, lagoon overflows, sewer blockages, storm water
flooding, or pollution, to Wingate Utilities within 24 hours.
   (D)   Payment of fees.
      (1)   Users shall pay the septic tank permit fee, sewer connection permit
fees, and tap-on fee as required under §
50.020 prior to installation or connection.
      (2)   Users shall pay water and wastewater rates as established by
periodic rate ordinances adopted by the Town Council and published in the
town’s fee schedule.
      (3)   Users shall pay the storm water fee as established by Ordinance
2015-2 and set by the Town Council, in accordance with I.C. 8-1.5-5-7.
   (E)   Compliance. Users shall comply with all directives from Wingate
Utilities related to the use and maintenance of water, wastewater, and storm
water systems, including any additional IDEM or federal requirements applicable
to commercial, industrial, or institutional users.
   (F)   Private sewage disposal. Users with private sewage disposal systems
shall operate and maintain them in a sanitary manner at their own expense,
until a public sewer becomes available, at which point they shall connect to
the public sewer and abandon private systems.
(Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.025 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Violations. Failure to comply with any provision of this ordinance,
including denying access for inspection or maintenance, improper use of water,
wastewater, or storm water systems, failure to report system issues, non-
payment of the septic tank permit fee, sewer connection fees, tap-on fee, water
rates, wastewater fees, or storm water fee, or non-compliance with IDEM
regulations, shall constitute a violation.
   (B)   Notice of violation. Wingate Utilities shall issue a written notice of
violation, providing the user with a reasonable time limit (not less than 30
days) to correct the violation before imposing penalties, unless immediate
action is required to protect public health or safety.
   (C)   Inspection authority. The Wastewater Department Superintendent or
authorized employees, bearing proper credentials, shall be permitted to enter
private property to inspect, observe, measure, sample, and test wastewater and
storm water systems to ensure compliance, in accordance with easements or
applicable laws.
   (D)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Application. A user may apply for an exemption from the requirement
to use a town-provided septic tank, town-managed graywater lagoon system, or
public sewer if they can demonstrate that an alternative system meets or
exceeds state and local standards and does not pose a risk to public health or
the environment.
      (2)   Approval. Exemptions shall be granted at the discretion of the Town
Council after review by Wingate Utilities designated health or environmental
officer. Approved exemptions may require periodic inspections at the user’s
expense.
(Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.026 FUNDING.
   (A)   Wingate Utilities shall establish dedicated funds to support the
operations of the water, wastewater, and storm water systems. The septic tank
permit fee, sewer connection permit fees, and tap-on fee shall offset the cost
of providing and installing wastewater infrastructure.
   (B)   Water and wastewater rates, as established by periodic rate
ordinances, and the storm water fee, as established by Ordinance 2015-2, shall
support the operations and maintenance of their respective systems. A Sewage
Works Sinking Fund, Operation and Maintenance Fund, and Sewage Works
Improvement Fund shall be maintained for the Wastewater Department to meet bond
obligations and support system improvements.
   (C)   Additional funding may be derived from grants, bonds, or other
sources, as determined by the Town Council. All revenues and expenses shall be
allocated to the appropriate department’s financial account to ensure
compliance with I.C. 8-1.5-3-4 and I.C. 8-1.5-5-6.
(Ord. 2025, passed - -2025)
§ 50.027 WATER METER TAMPERING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      TAMPERING. Any unauthorized act that interferes with the proper
functioning, accuracy, or security of a water meter or water meter pit,
including, but not limited to, altering, damaging, bypassing, removing, or
connecting to the meter or pit without Utility approval.
      TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the Town of Wingate, acting as the
Utility Board pursuant to this chapter.
      UTILITY. The Combined Water and Wastewater Utility of the Town of
Wingate, as established by this chapter.
      WATER METER. A device installed by the Utility to measure the volume of
water usage for billing purposes, including any associated components such as
registers, sensors, or remote reading equipment.
      WATER METER PIT. The structure or enclosure, including lids, covers, and
associated fittings, that houses the water meter to protect it from damage and
provide access for maintenance and reading.
   (B)   Prohibition of tampering.
      (1)   Tampering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
entity to tamper with, alter, damage, bypass, remove, or otherwise interfere
with any water meter or water meter pit owned or operated by the utility,
except as expressly authorized by the utility.
      (2)   Unauthorized connections. No person, firm, or entity shall make any
connection to the utility’s water system through or around a water meter or
water meter pit without prior written approval from the utility.
      (3)   Access restrictions. Only authorized utility personnel or agents
shall access, repair, replace, or modify water meters or water meter pits.
Unauthorized access to or entry into a water meter pit is prohibited.
      (4)   Prohibited acts. Prohibited acts include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Breaking or removing seals, locks, or covers on water meters or
water meter pits;
         (b)   Installing devices to bypass or manipulate water meter readings;
         (c)   Damaging or obstructing access to water meters or water meter
pits;
         (d)   Diverting water to avoid metering or billing; and
         (e)   Altering or relocating a water meter or water meter pit without
utility approval.
   (C)   Enforcement and penalties.
      (1)   Violation notice. Upon discovery of tampering or unauthorized
activity involving a water meter or water meter pit, the Utility Manager or
designated personnel shall issue a written notice of violation to the
responsible party, specifying the nature of the violation and required
corrective actions.
      (2)   Service disconnection. The Utility may disconnect water service to
any property where tampering is confirmed, pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-3-4,
following written notice and a 1ten-day opportunity to cure the violation.
Reconnection shall be contingent upon payment of all fines, repair costs, and
reconnection fees.
      (3)   Civil remedies. The Utility may pursue civil action to recover
damages, costs, and attorney fees resulting from tampering or unauthorized use
of the water system, as authorized by I.C. 8-1.5-3-8.
      (4)   Criminal referral. In cases of willful or repeated tampering, the
utility may refer the matter to local law enforcement for investigation and
prosecution under applicable state criminal statutes.
   (D)   Administration.
      (1)   Utility manager oversight. The Utility Manager, appointed under
this chapter, or any other person as designated by the Town Council, shall be
responsible for enforcing this section, including investigating suspected
violations, issuing notices, and recommending penalties to the Town Council.
      (2)   Appeals. Any person or entity receiving a violation notice or
penalty may appeal to the Town Council within 15 days of receiving the notice.
The Town Council shall hold a hearing within 30 days and issue a final
decision, which shall be binding unless overturned by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
      (3)   Clerk-Treasurer role. The Clerk-Treasurer shall oversee the
collection of fines and fees imposed under this section.
   (E)   Notification and education.
      (1)   Public notification. The utility shall notify customers of this
ordinance through billing inserts, the town’s website, or other public
communication methods within 60 days of its adoption.
      (2)   Customer education. The utility shall provide information to
customers about the importance of protecting water meters and water meter pits
and the consequences of tampering, including potential fines and service
disruptions.
(Ord. 2025-, passed - -2025) Penalty, see §
50.999
BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 50.035 RESPONSIBILITY.
   Wingate Utilities shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contaminants or pollutants through the
water service connection. If, In the judgment of said Wingate Utilities, an
approved backflow prevention assembly is required as defined by 327 I.A.C. 8-10
(as the customer’s water service connection; or, within the customer’s private
water system) for the safety of the water system, Wingate Utilities shall give
notice in writing by mail to said customer to install such an approved backflow
prevention assembly(s) at the specific location(s) on their premises. The
customer shall install such approved assembly(s) at the customer’s own expense;
and, failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install,
have tested, and maintain said assembly(s) shall constitute a grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been
satisfactorily met.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank,
plumbing fixture, or other devise or flood level rim of said vessel. An
approved AIR GAP shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe,
measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel; and in no case less
than one inch.
   APPROVED. Accepted by Wingate Utilities as meeting applicable specification
stated or cited in this subchapter, or as suitable for the purposed use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the utility’s approved potable water supply. These AUXILIARY WATERS
may include water from another utility’s public potable water supply or any
natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, and the like, or “used
waters” or “industrial fluids.” These waters may be contaminated or polluted,
or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over
which the water utility does not have sanitary control.
   BACKFLOW. The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either
backpressure or backsiphonage.
   BACKPRESSURE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source or source other than the intended source.
   BACKSIPHONAGE. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply caused by the reduction
of pressure in the potable water supply system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An approved assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage,
industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds, or other materials to a degree
which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or
fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains
potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial fluids of
questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur
into the potable water system.
   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT. The installation of an approved
backflow assembly at the water service connection to any customer’s premises
where it is physically and economically unfeasible to find and permanently
eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the
customer’s water system; or it shall mean the installation of an approved
backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a
portion of a customer’s water system where there are actual or potential cross-
connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point
of cross-connection.
   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROLLED. A connection between a potable water system and
a non-potable water system with an air gap or approved backflow prevention
assembly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   DEGREE OF HAZARD. An evaluation of the potential risk and the adverse effect
of the hazard upon the potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly of two independently operating,
approved check valves with resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the
check valves, plus properly located resilient seated test cocks for testing of
each check valve. The entire ASSEMBLY shall meet the design and performance
specifications as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program
resulting in an approval by a recognized and Wingate Utilities approved testing
agency for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these ASSEMBLIES
must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. Confined space
installations will not be accepted.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, devise, or practice in the water supply system
and its operation which could create or, in the judgment of Wingate Utilities,
may create a danger to the health and wellbeing of the water customer.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM. Any system containing a fluid or solution, which
may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a
form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional,
or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may
include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of
process waters and “used water” originating from the public potable water
system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid
form; plating acids and alkalizes, circulating cooling waters connected to an
open cooling water and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically
treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such
as wells, springs, streams, rivers, irrigation canal or systems, and the like;
oils, gases, glycerin, paraffin, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid
and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting
purposes.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water which is not safe for human consumption or which is
of questionable potability.
   PLUMBING HAZARD. A plumbing type cross-connection in a customer’s potable
water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or
approved backflow prevention assembly.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or
biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
   POLLUTIONAL HAZARD. An actual or potential threat to the physical water
system but which could constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable
or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be
dangerous to health.
   POTABLE WATER. Any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe
for human consumption.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLIES. An assembly of two independently
acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating,
mechanically independent differential pressure relief valve located between the
check valves and, at the same time, below the first check valve, the unit shall
include properly located resilient seated test cocks and resilient seated shut-
off valves at each end of the ASSEMBLY. The entire ASSEMBLY shall meet the
design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and a field
evaluation program resulting in approval by a recognized and Wingate Utilities
approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The ASSEMBLY shall
operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the check valves at an
acceptable level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the
ASSEMBLY. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check
valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the
ASSEMBLY. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential
relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between
the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is
two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the
atmosphere. To be approved, these ASSEMBLIES must be readily accessible for in-
line testing and maintenance and be installed in a location where no part of
the assembly will be submerged. Confined space installations will not be
approved.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Wingate Water Utilities, or his or
her designee, who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the
impletion of an effective cross-connection control program and for the
enforcement of provisions of this subchapter.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the
physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer’s
potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a water utility from a public potable
water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer
under the sanitary control of the water utility.
   WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service connection from the
public potable water system, i.e., where the water utility loses jurisdiction
and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer’s
water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection,
then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter,
provided the meter is installed outside of the building; i.e., in a pit or
vault. If the meter is installed inside a building, then the water utility’s
jurisdiction terminates at the downstream end of the outside shut-off valve to
the water service. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the water
service line ahead of any meter or ahead of any backflow prevention assembly.
Service connection shall also include WATER SERVICE CONNECTION from a fire
hydrant and all other temporary or emergency WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS from the
public potable water system.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.037 WATER SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
utility system and the customer system.
   (B)   (1)   The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and
the distribution system; and shall include all air gaps or approved backflow
prevention assemblies properly installed and maintained, up to the point where
the customer’s system begins.
      (2)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage, and deliver of water to the distribution
system. The distribution system shall include the network of mains used for the
delivery of water from the source to the customer’s system.
   (C)   (1)   The customer’s system shall include those parts of the
facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are
utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use.
      (2)   As defined in the town service area, at or about the customer
fitting connection outside of the meter pit or 18 inches for residential
services or at the corporate shut-off at the distribution main for commercial
properties, unless otherwise designated.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.038 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by Wingate Utilities unless the water supply is protected as
required by state rules and regulations or this subchapter. Service of water to
any premises may be discontinued by Wingate Utilities if a backflow prevention
assembly required by this subchapter is not installed, tested, and maintained
or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or
bypassed; or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises.
   (B)   Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are
corrected. All customers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, reduced pressure principle backflow preventer in the main water
line serving each building on the premises. The backflow preventer must be
installed in an easily accessible location.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.039 INSPECTIONS.
   The customer’s system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times
to authorized representatives of Wingate Utilities to determine whether there
exist cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including
violations of this subchapter or regulations which are adopted through this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.040 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   When a violation condition becomes known, the Superintendent may deny or
immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical
break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in
conformance with state statutes and town ordinances relating to plumbing and
water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Written notice
shall be provided to the customer as soon as practical. A customer shall have
the opportunity for hearing within ten days of any emergency discontinuance.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.041 INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
   An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each
service line on each service line to a customer’s water system at or near the
property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all
cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.042 TYPE OF PROTECTIVE ASSEMBLY.
   The type of protective assembly required shall depend upon the degree of
hazard which exists as follows.
   (A)   In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply,
the public water systems shall be protected by an approved air gap separation
or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
   (B)   In the case of any premises where there is water or a substance that
would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the
public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow assembly.
   (C)   In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to
health such as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water
system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap
separation or an approved reduced principle backflow prevention assembly.
Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include, but are not
limited to, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical
manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and planting plants.
   (D)   In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross-
connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
   (E)   In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap
separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly on each service to the premises.
   (F)   In the case of any premises having a lawn irrigation system, the
public water system shall be protected by an approved pressure vacuum breaker
backflow prevention assembly or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly.
   (G)   In the case of any premises having a fire service line, the public
water system shall be protected by an approved double detector check valve
assembly.
   (H)   All other premises not covered in divisions (A) to (G) above shall be
required to install a non- testable dual check valve assembly for the
protection of the public water system.
   (I)   Existing installations are not exempt from current rules and
regulations in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.043 APPROVAL OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and
size approved by Wingate Utilities. The term APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION
ASSEMBLY shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance
with the standards established by the American Water Works Association (AWWA)
entitled “AWWA C506-84 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double
Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices.”
   (B)   Said assembly shall meet the laboratory and field performance
specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research (FCCC & HR) of the University of Southern California established by
Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies - § 10 of the most current
issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control. Final approval shall be
evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory
certifying full compliance with the said AWWA standards and FCCC & HR
specifications.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.044 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS BY REFERENCE.
   The AWWA and FCCC & HR standards are specifications specifically referenced
in §
50.043 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.045 DUTY TO TEST AND REPAIR.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any customer/user at any premises where
backflow prevention assemblies are installed as stipulated in §
50.042(A) to (G), to have certified inspections and operational tests made upon
installation and at least once per year. In those instances where the Town
Utilities Superintendent deems the hazard to be great enough, the
Superintendent may require inspection at more frequent intervals. The
inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be
performed by a certified tester registered and approved by the state and
Wingate Utilities.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the customer to see that these tests are made
in a timely manner. If a customer/user does not have its backflow prevention
assembly tested within 30 days of the testing due date, Wingate Utilities may
discontinue water service to the premises to maintain the safety of the public
water system. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at
the expense of the customer/user whenever said assemblies are found to be
defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept by the
customer/user and a copy furnished to Wingate Utilities.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.046 CERTIFICATION OF TESTERS.
   Certified testers shall be registered with Wingate Utilities and shall
provide proof of state registration. In addition, certified testers will
provide proof that test gauges used in testing backflow prevention assemblies
have been calibrated and certified annually. All inspection reports shall be
made using approved forms, either from Wingate Utilities or approved by the
same.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
§ 50.047 RULES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Indiana Plumbing Code, State Department of Health and IDEM Rule 327
I.A.C. 8-10 are incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018)
SEPTIC TANK AND GRAYWATER LAGOON SYSTEMS
§ 50.060 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter establishes regulations for the mandatory installation
and use of town-provided septic tanks in all households within the town for the
collection of wastewater solids and authorizes the use of town-managed
graywater lagoon systems for the treatment and disposal of household
wastewater.
   (B)   It also outlines the town’s responsibilities for the provision,
inspection, and maintenance of both septic tanks and graywater lagoon systems,
and establishes a permit fee for septic tanks to be paid by homeowners.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRAYWATER LAGOON SYSTEM. A town-managed system designed to treat and dispose
of household graywater (wastewater from sources such as laundry, showers, and
sinks, excluding toilet waste) through a lagoon or pond, constructed and
maintained by the Town of Wingate in accordance with state and local
regulations.
   HOUSEHOLD. Any residential dwelling unit, including single-family homes,
duplexes, or other residential structures, occupied or intended for occupancy.
   SEPTIC TANK. A watertight, underground tank designed to collect and hold
solid waste from household wastewater, provided and installed by the Town of
Wingate.
   TOWN. The Town of Wingate, Indiana, or its designated representatives.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.062 MANDATORY SEPTIC TANK USE.
   (A)   Requirement. All households within the jurisdictional boundaries of
the town shall utilize a septic tank provided by the town for the collection
and holding of wastewater solids.
   (B)   Prohibition. No household shall install, maintain, or use a privately
owned septic tank unless granted a specific exemption by the Town Council under
§
50.066.
   (C)   Installation. The town shall provide and install a septic tank for
each household, subject to compliance with this ordinance and payment of the
permit fee described in division (D) below. Installation shall comply with all
applicable state and local regulations, including those of the State Department
of Health.
   (D)   Permit fee. Homeowners shall be responsible for a one-time permit fee
to cover the cost of the septic tank provided and installed by the town. The
fee amount shall be determined by the Town Council and published in the town’s
fee schedule. The fee must be paid prior to septic tank installation, and no
installation shall proceed until the fee is received by the town.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.063 TOWN-MANAGED GRAYWATER LAGOON SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Authorization. All households shall utilize a town-managed graywater
lagoon system for the treatment and disposal of household graywater, unless
granted an exemption under §
50.066.
   (B)   Construction and installation. The town shall maintain a graywater
lagoon system to ensure compliance with standards set by the State Department
of Health and other applicable regulations.
   (C)   Connection to septic tank. Graywater lagoon systems shall only receive
graywater separated from septic tank wastewater (blackwater). The septic tank
shall handle all toilet waste and other solids.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.064 TOWN MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR SEPTIC TANKS.
   (A)   Inspection. The town shall conduct inspections of each household’s
septic tank at least once every three to five years to assess the condition of
the tank and ensure proper functioning.
   (B)   Pumping. The town shall arrange and cover the cost of pumping each
septic tank as needed, based on inspection findings, but no less frequently
than every three to five years.
   (C)   Scheduling. The town shall notify property owners in writing at least
30 days in advance of scheduled inspections or pumping activities. Property
owners shall provide reasonable access to the septic tank for these purposes.
   (D)   Repairs and replacements. If an inspection reveals the need for
repairs or replacement of a septic tank, the town shall undertake such actions
at no direct cost to the property owner, unless damage is due to misuse or
negligence by the property owner as determined by the town.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.065 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Access. Property owners shall ensure that both the septic tank and
graywater lagoon system are accessible for inspection, maintenance, and repair
activities conducted by the town.
   (B)   Proper use.
      (1)   Property owners shall avoid disposing of non-biodegradable
materials, chemicals, or excessive grease into the septic tank or graywater
lagoon system, as these may cause damage or system failure.
      (2)   Property owners shall ensure that only graywater (e.g., from
laundry, showers, sinks, and the like) is directed to the graywater lagoon
system, and that toilet waste and other solids are directed to the septic tank.
   (C)   Reporting. Property owners shall promptly report any signs of system
failure, such as septic tank backups, lagoon overflows, odors, or surface
pooling, to the town’s designated contact within 24 hours.
   (D)   Compliance. Property owners shall comply with all town directives
related to the use and maintenance of septic tanks and graywater lagoon
systems.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.066 VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations. Failure to comply with any provision of this ordinance,
including denying access for inspection or maintenance, improper use of the
septic tank or graywater lagoon system, or failure to report system issues,
shall constitute a violation.
   (B)   Notice of violation. The town shall issue a written notice of
violation, providing the property owner with 30 days to correct the violation
before imposing penalties, unless immediate action is required to protect
public health or safety.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.067 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Application. A property owner may apply for an exemption from the
requirement to use a town-provided septic tank or town-managed graywater lagoon
system if they can demonstrate that an alternative system for wastewater
management meets or exceeds state and local standards and does not pose a risk
to public health or the environment.
   (B)   Approval. Exemptions shall be granted at the discretion of the Town
Council after review by the town’s designated health or environmental officer.
Approved exemptions may require periodic inspections at the property owner’s
expense.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.068 FUNDING.
   The town shall establish a dedicated fund to cover the costs of septic tank
provision, installation, inspection, pumping, repairs, and replacements, as
well as the construction, inspection, and maintenance of graywater lagoon
systems. Funding may be derived from general revenues, grants, or a designated
wastewater management fee assessed to property owners, as determined by the
Town Council.
(Ord. passed - -)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.090 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION RATES PER SEWER METER.
   For the use of and the service provided for garbage disposal, rates and
charges shall be collected from each and every lot, parcel, or real estate or
building which is connected with a sewer meter.
   (A)   Except as herein otherwise provided, rates and charges will be based
as follows: $14 per month per waste meter unit.
   (B)   In the event two or more housekeeping units are the users of a single
sewer meter, then in each such case, for billing purposes, the rates and
charges shall be based as follows: $14 for each housekeeping unit thereof.
(Ord. 2014-2, passed 4-24-2014)
§ 50.091 WATERWORKS RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   There shall be and there is hereby established for the use of and the
service rendered by the waterworks system of the town, the schedule of rates
and charges, based on the use of water supplied by said waterworks system as
set forth on Exhibit A of the ordinance from which this section is derived and
incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   The rates herein approved shall provide for a reasonable return on the
water utility plant of the town and such other legal and necessary expenses as
provided in I.C. 8-1.5-3-8.
(Ord. 2019-04, passed 12-10-2019; Ord. 2025-02, passed 3-8-2025)
§ 50.092 SEWAGE WORKS RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Charges shall be based on the quantity of water used on or in the
property or premises as measured by the water meter therein use as follows.
      (1)   Metered rates per month:
         (a)   Between zero to 2,000 gallons: $47.52;
         (b)   Between 2,000 to 5,000 gallons: $62.48; and
         (c)   Over 5,000 gallons: $80.99.
      (2)   Minimum charge per month: customers with standing structures on
individual properties whose meters are shut off pay half the stated minimum
charge per month of $47.52.
      (3)   Apartment complex: flat fee per rental unit, laundry, maintenance
room, and office per month (based on 2,000 gallons): $47.52.
      (4)   Payments not received by the bill due date shall incur a 10%
penalty on unpaid balances.
   (B)   The standard residential fee for tapping onto the town’s waste water
utility system is $500. The standard commercial fee for tapping on to the
town’s waste water utility system is $1,000.
   (C)   If the deposit applies to a customer with both water and sewer
service, then the customer shall pay only one deposit fee. In the event that
deposit is for a rental unit, $75 deposit shall be collected from both the
renter and the landlord.
   (D)   Non-sufficient funds fee is $27.50. If the non-sufficient funds
applies to a bill that includes both water and sewer, then the customer shall
pay only one NSF fee.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 12-10-2019; Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-8-2025)
§ 50.093 STORM WATER UTILITY FEE.
   There shall be a fee of $4 per month residential, $6 per month small
business, and $8 per month large business per customer for upkeep, maintenance,
and repairs of the storm water utility, effective upon passage.
(Ord. 2015-2, passed 4-14-2015)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
50.012 shall be subject to immediate arrest under charges of disorderly conduct
or criminal mischief, or otherwise fined for violation hereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-8-14)
   (C)   Violators of §§
50.001 through
50.026 shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 per violation, with each day of
non-compliance considered a separate violation. Wingate Utilities may also
pursue injunctive relief or recover expenses, losses, or damages, including
enforcement costs and reasonable attorney fees, caused by such violations.
   (D)   Any person, firm, or entity found to have violated §
50.027 shall be subject to the following penalties:
      (1)   First offense: A fine of $250, plus the cost of repairing or
replacing any damaged utility property and any estimated water loss due to
tampering, as determined by the utility;
      (2)   Second offense: A fine of $500, plus repair and water loss costs,
and potential disconnection of water service until compliance is achieved; and
      (3)   Subsequent offenses: A fine of $1,000 per violation, plus repair
and water loss costs, disconnection of water service, and potential referral
for criminal prosecution under I.C. 35-43-4-2 (theft) or I.C. 35-43-5-3
(criminal mischief).
   (E)   In addition to any other sanction provided by §§
50.035 through
50.047, a person who violates §§
50.035 through
50.047 shall, on the first offense, be fined $100. A person who violates §§
50.035 through
50.047 a second time will be fined the sum of $250. A person who violates §§
50.035 through
50.047 a third time, or more, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $2,500. The
foregoing shall be together with reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the
town in enforcing §§
50.035 through
50.047.
   (F)   Violators of §§
50.060 through
50.068 may be subject to a fine of up to $500 per violation, with each day of
non-compliance considered a separate violation. The town may also pursue
injunctive relief to ensure compliance.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-8-2018; Ord. 2025, passed - -2025; Ord. 2025-, passed -
-2025)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Speed restrictions
   
70.03   Parking
   
70.04   Abandoned vehicles
   
70.05   Town Marshal
   
70.06   Stopping and yielding
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Any machine or device that is designed, intended,
modified, or used to travel across, along, or over the ground that is:
      (1)   Capable of being occupied by or carrying one or more things,
animals, or human beings; and
      (2)   Designed, intended, modified, or used to move by means of power
derived from the physical effort of human beings.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way maintained
by the state or a political subdivision thereof when any part of the same is
open to the use of the public for travel by vehicle.
   VEHICLE. Any machine or device that is designed, intended, modified, or used
to travel across, along, or over the ground that is:
      (1)   Capable of being occupied by or carrying one or more things,
animals, or human beings; and
      (2)   Designed, intended, modified, or used to move, in whole or in part,
by means of power derived from a source other than the physical effort of human
beings.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1)
§ 70.02 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   No vehicle shall be operated within the town at a rate in violation of the
restrictions set forth as follows.
   (A)   Streets. No vehicle shall be operated at a rate of speed in excess of
30 mph on any street within the town.
   (B)   Alleyways. No vehicle shall be operated on an alley at a rate of speed
in excess of ten mph.
   (C)   Park environs. No vehicle shall be operated on the premises of any
public park at a rate of speed in excess of five mph.
   (D)   Other areas. No vehicle shall be operated at a rate of speed in excess
of 25 mph on any area not identified in this section.
   (E)   Minimum speed. No motorized vehicle shall be operated on any street
within the town at a rate of speed less than five mph. Further, no person shall
operate a vehicle upon the streets or alleys of the town in such a manner as to
slow following traffic to less than the minimum speed limit for such street or
alley, obstruct or hinder traffic, or endanger any person.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 PARKING.
   The following provisions govern the parking of vehicles on the streets,
alleyways, and public areas within the town and the enforcement thereof.
   (A)   Alleys. No person owning or in charge of a vehicle shall park it, or
allow it to be parked, upon the traveled portion of any alley for a period
longer than 20 minutes.
   (B)   Parks. Parking is permitted in designated areas of Wingate Town Park
from one half hour before sunrise to one half hour after sunset daily, unless
otherwise posted or authorized by the town. There shall be no parking
overnight.
   (C)   Other areas. No person owning or in charge of a vehicle shall park it,
or allow it to be parked, upon a utility and emergency access way, an unpaved
portion of private property, or on a sidewalk.
   (D)   Parallel parking on streets. No person owning or in charge of a
vehicle shall park it, or allow it to be parked, in any manner other than
parallel parking. A vehicle is parallel parked if it is parked on the right-
hand side of the street as designated by the direction of lawful travel with at
least one-half the total number of its wheels being no more than 12 inches from
the curb.
   (E)   No parking signs. The Council may cause “no parking” signs to be
placed on or near any street, alley, or public way, and the same shall be
binding on all persons within the town, who shall not park a vehicle in the
area designated as “no parking” by such signs.
   (F)   Number of parking citations.
      (1)   One violation of this section occurs with respect to a vehicle
whenever such vehicle is found parked or allowed to be parked, in a prohibited
area, regardless of whether or not it has been moved since the last time so
found.
      (2)   The provisions of this section notwithstanding, no more than one
citation shall be issued with respect to an improperly parked vehicle within a
ten-minute period.
   (G)   Towing and storage of vehicles.
      (1)   The other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, any vehicle
cited for parking in a prohibited area and found parked at any place within the
same prohibited area one hour or more after the time of the citation, whether
or not said vehicle moved during such time, may be forthwith towed to a place
of storage without notice to the owner or person in charge of the vehicle.
      (2)   In such event, the owner, and any person having charge of the
vehicle if different from the owner, shall be jointly and severally liable to
the town for the costs of towing and storage.
   (H)   Towing agent. The Town Marshal shall select, on a rotating basis,
private firms to perform towing and storage services upon vehicles as may be
requested pursuant to §
70.07.
   (I)   Return of vehicle. No vehicle towed and stored shall be returned to
any person until:
      (1)   The citation, towing, and storage charges have been paid; or
      (2)   If the citation is disputed, the owner places an amount equal to
the citation, towing, and storage charges in an escrow account from which he or
she may not withdraw funds absent consent of the Town Attorney or order of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   This section applies to abandoned motorized vehicles found within the town.
   (A)   On public property. A motorized vehicles is ABANDONED if it appears on
public property in any one or more of the following circumstances or
conditions:
      (1)   In a manner or in a place inconsistent with the code or the law;
      (2)   Regardless of conformity to the code or the laws, without having
been moved for two consecutive days; or
      (3)   In such a manner as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the
movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public right-of-way.
   (B)   On private property. A motorized vehicle is abandoned if it appears on
private property in any one or more of the following circumstances or
conditions:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person in control of that
property for more than 24 hours; or
      (2)   Regardless of the consent of the owner or person in control of that
property, in a state of dismantlement or disrepair rendering the motorized
vehicle incapable of either operation or operation on a public highway or road
in conformity with the laws.
   (C)   On private or public property. A motorized vehicle is ABANDONED if it
appears on any public or private property as the result of towing under §
70.03 if the motorized vehicle is not claimed, bonded, or redeemed by the owner
or the owner’s agent within 20 days after the motorized vehicle’s having been
towed.
   (D)   Exception. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a motorized
vehicle is not abandoned on private property if it is in an enclosed building;
on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner
when necessary to the operation of such enterprise; or, in a storage facility
maintained in a lawful place and manner.
   (E)   Towing and storage. The other provisions of this chapter
notwithstanding, the Town Marshal is authorized to remove or have removed any
abandoned motor vehicle and dispose of the same pursuant to I.C. 9-22-1-1 et
seq. as the same exist on the effective date of this code or as may hereafter
be amended, recodified, or reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned and junk vehicles, see
Chapter 92, “Nuisances”
§ 70.05 TOWN MARSHAL.
   It is the duty of the Town Marshal to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. He or she is authorized further to direct all traffic either in person
or by means of visible or audible signal. Any person who refuses to obey an
audible or visible signal of the Town Marshal regarding the movement of traffic
shall be deemed to have violated this section and shall be fined $25 for each
such violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-4)
§ 70.06 STOPPING AND YIELDING.
   Any person operating a vehicle upon the streets, alleys, and public ways of
the town shall come to a complete stop or yield the right-of-way to oncoming
traffic at all intersections at which appropriate signs so indicated are
posted. The Council may cause such signs to be placed on or near any street,
alley, or public way, and the same shall be binding on all persons within the
town.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-5)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   All traffic regulations and violations occurring within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the town shall be governed exclusively by the
traffic laws set forth in Indiana Code, including, but not limited to, I.C.
Title 9, Article 21 (Motor Vehicles) and Title 34 (Civil Law and Procedure).
      (2)   Penalties for violations, including fines, vehicle removal at the
owner’s expense, license suspension, or other remedies as provided by state
law, will be applied by the Town Marshal or designated deputies in accordance
with the Indiana Code.
      (3)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who operates a vehicle in violation of §
70.02(E) shall be fined and be liable to the town for $25 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-1-5)
      (2)   Any person operating a vehicle at a rate of speed higher than that
allowed by §
70.02 shall be found in violation of said section and be fined in the following
amounts:
         (a)   For each violation involving vehicle speed of five or less mph
over the applicable limit, $10;
         (b)   For each violation involving vehicle speed of more than five but
less than or equal to ten mph over the applicable limit, $30;
         (c)   For each violation involving vehicle speed of more than ten but
less than or equal to 15 mph over the applicable limit, $40;
         (d)   For each violation involving vehicle speed of more than 15 mph
but less than or equal to 20 mph over the applicable limit, $50; and
         (e)   For each violation involving vehicle speed of more than 20 mph
over the applicable limit, $75 plus $10 for each mph that is 21 mph or more
over the applicable limit.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-1-6)
   (C)   The owner of a vehicle parked in violation of §
70.03, as well as the person in charge of the same if he or she be different
from the owner, shall be fined and be jointly and severally liable to the town
for $5 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-2-8)
   (D)   The owner of an abandoned motorized vehicle, as well as the person in
charge of the same if he or she be different from the owner, shall be fined and
be jointly and severally liable to the town for $75 for each violation. The
provisions of this §
70.04 notwithstanding, no more than one citation shall be issued with respect
to an abandoned motorized vehicle within a 24-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-3-5)
   (E)   Any person who violates §
70.06 shall be fined $25 for each such violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-5)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Unlawful operation of a golf cart/off-road vehicle
   
71.03   Operator
   
71.04   Financial responsibility
   
71.05   Times of operation
   
71.06   Place of operation
   
71.07   Occupants
   
71.08   Traffic rules
   
71.09   Slow moving vehicle emblem
   
71.10   Requirement for local registration
   
71.11   Exceptions
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license to operate a motor vehicle issued by the
state or any other state.
   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart/off-
road vehicle in an amount not less than required by state law for motor
vehicles operated on public highways in the state.
(I.C. 9-25-4)
   GOLF CART. A four-wheel motor vehicle originally and specifically designed
and intended to transport one or more individuals and golf clubs for the
purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course.
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE.
      (1)   A motor driven vehicle capable of cross country travel without the
benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice,
marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. It includes, but is not limited to,
a multi-wheel driven or low pressure tire vehicle, amphibious machine, ground
effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation deriving power
from a source other than muscle or wind.
      (2)   It does not include a farm vehicle being used for farming or a
vehicle used for military or law enforcement purposes, a construction, mining,
or other industrial related vehicle used in performance of its common function,
a snowmobile, a golf cart, a registered aircraft, or any other vehicle properly
licensed by the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles, and any watercraft which is
registered to state statutes.
   OPERATE. To exercise any control over the function or movement of a golf
cart/off-road vehicle.
   TOWN STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained, when any part of the way is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel within the corporate limits of the town. The
term includes, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, roads, “county road,”
park roads, drives, or highways.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015)
§ 71.02 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF A GOLF CART/OFF-ROAD VEHICLE.
   (A)   An off-road vehicle shall not be operated on a town road and alley
unless it is duly registered with the State Department of Natural Resources and
meets all of the standards, requirements, and regulations set forth in I.C. 14-
16-1-1 et seq.
   (B)   The operation of a golf cart/off-road vehicle within the town is
strictly prohibited unless the golf cart/off-road vehicle is operated and
equipped in full compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 OPERATOR.
   Only persons 16 years of age or older and holding a valid, state issued
driver’s license, may operate a golf cart/off road vehicle within the town
limits. Operator must have a valid driver’s license in his or her possession
while operating a golf cart/off road vehicle within the town limits.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see I.C. 9-24-1-7(b)
§ 71.04 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The operator or owner of a golf cart/off-road vehicle must show financial
responsibility when operating a golf cart/off-road vehicle within the town.
Written proof of financial responsibility must be available on the golf cart/
off-road vehicle or carried by the operator at all times.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see I.C. 9-25-4
§ 71.05 TIMES OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts/off-road vehicles shall not be operated on any town streets
between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, unless the
golf cart/off-road vehicle is equipped with two operating headlights (one on
each side of the front of the golf cart/off road vehicle), and a red or amber
flashing lamp visible from a distance of 500 feet. The red or amber flashing
lamp may be used at all times other than when lighted lamps are required.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see I.C. 9-21-9-4
§ 71.06 PLACE OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts/off-road vehicles may be operated on town streets, and paved or
stoned surfaces in the town parks. Golf carts/off-road vehicles may not be
operated on any sidewalks in town, grassy areas in the parks or anywhere not
specifically designated for a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   The number or occupants in a golf cart/off-road vehicle shall be
limited to the number of person for whom factory seating is installed and
provided on the golf cart/off-road vehicle.
   (B)   The operator and all occupants shall be seated in the golf cart/off-
road vehicle and no parts of the bodies of the operator or any occupants shall
extend outside the perimeter of the golf cart/off-road vehicle while the golf
cart/off-road vehicle is being operated; provided however, the operator shall
use proper hand signals when required.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 TRAFFIC RULES.
   The operator of the golf cart/off-road vehicle shall comply with all traffic
rules and regulations adopted by the state and the town, which govern the
operation of motor vehicles. This includes any and all restrictions set forth
within this chapter. In the event of a collision, the operator must comply with
I.C. 9-26-6, including, but not limited to, cleaning up all foreign materials
dropped upon the street from the golf cart/off road vehicle. Unless otherwise
prohibited by state law, all law enforcement officers having jurisdiction in
the town, including officers of the State Department of Natural Resources,
shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09 SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM.
   All golf cart vehicles shall display a triangular slow moving vehicle emblem
mounted as near as is practicable to the center of mass and at an approximate
height of not less than three feet and not more than five feet from level
ground or pavement surface. The emblem shall be mounted so as to be entirely
visible from the rear, day or night.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see I.C. 9-21-9-2
§ 71.10 REQUIREMENT FOR LOCAL REGISTRATION.
   Any golf cart/off-road vehicle to be operated within the town limits shall
be registered annually through the Town Hall by a town representative. Each
registrant shall provide the vehicle identification number or serial number,
proof of financial responsibility with respect to each golf cart/off-road
vehicle to be registered, show proper use of hand or arm signals, pay a
registration fee of $10 for golf cart/off-road vehicle to be registered, and
display town registration tag on front of the golf cart/off-road vehicle. The
registration certificate shall be maintained on or about the golf cart/off-road
vehicle at all times that it is in operation. This registration is non-
transferable.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015)
§ 71.11 EXCEPTIONS.
   Golf carts/off-road vehicles operated in connection with any fair, festival,
or other special event, with written permission from two Town Council members,
shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter when operated within the
confines of the activity. The operator of a golf cart/off-road vehicle must
still be a licensed driver, financial responsibility must be in effect with
respect to the golf cart/off-road vehicle, and golf cart/off-road vehicle must
otherwise comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person that operates an off-road vehicle or golf cart in violation
of this chapter shall be fined as follows:
      (1)   First offense: $50;
      (2)   Second offense: $75; and
      (3)   Third offense: $150 plus revocation of registration and driving
privileges under this chapter.
   (B)   Violators may also be assessed reasonable attorney fees and costs of
collection incurred in enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   A fine assessed fro a violation shall be deposited into the General
Fund of the town.
(Ord. 2015-3, passed 8-11-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Additional provisions, see I.C. 9-21-1-3.3
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PROTECTION
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animals running at large
   
90.03   Domestic pet care standards
   
90.04   Animal waste
   
90.05   Keeping dangerous or wild animals
   
90.06   Offensive smells or conditions
   
90.07   Removal of dead animals
   
90.08   Barking dogs
   
90.09   Name tags required
   
90.10   Rabies
   
90.11   Impoundment and violation notice
   
90.12   Impoundment of dangerous animals
   
90.13   Breach of facility; interference with agent
   
90.14   Proof of violation and enforcement
   
90.15   Nuisances; animal permit for 4-H and FFA members
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. Any individual 18 years of age or older who is authorized by an
animal’s owner to have temporary or permanent custody of, shelter, have charge
of, harbor, exercise control over, or otherwise act on such owner’s behalf with
respect to such animal.
   ANIMAL. Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
   ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY. Animal Welfare League of Montgomery County, Inc., or
any other governmental or private entity charged or contracted with for the
implementation of animal control services for and on behalf of Montgomery
County.
   ANIMAL CONTROL AGENT. A civilian individual employed or appointed by an
animal control agency for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this
chapter or any contract for animal control services.
   ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY. A facility, shelter, or vehicle operated by an
animal control agency for promoting animal welfare and humane treatment of
animals.
   AT LARGE.
      (1)   An animal that is:
         (a)   Not on a leash and is off the property of its owner or the
owner’s agent;
         (b)   On a leash that does not adequately confine the animal to the
property of the owner or the owner’s agent;
         (c)   On a leash that is not otherwise under the immediate control of
an individual physically capable of restraining the animal; or
         (d)   Otherwise not under the direct control of the owner or owner’s
agent.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, an animal that is engaged in legal
hunting or farming activities and is under the control and supervision of the
owner or the owner’s agent is not considered to be AT LARGE under this chapter.
   COYDOG. Shall have the meaning prescribed by I.C. 15-20-l-5(a)(l), as
amended or recodified from time to time.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Includes any of the following:
         (a)   Any animal which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions
within the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a
defensive action by any individual to prevent serious bodily injury when the
individual and the animal are off the property of the owner or agent;
         (b)   Any animal which, when unprovoked, attacks or bites an
individual causing serious bodily injury;
         (c)   Any animal which within the prior 36-month period, when
unprovoked and off the property of the owner or agent, has bitten or otherwise
caused severe injury to domestic livestock or a domestic pet without
provocation;
         (d)   Any animal which, when unprovoked and off the property of the
owner or keeper of the animal has caused the death of domestic livestock or a
domestic pet, or severe injury to multiple domestic livestock or domestic pets,
without provocation; or
         (e)   Any wolf hybrid or coydog.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term DANGEROUS ANIMAL excludes
any K-9 dog or police dog that is owned, used or maintained by a law
enforcement agency.
   DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK. Any animal, other than a domestic pet, that is kept for
agricultural or commercial purposes, or in connection with a 4-H or FFA
activity, and is one of the following: alpaca; bison; elk; cattle; donkey;
goat; horse; llama; mule; ostrich; emu; swine; poultry (chicken, turkey, duck
or goose), rabbit, or sheep.
   DOMESTIC PET. Any animal that is commonly kept for pleasure rather than for
commercial purposes, including, without limitation, the following species:
      (1)   Dogs (canis lupus familiaris);
      (2)   Domestic cats (felis catus);
      (3)   Guinea pigs (cavia porcellus);
      (4)   Hamsters (any species of the genus mesocricetus);
      (5)   Gerbils (any species of the genus gerbillus); and
      (6)   Ferrets (mustela putorius furo).
   INDIVIDUAL. A human being.
   KENNEL. Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling cats and
dogs.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A county sheriff; a state, county or city police
officer; a town marshal; a prosecuting attorney; a conservation officer; or a
deputy of any of such persons.
   MICROCHIP. A computer chip implanted underneath the skin of an animal that
contains identification information relating to that animal.
   NON-DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which is not a dangerous animal.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, trust, or estate.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal or animals which:
      (1)   Is an at-large animal;
      (2)   Attacks other animals;
      (3)   Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
      (4)   Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely
fashion;
      (5)   Damages private or public property;
      (6)   Runs at large while in heat; or
      (7)   Trespasses on school grounds.
   RESTRAINT. Any animal secured by a leash or lead or under the control of a
responsible person and obedient to that person’s commands, or within the real
property limits of its owner.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. An injury to an individual that:
      (1)   Results in death of the individual;
      (2)   Creates a substantial risk of the individual’s death; or
      (3)   Causes serious permanent disfigurement, unconsciousness, extreme
pain, permanent, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily
member or organ, or loss of a human fetus.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury to a domestic pet or domestic livestock
that results in multiple bites, broken bones, muscle tears or disfiguring
lacerations, or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery.
   STRAY. Any animal that does not appear, upon reasonable inquiry, to have an
owner.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town of Wingate Town Council.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, fox,
poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm-blooded
animal which can normally be found in the wild state.
   WOLF HYBRID. Shall have the meaning prescribed by l.C. 15-20-1-5(a)(3), as
amended or recodified from time to time.
§ 90.02 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person shall allow any domestic livestock or domestic pets to run
at large in the city.
   (B)   No owner or agent shall fail to exercise proper care and control of
their animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
§ 90.03 DOMESTIC PET CARE STANDARDS.
   Each owner or agent having custody or charge of, harboring, or exercising
control over a domestic pet shall provide the following minimum standards of
care for each such animal.
   (A)   Each domestic pet shall have access to a shelter which will protect it
from the weather and allow it to stand, sit, turn around, and lie down without
restriction. The shelter must be structurally sound, moisture proof and
windproof, and provide adequate protection from the cold and heat, including
bedding to provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness and
promote the retention of body heat in cold weather. The shelter must be placed
in a dry area free of debris, feces, and standing water.
   (B)   Each domestic pet shall have sufficient and wholesome food and water,
which is proper and nutritional for that species of animal.
   (C)   If a domestic pet is ill, diseased, or injured, it shall receive
proper veterinary care as necessary to promote the good health of the domestic
pet and prevent the transmittal of disease to other animals or humans.
   (D)   No domestic pet shall be abandoned, beaten, ill-treated, tormented, or
otherwise abused or neglected, or involved in any dog fight, or other fight
between animals or between animals and humans.
   (E)   A domestic pet shall be kept under restraint when in heat so as to
prevent unintentional breeding.
   (F)   If a domestic pet is chained or tethered, the chain or tether shall
not weight more than one-eighth of the animal’s body weight, shall be at least
ten feet in length and have swivels on both ends, so as to reduce the
likelihood of entanglement. A chain or tether used to restrain a domestic pet
must, by design and placement, be unlikely to become entangled.
   (G)   No domestic pet shall be kept or maintained on a tether for a period
of more than ten continuous hours, nor for no more than 12 hours in any 24-hour
period, nor for any duration under conditions which threaten the health or well
being of the domestic pet.
   (H)   A muzzle may not be worn by a dog continuously as a means for
controlling barking.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.04 ANIMAL WASTE.
   Each owner or agent shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any
excreta deposited by their animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas, or
private property.
§ 90.05 KEEPING DANGEROUS OR WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his or her premises any
dangerous animal.
   (B)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his or her premises any
wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions, or circuses.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.06 OFFENSIVE SMELLS OR CONDITIONS.
   No person shall keep within the town any animal or animals in such a manner
as to create or cause any offensive or noxious smell or condition, or maintain
or use any animal pen or shelter in such manner as to permit the contents of
filth therein to run or wash upon premises owned or occupied by another or upon
any street or other public place.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.07 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   Any person who becomes aware of the death of any animal owned by him or her
within the town shall, within six hours thereafter, dispose of the dead animal
so as not to become a nuisance. When that animal is killed by a person other
than its owner, then that person shall instead dispose of the dead animal.
§ 90.08 BARKING DOGS.
   No person shall keep within the town any animal which by loud and frequent
barking, howling, yelping or other animal noises, disturbs the peace and quiet,
or annoys any citizens.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.09 NAME TAGS REQUIRED.
   No owner of any domestic pet shall allow that domestic pet to be off that
owner’s premises unless the domestic pet is wearing a tag which gives the
owner’s name and address.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.10 RABIES.
   All dogs, cats, and ferrets three months of age or older must be vaccinated
against rabies. The rabies vaccination of a dog, cat, and ferret shall be
maintained by ongoing revaccination of the animal pursuant to State Law (345
I.A.C. § 1-5) and other guidelines set forth by the State Board of Animal
Health.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.11 IMPOUNDMENT AND VIOLATION NOTICE.
   (A)   Grounds for impoundment. Any law enforcement officer or animal control
agent may immediately capture and impound any of the following animals:
      (1)   Any at large animal;
      (2)   Any stray animal;
      (3)   Any wolf hybrid or coydog;
      (4)   Any unattended animal that is ill, injured, or otherwise in need of
emergency care;
      (5)   Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
      (6)   Any unattended animal that is exhibiting aggressive or dangerous
behavior and is not sufficiently confined to the property of its owner;
      (7)   Any animal that a law enforcement officer or animal control agent
has probable cause to believe is a dangerous animal; or
      (8)   Any animal that a law enforcement officer or animal control agent
has probable cause to believe has been the subject of or involved in a
violation under I.C. 15-20-1-4 or I.C. 35-46-3.
   (B)   Actions to prevent harm to individuals or other animals. If any animal
is found at large and cannot be safely captured, a law enforcement officer may
seek assistance from an animal control agent, or take other action deemed
appropriate, including tranquilizing or killing such animal, to prevent serious
bodily injury to individuals, or severe injury to domestic pets or domestic
livestock.
   (C)   Identification of impounded animals; notice to owners.
      (1)   Any animals which are impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be
scanned or examined by the animal control facility for a microchip, collar tag,
or other identification containing the owner’s name, address, and/or phone
number, unless doing so presents an unreasonable risk of serious bodily injury
to an animal control agent.
      (2)   (a)   If an impounded animal’s owner can be identified, the animal
control facility shall notify the owner by the end of the next business day
that the animal has been impounded, and that unless the animal is claimed by
the owner within five days from the date of impoundment, the animal may be
placed for adoption or humanely euthanized.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of a second or
subsequent impoundment, the impounded animal may be placed for adoption or
humanely euthanized if not claimed within three days after the owner is
notified.
      (3)   Stray animals without any means of identification of their owners
shall be held at the animal control facility a minimum of three days in order
to permit an owner adequate time to reclaim them. A stray animal which is
unclaimed after having been impounded for three days may be placed for adoption
or humanely euthanized, except that the stray shall be euthanized if it is a
dangerous animal.
   (D)   Release from impoundment.
      (1)   A non-dangerous animal may be returned to its owner if the
following conditions are met.
         (a)   Costs of impoundment. The owner of an impounded animal shall be
responsible for all costs of impoundment, and must pay such costs in full prior
to the animal’s release from impoundment.
         (b)   Microchip implantation. Prior to the return to its owner of any
impounded dog or cat which at the time of impoundment did not bear a microchip,
collar tag or other means of identification, the animal control agency shall
cause a microchip with a registered identification number to be implanted in
the dog or cat at the owner’s expense. The animal control agency shall be
entitled to retain the dog or cat until the microchip implantation fee is paid.
         (c)   Payment of county option dog tax. No dog impounded pursuant to
this chapter shall be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
payment of all applicable county option dog taxes with respect to such dog. Any
dog so impounded shall be considered unclaimed until such tax is paid.
         (d)   Spay or neuter. No dog or cat impounded pursuant to this chapter
shall be released to its owner until the owner either presents proof that the
animal is spayed or neutered, or otherwise altered to prevent it from
procreating, or makes representation that the animal shall be spayed/neutered
within a time period specified by the animal control officer, and provides
proof thereafter.
         (e)   Proof of rabies vaccination. No dog, cat, or ferret three months
of age or older impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be released to its
owner until the owner presents proof of current rabies vaccination.
         (f)   Payment of fines. No animal impounded pursuant to this chapter
shall be released to its owner until the owner pays all fines and costs imposed
by this chapter.
      (2)   The return of a dangerous animal to its owner is governed by §
90.12.
   (E)   Treatment or euthanizing of sick or injured animals. The animal
control facility shall have authority to take whatever action is reasonably
necessary, including humane euthanization, to deal with a sick or injured
animal, to prevent unnecessary suffering of the animal, or to prevent the
spread of communicable diseases. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the animal
control facility’s ability to take whatever action is reasonably necessary to
provide veterinary care by a veterinarian for a sick or injured animal.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.12 IMPOUNDMENT OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Impoundment. A dangerous animal which has been captured and impounded
by a law enforcement officer or animal control agent shall remain impounded
subject to the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Euthanization of dangerous animals. A dangerous animal which has been
impounded shall be euthanized if:
      (1)   The owner fails to request a hearing before the Town Council
pursuant to division (C) below within five days after having been notified of
the impoundment;
      (2)   The owner waives in writing all ownership interest in the dangerous
animal; or
      (3)   The owner cannot be identified or located, and the animal remains
unclaimed for three days after having been impounded.
   (C)   Hearings and appeals. If an owner makes a timely request for a hearing
pursuant to division (B)(1) above, the Town Council shall conduct a public
hearing.
      (1)   At such hearing, a law enforcement officer, animal control officer,
or animal control agency shall present evidence supporting a determination that
the animal is a dangerous animal, and the owner shall have the opportunity to
confront and cross-examine the witnesses supporting such determination, and to
present evidence opposing the determination.
      (2)   Following the hearing, the Town Council shall make a finding by a
preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing whether the animal is a
dangerous animal.
      (3)   If the Town Council determines that the animal is not a dangerous
animal, it shall order the animal released to the owner, subject to the
requirements of §
90.11(D)(1).
      (4)   If the Town Council determines that the animal is a dangerous
animal, the animal shall be retained by an animal control agency and must be
permanently removed from the corporate limits of the town within three days
after said determination, with the costs of keeping and removing the animal all
to be at the owner’s expense.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.13 BREACH OF FACILITY; INTERFERENCE WITH AGENT.
   (A)   No person other than an authorized employee or agent of an animal
control facility shall release any animal impounded therein.
   (B)   No person shall interfere with the taking of an animal by an animal
control agent.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.14 PROOF OF VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The demonstration of a prima facie violation under this chapter may be shown
by any combination of the following evidence:
   (A)   Observation or other confirmation by a law enforcement officer, animal
control agent, or other duly-authorized municipal code enforcement agent;
   (B)   A written statement from a complaining witness with personal knowledge
of the alleged violation at issue;
   (C)   An audio recording by a complaining witness with personal knowledge of
the alleged violation at issue; or
   (D)   A video recording or photograph by a complaining witness with personal
knowledge of the alleged violation at issue.
(Penalty, see § 90.99)
§ 90.15 NUISANCES; ANIMAL PERMIT FOR 4-H AND FFA MEMBERS.
   (A)   Definitions.
      4-H. A youth organization administered by the National Institute of Food
and Agriculture of the United States Department of Agriculture and the name
represents four personal development areas of focus for the organization: head,
heart, hands, and health.
      FFA. The Future Farmers of America.
      YOUTH. A person 19 years old or younger.
   (B)   Animal permit for 4-H and FFA members.
      (1)   A youth who is a member of 4-H or FFA may obtain an initial permit
to raise up to 20 total poultry, rabbits, and or waterfowl, in any zoning
district in the town for any 4-H or FFA project.
      (2)   Applications for an animal permit shall be obtained from the Town
Clerk-Treasurer and shall be effective for one full calendar year.
      (3)   There shall be no fee charged by the town for this permit.
      (4)   All applications for an animal permit must be filed with the Town
Clerk-Treasurer by and shall be approved by the Town Council, within a
reasonable amount of time after review and consideration.
      (5)   The permit may be revoked by the Town Council for cause shown.
   (C)   Membership.
      (1)   All applicants must be able to prove membership either in 4-H or
FFA.
      (2)   After a permit has been issued, the applicant is under a continuing
duty to prove membership either in 4-H or FFA if required by the town.
   (D)   Requirements for permit.
      (1)   Applicants must contact their neighbors before turning in an
application to advise the neighbors about the type and number of animals they
want to raise and the location where the animals will be kept.
      (2)   The youth must have a land area adequate enough for the animals,
according to the Board of Animal Health regulations.
      (3)   All animals shall be maintained in a healthy condition, or if ill,
shall be given appropriate treatment.
      (4)   The structure in which animals are kept shall be maintained in a
clean condition and a good state of repair. The structure shall allow adequate
protection against weather extremes.
      (5)   Structures housing animals shall be sufficiently large to permit
freedom of movement for the animals.
      (6)   If a youth is keeping a rooster and it creates noise which bother
neighbors, the rooster shall be removed from the premises.
      (8)   Food supplies shall be of sufficient quantity and nutritional value
to meet the daily requirements of the animals.
      (9)   All animals must be terminal.
      (10)   Applicants must provide the town with a written plan for animal
waste disposal.
      (11)   All structures and holding areas for the animals must be set back
at least ten feet from any property line. However, this can be modified by the
Town Council upon written request of the applicant.
   (E)   Right of entry. The Town Marshal and/or any member of the Town Council
shall have the right to enter upon private property where the animals are kept
during reasonable daytime hours to inspect the premises to determine compliance
with this ordinance. If entry is refused, the Town Marshal can obtain an
inspection warrant as authorized under State Code.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations. Any person who is in violation of this chapter shall be
deemed to have committed a civil ordinance violation and may be issued a
citation by the designated enforcement entity.
      (1)   (a)   Each day a violation remains uncorrected is a distinct and
separate ordinance violation subject to an additional citation and fine in the
amount prescribed below.
         (b)   However, two or more violations that are linked closely in time
and/or nature may, in the sole discretion of the enforcement entity, be deemed
one violation.
      (2)   The monetary fine for each civil animal control violation shall be
$25, except that for a repeated animal control violation by the same person,
the following fines shall apply:
         (a)   Second citation: $50; and
         (b)   Each citation in excess of two: $100.
      (3)   Further, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, any
person who shall violate this animal control chapter five or more separate
times in one calendar year period shall be fined an additional $500 as an
habitual animal control violator.
      (4)   All fines for animal control violations shall be paid within five
days to the Town Clerk-Treasurer, who shall render to the person making the
payment a receipt stating the amount and purpose for which the fine has been
paid. All fines thus received shall be deposited with the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Law enforcement officers and animal control officers may issue
notices of civil animal control violation(s) to a person who commits a civil
animal control violation, by doing so either to the owner or the owner’s agent.
The citation may be served by personal service, by certified mail, or by a
placement in a conspicuous place on the property where the violation occurs and
shall serve as notice to a person that the person has committed an animal
control ordinance violation.
      (2)   If the violation is determined by the law enforcement officer or
animal control officer to be a threat to public health or safety, that officer
may take any and all further enforcement and/or abatement measures allowed by
law.
   (C)   Appeal. Any owner wishing to appeal or clarify any citation or
requirement of this chapter may make an appeal to the Town Council within five
days of receipt of that citation.
   (D)   Trial for animal control violations.
      (1)   A person who receives a ticket or citation may elect to stand trial
for the offense by indicating on the ticket or citation that person’s intent to
stand trial and returning a copy of the citation to the Clerk-Treasurer. The
returned copy of the ticket or citation shall serve as notice of the person’s
intent to stand trial. On receipt of the notice of intention to stand trial, a
lawsuit will be commenced by the Town Attorney in a court of competent
jurisdiction in the county and the matter shall proceed as any other ordinance
violation proceeding.
      (2)   If a person who receives a citation fails to pay the assessed fine
within five days or fails to give notice of that person’s intention to stand
trial as prescribed above, the Town Attorney may file a civil lawsuit as
prescribed by applicable laws and ordinances, and seek penalties as prescribed
in this chapter.
      (3)   In addition to any fines above, a person adjudged to have committed
a civil animal control violation is liable and responsible for all fees, costs
and expenses involved in abatement, enforcement, and prosecution of that
violation, including, but not limited to, impoundment and boarding expenses,
veterinary and other animal-care expenses, clean-up costs, reasonable attorney
fees, costs of giving notices, and court costs. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION
Section
Open Burning
   
91.01   Definition
   
91.02   Prohibition
   
91.03   Exceptions, variances, and conditions
   
91.04   Enforcement
   
91.05   Burning restrictions and regulations
 
   
91.99   Penalty
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the air, without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber.
(Ord. 2023 02, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 91.02 PROHIBITION.
   No person shall start, kindle, cause, allow, or maintain any form of open
burning of any materials on private or public property, except as specifically
authorized by this subchapter. No person shall allow the accumulation or
existence of combustible material that constitutes or contributes to open
burning.
(Ord. 2023 02, passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 EXEMPTIONS, VARIANCES, AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions. 
      (1)   The following types of burning are allowed: the burning of
charcoal, clean untreated wood, and other cooking fuels customarily used in an
outdoor grill, traditional food cooking devices, or campfires.
      (2)   RECREATIONAL FIRES shall be defined as an outdoor fire whose
purpose is for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth, or similar
purposes.
      (3)   Only clean, untreated wood or charcoal shall be used. Paper or
petroleum products can be used for ignition purposes only. Construction
materials or yard waste are strictly prohibited.
      (4)   The fire shall not be ignited more than two hours before the
recreational activity is to take place and shall be extinguished upon the
conclusion of the activity.
      (5)   The pile to be burned shall be less than 1,000 cubic feet (for
example: ten feet by ten feet by ten feet).
      (6)   The local Fire Department shall be notified 24 hours in advance if
the pile to be burned is more than 125 cubic feet (for example: five feet by
five feet by five feet).
      (7)   The fire shall not be for disposal purposes.
      (8)   The fire shall not be within 500 feet of a pipeline or fuel storage
area.
   (B)   Variances.
      (1)   Other types of fires may be approved as follows: Any other type of
fire whereby a citizen of the town has obtained a variance from the provisions
of this subchapter by petitioning the Town Council may be allowed. However, the
Town Council cannot grant a variance for burning that would otherwise violate
the provisions of the 326 I.A.C. 4-1 et seq. and as amended and I.C. 13-17-9.
      (2)   The following types of fires may be allowed if approved by the
State Department of Environmental Management:
         (a)   Fire fighter training;
         (b)   Fire extinguisher training;
         (c)   Vegetation propagation;
         (d)   Use of an air curtain destructor; and
         (e)   Please refer to Attachment A of the ordinance from which this
section is derived for expanded version of variance situations based on 326
I.A.C. 4-1-3(c)(3-8) and 326 I.A.C. 4-1-4.
   (C)   Conditions. The following conditions apply to all exemptions and
variances.
      (1)   Burning shall be done during safe weather conditions. Burning shall
not occur during high winds, temperature inversions, air stagnation, or when a
pollution alert or ozone action day has been declared.
      (2)   Fires must be attended at all times until completely extinguished.
      (3)   Fires must be extinguished if they create a fire hazard nuisance,
based on complaints of breathing of others, pollution problem, or threat to
public health.
      (4)   Fire fighting equipment adequate for the size of the fire shall be
on-site and nearby during times of burning.
      (5)   Burning shall not be for disposal purposes.
      (6)   All burning shall comply with other federal, state, and local laws,
rules, and ordinances.
(Ord. 2023 02, passed 8-8-2023) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person found in violation of this subchapter shall be subject to
the following procedures.
      (1)   The Fire/Police/Health Department/Solid Waste District/or other
designated department personnel shall issue a warning notice to a first-time
violator stating that he or she is in violation. The person must then correct
the violation by immediately extinguishing the fire. Failure or refusal to
immediately extinguish the fire shall result in a citation being issued.
      (2)   Upon issuance of a citation, the violator shall be fined in
accordance with §
91.99(B).
      (3)   Violators may also be assessed reasonable attorney fees and costs
of collection incurred in enforcement of this subchapter.
      (4)   Failure or refusal by the violator to immediately extinguish the
fire in violation of this subchapter shall also result in the Fire Department
having the authority to go upon private property to extinguish said fire.
      (5)   Each subsequent starting, kindling, causing, or allowing of a new
fire after a warning notice or citation has been issued, shall be considered a
separate offense.
      (6)   Any person who allows the accumulation or existence of combustible
material which constitutes or contributes to open burning may not refute
liability for violation of this subchapter on the basis that said fire was set
by vandals, accidental, or act of God.
   (B)   The open burning provisions are enforceable by the duly appointed
Fire/Police/Health Department/Solid Waste District/or other designated
department personnel or law enforcement officers within the town, acting on his
or her own initiative or at the request of the Town Council.
(Ord. 2023 02, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 91.05 BURNING RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Waste oil burning where waste oil originates from spillage during
testing of an oil well and has been collected in a properly constructed and
located burn-off pit as prescribed in 310 I.A.C. § 7-l-37(a) in the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) rules, oil, and gas operations. Burning
shall be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Each oil pit may be burned once every two months; and
      (2)   The fire must be extinguished within 30 minutes of ignition.
   (B)   Indiana Department of Natural Resources (DNR) burning, to facilitate
prescribed burning on DNR -controlled properties for wildlife habitat
maintenance, forestry purposes, natural area management, and fire fighting or
prevention; United States Department of the Interior burning, to facilitate a
National Park Service Fire Management Plan for the Indiana Dunes National
Lakeshore, for example; and United States Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service burning, to facilitate wildlife habitat maintenance, forestry purposes,
natural area management, ecosystem management, and firefighting or prevention.
   (C)   Burning by the United States Forest Service for firefighting or
prevention is not subject to the conditions in §
91.03(C).
   (D)   Burning of marijuana by federal, state, and local law enforcement
offices. Only clean petroleum products shall be used for ignition purposes.
   (E)   Burning, for the purpose of heating, shall be performed using clean
wood products or paper in a noncombustible container that is sufficiently
vented to induce adequate primary combustion, and has enclosed sides and a
bottom. Burning shall be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Burning shall only occur between October 1 and May 15; and
      (2)   Burning shall not be conducted for the purpose of disposal.
   (F)   Burning of vegetation by fire departments and firefighters to create
fire breaks for purposes of extinguishing an existing fire. Such burning is not
subject to the conditions in §
91.03(C).
   (G)   Burning of clean petroleum products for fire extinguisher training,
subject the following conditions.
      (1)   The Local Fire Department and Health Department must be notified at
least 24 hours in advance of the date, time, and location of the burning.
      (2)   All burning shall take place in a noncombustible container or
enclosure, enclosed on all sides with a bottom.
      (3)   A total of no more than 14 gallons of fuel may be burned per day.
      (4)   Only one fire may be allowed to burn at a time.
      (5)   All burning shall be conducted in such a manner so as to prevent
any possibility of soil contamination.
   (H)   Emergency burning with prior oral approval of the Commissioner of the
State Department of Environmental Management or the Commissioner’s designated
agent may be authorized for the following:
      (1)   Spilled or escaping liquid or gaseous petroleum products when all
reasonable efforts to recover the spilled material have been made and failure
to burn would result in an imminent fire or health hazard or air or water
pollution problem; or
      (2)   Clean wood waste, vegetation, or deceased animals resulting from a
natural disaster where failure to burn would result in an imminent health or
safety hazard.
(Ord. 2023 02, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Upon issuance of a citation, as stated in §
91.04, the violator shall be fined as follows:
         (a)   First offense: $50;
         (b)   Second offense: $75; and
         (c)   Third offense: $150.
      (2)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2023 02, passed 8-8-2023)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
Public Nuisances
   
92.01   Declaration
   
92.02   Duties
   
92.03   Investigation
   
92.04   Notices; abatement
   
92.05   Liability
   
92.06   Citation
   
92.07   Other acts constituting nuisance
   
92.08   Continuing nuisances
Noise Control
   
92.20   Title
   
92.21   Definitions and interpretations
   
92.22   Prohibited noises
   
92.23   Exemptions
   
92.24   Temporary permits
   
92.25   Enforcement and appeals
Abandoned and Junk Vehicles
   
92.40   Purpose
   
92.41   Definitions
   
92.42   Junk and junk cars declared nuisances
   
92.43   Storage of junk vehicles prohibited
   
92.44   Enforcement
   
92.45   Removal by town
   
92.46   Charge for removal declared a lien
 
   
92.99   Penalty
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 92.01 DECLARATION.
   Each of the following conditions are hereby declared a public nuisance and a
danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the town:
   (A)   The existence of weeds, trees, shrubs, plants, vines, or other
vegetation, whether the same be living, dead, decayed, broken, or dying, which
is:
      (1)   Of such a character or to such an extent as to interfere with
health, safety, or public welfare; or
      (2)   Of such a character or to such an extent as to interfere with the
safe and lawful use of any real estate, easement, or right-of-way by any person
or the town.
   (B)   The existence of any tree or vegetation, whether the same be living,
dead, decayed, broken, or dying, which overhangs the surface of a public way
below a clear height of 13 feet six inches, or which interferes with the
passage of light from a street lighting system;
   (C)   The existence of any waste, garbage, or trash upon property, whether
or not the same be in boxes, bags, or any other containers, for a period longer
than seven consecutive days, or of such a character or to such an extent as to:
      (1)   Interfere with health, safety, or public welfare;
      (2)   Interfere with the safe and lawful use of any real estate,
easement, or right-of-way by an person;
      (3)   Exude unpleasant odors; or
      (4)   Attract animals.
   (D)   The continuous or periodic presence of rats, mice, insects, parasites,
or vermin, or the existence of an environment favorable to their habitation
and/or multiplication, on three consecutive days, or of such a character or to
such an extent as to:
      (1)   Interfere with health, safety, or public welfare;
      (2)   Interfere with the safe and lawful use of any real estate,
easement, or right-of-way by any person; or
      (3)   Exude unpleasant odors.
   (E)   The existence of any personal property not in an enclosed building on
three consecutive days which:
      (1)   Is in an abandoned condition;
      (2)   Is in any inoperable condition;
      (3)   Does not display as required by law any tags, licenses, decals, or
information;
      (4)   Leaks any fluid;
      (5)   Exudes an unpleasant odor;
      (6)   Is of such a character or to such an extent as to interfere with
health, safety, or public welfare; or
      (7)   Is of such a character or to such an extent as to interfere with
the safe and lawful use of any real estate, easement, or right-of-way by any
person.
   (F)   The existence of any real estate which, on three consecutive days, is
found to be:
      (1)   In an abandoned condition;
      (2)   To exude an unpleasant odor;
      (3)   In a condition of such a character or to such an extent as to
interfere with health, safety, or public welfare; or
      (4)   In a condition of such a character or to such an extent as to
interfere with the safe and lawful use of any other real estate, easement, or
right-of-way by any person.
(Ord. 2015-4, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 92.02 DUTIES.
   Any persons who are owners, occupiers, or who have the care, custody, or
control of any real or personal property within the town which is declared to
be a public nuisance by §
92.01 are jointly and severally under a duty to remove, cease, or abate such
public nuisance, whether the same be located on their real estate, or on a
parkway or other strip of ground lying between private property and a curb or
paved portion of the street.
(Ord. 2015-4, passed 12-8-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 INVESTIGATION.
   The Town Marshal shall, upon request of any person in the town or upon his
or her own initiative, shall undertake to investigate any condition which may
be a public nuisance as defined by this chapter. In the course of performing
such investigation, he or she is authorized to enter onto private property and
to record, by photographic or videographic means, the condition of the property
subject to investigation.
(Ord. 2015-4, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 92.04 NOTICES; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Upon determining that a public nuisance exists, the Town Marshal shall
give notice of the existence of the nuisance to the owners, occupiers, or
person having the care, custody, or control of the property, or to any of them,
by certified mail, return-receipt requested. Such notice shall set forth the
provision violation, a brief description of the conditions constituting the
violation. The notice shall also set forth the text of this section.
   (B)   Any person receiving notice of a violation of this subchapter shall,
within 15 days, take and complete all measures reasonably necessary to abate,
remove, and cure such nuisance.
   (C)   If, after 15 days following service of the notice, such nuisance is
not abated, removed, and cured, the Town Marshal shall issue a citation for the
violation and report the same to the Council, which may thereupon cause the
abatement, removal, and cure of the nuisance and pay the costs thereof. Said
costs shall be billed to the owner(s), occupier(s), or persons having the care,
custody, or control of the property and, if the same be unpaid to the town for
30 days, it shall, in addition to any other remedies provided by law, be
certified and forwarded to the appropriate county officials and taxed against
the property to be collected in the manner as other taxes are collected. This
liability shall be in addition to liability for any penalty for violation of
this subchapter.
   (D)   If, after exercising reasonable diligence, the Town Marshal is unable
to determine the identity and address of the person to whom notice is required
under this section, or if the person refuses notice by declining or failing to
sign for certified mail, the notice required by this section shall be published
by posting such notice in a prominent place on the property where the nuisance
was found.
   (E)   If the abating, removing, or curing of a nuisance by the town under
division (C) above results in the possession of any saleable personal property,
the same may be sold by the town at such times and places, and be for such
price and terms as the Council deems convenient, and the proceeds thereof
forfeited and made the property of the town to defray costs.
   (F)   No person shall interfere with the Town Marshal or any person acting
at the request of the town in the investigation, abatement, curing, or removal
of any nuisance.
(Ord. 2015-4, passed 12-8-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 LIABILITY.
   The owner(s), person(s) occupying, or person(s) having the care, custody, or
control of property, shall be jointly and severally liable to the town, for all
fines, costs, expenses, or attorney fees, resulting from action pursuant to
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2015-4, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 92.06 CITATION.
   A person cited for violation of this section shall have ten business days
after receiving said citation to appear at the Town Hall during its regular
business hours and pay in full such fine as shall be designated on the
citation. If the designated fine is not so paid, notice and complaint on such
violation shall be submitted to a court of competent jurisdiction for
adjudication. Upon an adjudication adverse to the alleged violator, he or she
shall be liable for and pay the fine designated plus any and all court costs
and reasonable attorney fees which the town must expend for said proceedings.
(Ord. 2015-4, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 92.07 OTHER ACTS CONSTITUTING NUISANCE.
   The following shall also constitute a nuisance as prohibited by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Whenever premises shall not be graded and maintained so as to prevent
the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure
located thereon;
   (B)   Whenever buildings shall not be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. Where insects and rodents are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
infestation;
   (C)   Whenever any property is abandoned, neglected, or disregarded so as to
permit the same to be cluttered with an accumulation of litter or waste,
including, but not limited to, waste paper, rags, cans, bottles, boxes, lumber,
metal, garbage, trash, disused or inoperable vehicles, trailers, machinery,
appliances, or furniture thereon, unless specifically authorized by law;
   (D)   Whenever any storage of manure odor or dust producing materials of any
kind is allowed to occur within 50 feet of any adjoining lot line; and
   (E)   Whenever any animal other than a household pet is kept within the town
limits, provided, however:
      (1)   The term HOUSEHOLD PET, as used in this subchapter, shall not
include ducks, chickens, goats, sheep, swine, or other animals not customarily
kept as family pets (this includes any traditional or non-traditional animals);
      (2)   HOUSEHOLD PETS will be considered cats, dogs, and no more than
three penned rabbits. Dogs must have appropriate county tags, and all pets
shall be housed humanely and safely on the property;
      (3)   One horse or pony may be kept within a private stable if such lot
or tract contains at least two acres and one additional horse or pony may be
kept for each additional one-half acre;
      (4)   Customary farm animals may be kept on a non-commercial basis when
adequately housed and fenced on a parcel of land not less than 30,000 square
feet in area;
      (5)   Any area now within the corporate limits or hereafter annexed which
is not used as part of a saddle club, veterinarian, sale barn, 4-H, or
fairground, and associated activities may contain such usage; and
      (6)   Whenever stables and buildings housing other farm animals are
located closer than 100 feet of any lot line.
      (7)   A special exception should be made as it pertains to poultry,
rabbits, and waterfowl kept for any 4-H or FFA project. Persons keeping animals
for any 4-H or FFA project shall adhere to the provisions of §
90.15.
(Ord. 2015-4, passed 12-8-2015; Ord. 2022-01, passed 3-14-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 CONTINUING NUISANCES.
   If an initial notice of violation adopted under this subchapter was provided
by certified mail, personal service, or equivalent service, a continuous
abatement may be posted at the property at the time of abatement instead of by
certified mail, personal service, or equivalent service as required under this
subchapter. A continuous abatement notice serves as notice to the real property
owner that each subsequent violation during the same year for which the initial
notice the violation was provided may be abated by the town or its contractors.
(Ord. 2015-4, passed 12-8-2015)
NOISE CONTROL
§ 92.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Town of Wingate, Noise Ordinance.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 11-13-2020)
§ 92.21 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the singular shall include the plural and
the plural shall include the singular, unless the context requires otherwise.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self-propelled.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, or other
entity.
   PREMISES. A tract of land, including its buildings and structures.
   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM. Any apparatus used for the amplification of
sounds from any radio, tape player, cassette player, compact disc player,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, alarm, or other sound-generating device,
including any apparatus for the amplification of the human voice.
   TOWN. The Town of Wingate, Indiana.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Wingate, Indiana.
   UNREASONABLE OR EXCESSIVE NOISE. Sound that is of a volume, frequency, or
pattern that prevents, disrupts, injures, or endangers the health, safety,
welfare, prosperity, comfort, or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivities within the corporate boundaries of the town, given the time of
day or environment in which the sound is made.
   VEHICLE. A device in, upon, or by which a person or property is, or may be,
transported or moved.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 11-13-2020)
§ 92.22 PROHIBITED NOISES.
   (A)   Unreasonable or excessive noise. Except as otherwise provided in this
subchapter, it shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person to cause
or make any unreasonable or excessive noise or to allow any unreasonable or
excessive noise to be caused or made in or on any real property or personal
property within the town limits occupied or controlled by that person.
UNREASONABLE OR EXCESSIVE NOISE shall also be defined as follows.
      (1)   Noise emanating from any public property, including any public
right-of-way, highway, building, sidewalk, public space, park, or thoroughfare,
and the sound generated therefrom is:
         (a)   Audible 40 feet or more from its source; or
         (b)   Is it a level of 90 decibels (90dB) or more when measured on a
dB(A) scale from a distance of not less than six feet from its source.
      (2)   Noise emanating from any private property and the sound generated
therefrom is:
         (a)   Audible 40 feet or more outside of said private property line;
or
         (b)   Is at a level of 90 decibels (90dB) or more when measured on a
dB(A) scale from a distance of not less than six feet from said private
property line.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. In addition to the general noise prohibition in
division (A) above, the following acts within the town limits are violations of
this subchapter.
      (1)   Motor vehicle noises.
         (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on a public street,
road, alley, highway, park, or other public property in which the engine,
muffler, exhaust, and/or other noise control equipment have been altered,
removed, or maintained in such disrepair as to generate an unreasonable or
excessive noise.
         (b)   No person shall operate or use any motor vehicle in such a
manner to create unreasonable or excessive noise from squealing of tires or
grating, grinding, rattling, or other noises from disrepair.
         (c)   No person operating a motor vehicle containing an engine brake
system shall apply the engine brakes.
         (d)   Except as used for warning purposes, no person shall use,
operate, or sound any horn or other signaling device on any motor vehicle on a
public street, road, alley, highway, park, or other public property for any
unreasonable period of time.
         (e)   No person shall play, use, or operate, or allow to be played,
used, or operated, in or on any motor vehicle any sound amplification system at
a volume that is louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of persons
who are inside the motor vehicle within which such device is played, used, or
operated.
      (2)   Noises from premises.
         (a)   No person shall play, use, or operate or allow to be played,
used, or operated on a premises any sound amplification system in such a manner
that the sound produced causes unreasonable or excessive noise heard beyond the
boundaries of the premises by a person with normal hearing.
         (b)   No person shall keep any animal, including, but not limited to,
dogs and birds, on a premises that causes unreasonable or excessive noise
clearly audible to a person from any place other than the premises from which
the animal is located.
      (3)   Machine noises.
         (a)   No person shall engage in the erection, excavation, demolition,
alteration, or repair of any building or real estate causing unreasonable or
excessive noise between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
         (b)   No person shall engage in the operation, alteration, or repair
of any pile driver, hydraulic shovel or grader, pneumatic hammer, hoist,
blower, fan, or other equipment causing unreasonable or excessive noise between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 11-13-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 EXEMPTIONS.
   Noises from the following uses and activities shall be exempt from the
prohibitions in §
92.22:
   (A)   Non-amplified crowd noises resulting from legal activities between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;
   (B)   Any authorized emergency, fire, law enforcement, or governmental
vehicle when responding to an emergency call, acting in time of emergency, or
in connection with official business;
   (C)   Emergency signaling devices, such as severe weather sirens, safety
signals, or other devices used as a warning of danger or an emergency;
   (D)   Emergency work, including work necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or
property from an imminent exposure to danger or work by private or public
utilities when restoring utility service;
   (E)   Properly operating building alarms or vehicle alarms;
   (F)   Properly operated and licensed aircraft;
   (G)   Properly operated and licensed refuse collection vehicles operating
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;
   (H)   Any activity sponsored, permitted, or authorized by the Town Council,
or any other governmental body having jurisdiction and control over the
premises, including, but not limited to, parades, festivals, fairs, sporting
events, concerts, firework displays, or school bands;
   (I)   Legal consumer fireworks properly used during the times allowed by the
state;
   (J)   Any construction or domestic power equipment operated between 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided that such equipment is operated with the
manufacturer’s mufflers and noise reducing equipment in use and in proper
working condition;
   (K)   Church or worship center bells sounded in conjunction with a function
or service; and
   (L)   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by the Town Council in accordance with §
92.24.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 11-13-2020)
§ 92.24 TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   (A)   Applications for a permit for temporary relief from the requirements
in this subchapter may be made in writing to the Town Council. Any permit
granted by the Town Council under this section shall contain all conditions
upon which said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time
that the permit shall be effective.
   (B)   The Town Council may prescribe any reasonable conditions or
requirements it deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community
or the surrounding neighborhood. The Town Council may grant a permit as applied
for only if it is found that:
      (1)   Additional time is reasonably necessary for the applicant to alter
or modify the activity or operation to comply with this subchapter;
      (2)   The activity, operation, or noise source will be of a temporary
duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this
subchapter;
      (3)   No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and/
or
      (4)   The noise source as permitted will not violate recognized safety
standards.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 11-13-2020)
§ 92.25 ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS.
   (A)   This subchapter may be enforced by the authorized agents of the Town
Council or by a law enforcement agency.
   (B)   (1)   Any person charged with violating the provisions of this
subchapter may, in the discretion of the enforcement officer, be issued an
official warning.
      (2)   If an official warning is issued, it shall be considered as
affording the violator one opportunity to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter.
      (3)   If any person fails to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter, the subchapter violation shall be enforced in accordance with I.C.
34-28-5-1 in a manner similar to that of infractions, with complaint and
summons described in I.C. 9-30-3-6 issued by the Town Police Department or
other enforcement agency.
   (C)   Upon written notices of a violation by the same person for the same
offense three times within a consecutive 12-month period, when such noise is
created by the same noise emitter or the same type of noise emitter, the noise
creating device may be ordered by the enforcement officer to cease being used
or operated until it can be brought into compliance with this subchapter.
   (D)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the violator shall be the person
or persons who created, caused to be created, permitted to be created, or
otherwise generated any source of noise in violation of this subchapter; the
person or persons in possession of a sound amplification system played, used,
or operated in violation of this subchapter; or the person in control of a
motor vehicle operating in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 11-13-2020)
ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES
§ 92.40 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to implement the procedure contained
in I.C. 9-22-1 which govern the removal, storage, and disposal of abandoned
vehicles.
§ 92.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;
      (2)   A vehicle left on public property without being moved for 24 hours;
      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on a public right-of-way;
      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of that property for more than 48 hours;
      (5)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission or differential has
been removed, or that
is otherwise partially dismantled or inoperable and left on public property; or
      (6)   A vehicle that is at least three model-years old, is mechanically
inoperable, and remains on private property, continuously, in a location or
locations visible from public property for more than 20 days. For purposes of
this paragraph, a vehicle covered by a tarpaulin or other plastic, vinyl,
rubber, cloth, or textile covering is considered to be visible.
   JUNK.
      (1)   Any articles in any form composed of or consisting of any of the
following:
         (a)   Secondhand, discarded, abandoned, or castoff building materials,
including without limitation, lumber, cabinets, doors, windows, siding, metals
or materials, namely iron, brass, bronze, copper, tin, zinc, lead, or any other
metals or compounds thereof;
         (b)   Broken glass, rags, clothing, rubber, plastics and synthetic
substances and fabrics, bottles, papers, feathers, any other waste material, or
any compound or byproduct of any of the foregoing enumerated materials;
         (c)   Furnaces, central air units, refrigerators, washing machines,
televisions, computer monitors, mattresses, sofas, furniture and doors not in
current use; and
         (d)   Wrecked, abandoned or dismantled automobiles or parts thereof.
      (2)   As used in this subchapter, a JUNK CAR shall include any motor
vehicle, as defined by I.C. 9-13-2-196, including any vehicle that does not
bear a currently valid license plate and is not kept in a garage or building. A
classic motor vehicle that is under active restoration would not be considered
to be a JUNK CAR.
   LITTER. Includes, but is not limited to, garbage, trash, debris, lawn or
garden waste, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers;
construction materials (except for those being used as part of an ongoing and
active building or repair project permitted under other applicable town
ordinances) and construction debris; scrap metal; discarded clothing; household
appliances; furniture (except for customary outdoor patio furniture in good and
usable condition); discarded or unused recreational equipment and toys; motor
vehicle, trailer and boat parts; or other nauseous or offensive matter of any
kind, that is not kept in a designated container designed to prevent its escape
and picked up (emptied) on a routinely scheduled basis. LITTER kept in or on a
trailer or truck bed shall not be deemed to be kept in a designated container.
   OPEN VIEW. Visible from private property and/or public property including,
without limitation, public roads and rights-of-way.
   UNREGISTERED VEHICLE. All vehicles except for those excepted in and pursuant
to I.C. 9-18.1-2-2, 9-18.1-2-4 through 9-18.1-2-9. A vehicle required to be
registered, pursuant to I.C. 9-18.1-2-3, shall be deemed to be an UNREGISTERED
VEHICLE unless a valid license plate, issued uniquely for that vehicle, is
securely fastened to it in the manner prescribed by I.C. 9-18.1-4-4, which, for
passenger vehicles, pick-up trucks and motorcycles, shall be upon the rear of
the vehicle, as follows:
      (1)   A license plate shall be:
         (a)   Securely fastened, in a horizontal and upright position that
displays the registration expiration year in the upper right comer, to the
vehicle for which the plate is issued:
            1.   To prevent the license plate from swinging;
            2.   At a height of at least 12 inches from the ground, measuring
from the bottom of the license plate; and
            3.   In a place and position that are clearly visible.
         (b)   Maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be
clearly legible; and
         (c)   Not obstructed or obscured by tires, bumpers, accessories, or
other opaque objects.
      (2)   An interim license plate issued or used by a dealer licensed under
I.C. 9-32 or used by a manufacturer must be displayed:
         (a)   In the manner required under division (1) above for the type of
vehicle on which the interim license plate is displayed; or
         (b)   In a location on the left side of a window that is:
            1.   Facing the rear of the motor vehicle; and
            2.   Clearly visible and unobstructed. A plate displayed under
division (2) above must be affixed to the window of the motor vehicle.
      (3)   Upon the renewal of a registration under this article, a license
plate other than a temporary license plate must display a renewal sticker:
         (a)   That is securely affixed in the upper right corner of the
license plate; and
         (b)   That covers the previous registration expiration year.
   VEHICLE. A device in, upon, or by which a person or property is, or may be,
transported or drawn upon a highway. The term includes automobiles, cars,
trucks, motorcycles, trailers, off-road vehicles (as defined in I.C. 14-8-2-
185), manufactured and mobile homes, and watercraft (as defined in I.C. 9-13-2-
198.5). The term does not include a device moved by human power, a wheelchair,
or an electric personal assistive mobility device.
§ 92.42 JUNK AND JUNK CARS DECLARED NUISANCES.
   Because of the danger of health by vermin and insects, and because of the
danger of the safety of children attracted by junk and junk cars, these items
are declared to be nuisances, except in lawfully operated junk yards or
enclosed buildings.
(Penalty, see § 92.99)
§ 92.43 STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to allow to remain in
the open upon public or private property within the town, any disassembled and/
or non-operative and unlicensed or junked, wrecked, or abandoned motor vehicle
for a period of five days or more on public property, or a period of 15 days or
more on private property, unless it is in connection with an automobile sale or
repair business or junk yard that is in full compliance with the County Zoning
Ordinance and all applicable state statutes.
   (B)   Further, it shall be unlawful for junk to be stored or allowed to
remain in the open upon public or private property within the town. Junk and/or
vehicle parts covered with a plastic or canvas tarpaulin or any other cover,
other than a fully enclosed structure constructed and maintained in compliance
with the County Zoning Ordinance, will still be considered stored in the open.
(Penalty, see § 92.99)
§ 92.44 ENFORCEMENT.
   If such junk or junk vehicle is not removed within five days from public
property, or within 15 days from private property, after such notice, the Town
Marshal, or his or her designee, shall issue a written order of violation of
the section, and the violating party shall be subject to civil penalties.
Enforcement shall be by the marshal service and if necessary appropriate action
in the county court. The form of all notices for vehicles shall be issued
pursuant to the provision of I.C. 9-22-1-11.
(Penalty, see § 92.99)
§ 92.45 REMOVAL BY TOWN.
   If any person who owns, controls, maintains, or occupies any property that
is in violation of this subchapter fails to correct the violation by removing
and disposing of the offending materials, within five days after proper notice
cited above if it is public property, or within 15 days after notice cited
above if it is private property, the Town Marshal, or his or her designee, may
then enter onto the property and remove the materials. If anyone with an
interest in the property objects to the entry of the Town Marshal in the
enforcement of this subchapter, the town may proceed to court for a court order
authorizing entry.
§ 92.46 CHARGE FOR REMOVAL DECLARED A LIEN.
   (A)   In the event the removal of items by the town is required as a
consequence of violations of this subchapter after notice, the reasonable
charge for the removal shall be levied upon and is hereby declared a lien
against the property from which the same was removed. The lien shall be
certified by the Town Clerk-Treasurer to the County Auditor. The charge shall
become a lien and attach to the real estate from the time of the filing.
   (B)   Upon the filing of any lien, the owners of any property involved will
be notified by sending a copy of the lien by the United States Postal Service
to the postal address of the property involved. Anyone with an interest in the
property who objects to the filing of the lien may appeal the filing to the
Town Council within 30 days of the date of the sending of the notice.
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The Town Council and the Town Marshal, or their designee, may at
any time require the owner and/or occupant of any property upon which a
nuisance as herein defined exists to do all things necessary to remove the
nuisance from such property by giving the owner and/or occupant 15 days’
written notice to the existence of the nuisance. The notice as herein required
shall state the nature of the alleged nuisance and the action deemed necessary
to correct the condition, and shall fix a date not sooner than 15 days from the
date of the receipt of the notice when said property owner and/or occupant may
appear before the Town Council to be heard on the question of the nuisance.
      (2)   All notices as herein required shall be sent by first-class U.S.
mail, postage prepaid, to the occupant or owner at the address of the owner as
reflected in the tax rolls of the town, township, or the county.
      (3)   Upon the failure of the owner and/or occupant to cause the
abatement of a nuisance as required by this section and after notice and
opportunity for hearing before the Town Council, the Town Council, upon a
finding that a nuisance exists and that it has not been abated, may proceed at
once to cause to be abated the nuisance, shall charge the costs thereof against
the owner and/or occupant of said property. The liability created herein shall
be joint and several as to the owners and any occupants or tenants.
   (C)   In the event the Town Council shall cause to be abated a nuisance on
any property, as compensation to the town for its services in causing the
abatement, the owner and/or occupant shall be charged the following fees:
      (1)   A fee of $25 for each inspection necessary to determine compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   A fee of $50 for determining private property ownership when
necessary;
      (3)   A fee of $10 for each time a first-class letter is written to the
occupant or owners;
      (4)   A fee of $50 per man-hour, or fraction thereof, for labor necessary
to abate the nuisance; and
      (5)   A fee of $75 per machine-hour, or fraction thereof, for the use of
each piece of equipment used in abating the nuisance.
   (D)   The Town Council shall, upon completion of all acts necessary to abate
the nuisance, send a statement to the owner and/or occupant of the property
notifying said owner and/or occupant of the fees and charges owing to the town
for its services. Upon the failure of the owner and/or occupant to pay said
fees and charges in full within 30 days, the Town Council may cause such
charges and fees to be placed upon the tax duplicate and collected in the same
manner as property taxes. The Town Council may, in the alternative, refer said
charges and fees to the Town Attorney, who shall forthwith collect the fees and
charges by civil process, including all reasonable attorneys’ fees in
connection with the collection.
   (E)   Any person who fails to remove or abate such nuisance or otherwise
comply with this subchapter, after receiving notice within the time prescribed
in the notice given pursuant to division (B) of this section, shall be fined a
sum not exceeding $300; provided, however, that the Town Council in addition
may cause such nuisance to be abated in any manner authorized under this
subchapter or by law, including an action pursuant to I.C. 36-8-2-4 and the
initiation of an action to abate a nuisance in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (F)   (1)   Any person who is judged to have violated the provision of §§
92.40 through
92.46 is subject to a fine of up to $150, in addition to towing, hauling,
removal, and storage charges. If the fines assessed here are not paid
voluntarily, the town may proceed to court for collection actions. In the event
that the town is successful in court, attorney fees may also be awarded.
      (2)   For violations of §
94.42:
         (a)   A written warning shall be issued for the first violation of §
94.42;
         (b)   A person who commits a second violation of §
94.42 shall be subject to the penalties provided for a Class C ordinance
violation; and
         (c)   Any unpaid civil penalties/fines, costs, and attorney fees may
be made a lien upon the property where the violation occurs.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
92.43 shall be subject to the penalties provided for a Class D ordinance
violation.
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Park Advisory Committee
   
93.02   Funds, expenditures, and contracts
   
93.03   Parking regulations for Wingate Town Park
   
93.04   General rules and regulations
§ 93.01 PARK ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established for the Town a Park
Advisory Committee to be operated as set forth herein. The Park Advisory
Committee is an advisory committee, and is not a Department of Parks and
Recreation.
(Prior Code, § 2-9-1)
   (B)   Appointment. The Park Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the
Town Council, and members thereof shall serve at the Council’s pleasure to be
removed, appointed, or reappointed at any time. Each member of the Park
Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 2-9-2)
   (C)   Duties. The Park Advisory Committee shall advise the Town Council on
the needs of the parks of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-9-3)
§ 93.02 FUNDS, EXPENDITURES, AND CONTRACTS.
   The Park Advisory Committee shall not authorize the expenditure of any
funds, enter into any contracts, or receive any money. The Town Council may, in
consultation with the Park Advisory Committee, expend funds or enter into
contracts with respect to the parks of the town. All donations of funds or
property made with respect to any park in the town or activities connected
thereto shall be made to the town only to become the property thereof in
accordance with the laws and the terms of such donation if accepted by the
town.
(Prior Code, § 2-9-1)
§ 93.03 PARKING REGULATIONS FOR WINGATE TOWN PARK.
   (A)   Permitted parking hours. Parking is permitted in designated areas of
Wingate Town Park from one half hour before sunrise to one half hour after
sunset daily, unless otherwise posted or authorized by the town.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SUNRISE. The time of official sunrise as determined by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for the geographic location of
Wingate, North Carolina.
      SUNSET. The time of official sunset as determined by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for the geographic location of Wingate,
North Carolina.
   (C)   Prohibited parking. No vehicle shall be parked in Town Park outside of
the permitted hours, except with prior written permission from the town or as
part of an authorized event.
   (D)   Enforcement. Violation of this section shall result in a citation and/
or removal of the vehicle at the owner’s expense, as enforced by the Police
Department or designated town officials.
   (E)   Signage. The town shall post signage at Town Park indicating the
permitted parking hours and referencing this section.
(Penalty, see § 10.99)
§ 93.04 GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Wingate Town Park is closed to vehicular traffic from Sunset to
Sunrise daily.
   (B)   No alcohol, drugs, weapons, profanity, or loud, abusive language is
allowed.
   (C)   No food, drinks, or smoking is allowed in designated playground areas.
   (D)   All pets shall be leashed at all times.
   (E)   Persons having pets in the park are responsible for cleaning up the
feces of their pets.
   (F)   No vehicles, bicycles, skateboards, or roller blades are allowed
inside buildings.
   (G)   Requests for facility reservations must be made with the Town Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (H)   Open fires are allowed in grills only.
   (I)   No signs or markings are allowed on any trees, buildings, driveways,
paved areas, or grounds.
   (J)   No wastewater or other unsanitary substance is allowed to drain upon
the grounds.
   (K)   Persons/organizations using the park’s grounds and its facilities will
be responsible for repair or replacement in kind of any damages beyond normal
wear and tear.
   (L)   Use of a park facilities imply the acceptance of the park policy as
established by the Town Council.
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
[Reserved]
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Wells and cisterns
   
130.03   Containers
   
130.04   Fireworks
Firearms, Weapons, and Ammunition
   
130.15   Discharging firearms
   
130.16   Prohibition
   
130.17   Regulations
Parades
   
130.30   Parades generally
   
130.31   License application
   
130.32   Insurance
   
130.33   Fee
   
130.34   Investigation
   
130.35   License denied
   
130.36   License granted
   
130.37   Duration, transfer
   
130.38   Revocation
   
130.39   Conduct of parade or gathering
   
130.40   Citation
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMMUNITION. Any thing designed or redesigned, manufactured or
remanufactured, modified, made or able to be thrown, propelled, or shot by a
firearm. Unless otherwise excepted, the term includes any commonly made, sold,
or used component which must be assembled with other items in order to function
as AMMUNITION.
   CONSUMER FIREWORK. A small firework that is designed primarily to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, and that is required to comply with
the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. § 1507.
The term also includes some small devices designed to produce an audible
effect, such as whistling devices, ground devices containing 50 milligrams or
less of explosive composition, and aerial devices containing 130 milligrams or
less of explosive composition. Propelling and expelling charges consisting of a
mixture of charcoal, sulfur, and potassium nitrate are not considered to be
designed to produce an audible effect.
      (1)   CONSUMER FIREWORKS include:
         (a)   Aerial devices, including, but are not limited to, sky rockets,
missile-type rockets, helicopter and aerial spinners, Roman candles, mines, and
shells;
         (b)   Ground audible devices, including, but are not limited to,
firecrackers, salutes, and chasers; and
         (c)   Firework devices containing combinations of effects described in
divisions (1)(a) and (1)(b) above.
      (2)   CONSUMER FIREWORKS do not include the following fireworks as
referenced in I.C. 22-11-14-8(a):
         (a)   Dipped sticks or wire sparklers. However, the total pyrotechnic
composition may not exceed 100 grams per item; and, devices containing chlorate
or per chlorate salts may not exceed five grams per item;
         (b)   Cylindrical fountains;
         (c)   Cone fountains;
         (d)   Illuminating torches;
         (e)   Wheels;
         (f)   Ground spinners;
         (g)   Flitter sparklers;
         (h)   Snakes or glow worms;
         (i)   Smoke devices; and
         (j)   Trick noisemakers that include party poppers, booby traps,
snappers, trick matches, cigarette loads, and auto burglar alarms.
   DISCHARGE. Propelling, throwing, or shooting any thing by means of a
firearm.
   FIREARM. Any weapon that is capable of expelling, designed to expel or may
readily be converted to expel a projectile by means of an explosion. The term
FIREARM shall include handguns, machine guns, rifles, shotguns, and all other
weapons which fit the definition of FIREARM as provided herein, as defined by
I.C. 35-47-1 et seq., or any other applicable state or federal laws.
   FIREWORK. Any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. FIREWORKS
consist of consumer fireworks, items referenced in I.C. 22-11-14-8(a), and
special fireworks. The following items are excluded from the definition of
FIREWORKS:
      (1)   Model rockets;
      (2)   Toy pistol caps;
      (3)   Emergency signal flares;
      (4)   Matches;
      (5)   Fixed ammunition for firearms;
      (6)   Ammunition components intended for use in firearms, muzzle-loading
cannons, or small arms;
      (7)   Shells, cartridges, and primers for use in firearms, muzzle-loading
cannons, or small arms;
      (8)   Indoor, pyrotechnics, special effects material; and
      (9)   M-80s, cherry bombs, silver salutes, and any device banned by the
federal government.
   PARADE. Any continuous movement of three or more vehicles or persons through
the streets, alleys, or sidewalks of the town in such a manner as to
communicate, celebrate, publicize, or display any message, idea, cause, person,
or day.
   PERSON. An individual, association, organization, limited liability company,
or corporation.
   WEAPON. Knife with a blade longer than one inch and any device or item
which, when used, is readily capable of causing serious bodily injury as
defined by the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)
§ 130.02 WELLS AND CISTERNS.
   No person shall have, possess, permit, or allow to be on property under his
or her control any well, cistern, or vault, whether the same be in use or
abandoned, unless access to the same is blocked by a cover or door fastened to
the well, cistern, or vault a combination lock or key lock in such a manner as
is reasonably calculated to prevent any person or animal from entering the
well, cistern, or vault.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 CONTAINERS.
   No person shall have, possess, permit, or allow to be on property under his
or her control which is outside a residence, any container, refrigerator,
freezer, or other appliance, whether the same be in use or abandoned, which is
capable of being entered by a minor or animal unless entry to the same is
blocked by a cover or door fastened to the container, refrigerator, freezer, or
other appliance.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definitions. The statutory definitions of the words in §
130.01, as set forth in I.C. 22-11-14, as may be amended, are adopted for
purposes of this section.
   (B)   Use of consumer fireworks prohibited. Except as expressly permitted in
division (C) of this section, no person within the corporate limits of the town
shall use, ignite, or discharge or permit the use, ignition, or discharge any
type of consumer firework at any time.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, consumer fireworks
may be used, ignited, and discharged within the corporate limits of the town,
in strict compliance with all applicable provisions of I.C. 22-11-14:
         (a)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after sunset on
June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, and
July 9;
         (b)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on
July 4; and
         (c)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on
January 1.
      (2)   The following schedule outline acceptable timeframes in which
consumer fireworks may be used in strict compliance with I.C. 22-11-14.
State Mandated (I.C. 22-11-14-10.5) Town Ordinance
State Mandated (I.C. 22-11-14-10.5)   Town Ordinance
                                      Friday before Memorial Day (5:00 p.m. to
                                      10:00 p.m.)
                                      Saturday before Memorial Day (5:00 p.m.
                                      to 11:00 p.m.)
                                      Sunday before Memorial Day (5:00 p.m. to
                                      11:00 p.m.)
                                      Memorial Day (5:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.)
June 29 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after   June 29 (5:00 p.m.-11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
June 30 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after   June 30 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
July 1 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after    July 1 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
July 2 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after    July 2 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
July 3 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after    July 3 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
July 4 (10:00 a.m. to midnight (12:00 July 4 (10:00 a.m. to midnight (12:00
a.m.))                                a.m.))
July 5 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after    July 5 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
July 6 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after    July 6 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
July 7 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after    July 7 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
July 8 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after    July 8 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
July 9 (5:00 p.m. to 2 hours after    July 9 (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.)
sunset)
                                      Friday before Labor Day (5:00 p.m. to
                                      10:00 p.m.)
                                      Saturday before Labor Day (5:00 p.m. to
                                      11:00 p.m.)
                                      Sunday before Labor Day (5:00 p.m. to
                                      11:00 p.m.)
                                      Labor Day (5:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.)
December 31 (10:00 a.m. to midnight   December 31 (10:00 a.m. to midnight (12:
(12:00 a.m.))                         00 a.m.))
January 1 (12:01 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.)   January 1 (12:01 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.)
 
   (D)   Additional restrictions. During those exceptional times, when consumer
fireworks may be used, ignited, and discharged within the corporate limits of
the town, as prescribed in division (C) above, the following restrictions
apply:
      (1)   No person may ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks at a
site other than:
         (a)   A special discharge location;
         (b)   The property of the person; or
         (c)   The property of another who has given permission to use the
consumer fireworks.
      (2)   No person less than 18 years of age may possess or use a firework
unless an adult is present and responsible at the location of the possession.
   (D)   Enforcement. The Town Marshal and Police Officers shall be charged
with enforcing the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Comparative state law.
      (1)   State law states that consumer fireworks may be used only between
9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on most other days that are not holidays.
      (2)   The town’s laws are more restrictive (5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.) than
state law on the non-holiday time frame.
      (3)   The town cannot be less strict than the 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
regulation on holidays. Anyone who violates the majority of the state law
commits a Class A misdemeanor. Shooting fireworks before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:
00 p.m. (except as provided on July 4, December 31, and January 1) is a Class C
infraction.
      (4)   Anyone who sets off fireworks in a place other than their property,
the property of someone who has given them permission, or a “special discharge
location” commits a Class C infraction.
      (5)   A person less than 18 who possesses or uses fireworks, without an
adult present and responsible, commits a delinquent act.
      (6)   Harming property with fireworks is a Class A misdemeanor.
      (7)   Causing serious bodily harm with fireworks results in a Level 6
Felony.
      (8)   Causing death with fireworks results in a Level 5 felony.
   (F)   Key provisions of state fireworks law. State law regulates fireworks
use, possession, and sale under I.C. 22-11-14. Below is a concise overview of
key provisions, with specific times, locations, age restrictions, and penalties
for violations. Local ordinances may impose stricter rules.
      (1)   Only individuals 18 years or older can purchase fireworks. Children
under 18 years old may use or possess fireworks only if an adult is present and
supervising.
      (2)   Fireworks may be discharged only on the user’s own property, the
property of someone who has given explicit permission, or a special discharge
location designated by the State Fire Marshal. Fireworks must be used at least
200 feet from any structure or vehicle.
      (3)   Fireworks are generally allowed from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on
non-holiday days, unless restricted by local ordinances.
         (a)   Holiday hours: On Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, and New
Year’s Eve, fireworks are permitted from 9:00 a.m. to midnight.
         (b)   Protected periods (local ordinances cannot restrict these):
            1.   June 29 to July 3: 5:00 p.m. until two hours after sunset;
            2.   July 4: 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. (midnight);
            3.   July 5 to July 9: 5:00 p.m. until two hours after sunset; and
            4.   December 31 to January 1: 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
         (c)   Holidays with extended hours (9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
(midnight)): New Year’s Day; Martin Luther King Jr.’s Birthday; Lincoln’s
Birthday; Washington’s Birthday; Good Friday; Memorial Day; Independence Day;
Labor Day; Columbus Day; Election Day; Veterans Day; Thanksgiving; and
Christmas.
      (4)   Types of fireworks.
         (a)   Consumer fireworks (1.4G): Includes sparklers, firecrackers,
bottle rockets, Roman candles, fountains, and novelty items like snakes and
party poppers. No permit is required for purchase or use by individuals.
         (b)   Section 8(a) fireworks: Includes sparklers, ground spinners,
cone fountains, wheels, and cylindrical fountains. Retail sales from temporary
stands require a permit.
         (c)   Special Fireworks (1.3G): Larger display fireworks require state
and federal permits from the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms, and Explosives (ATF).
         (d)   Illegal Fireworks: Cherry bombs, M-80s, silver salutes, M-250s,
and quartersticks are banned and should be reported to the ATF at 1-888-283-
2662.
      (5)   No permit is required for individuals to purchase or use consumer
fireworks. Retailers, manufacturers, wholesalers, and distributors must obtain
a certificate of compliance from the State Fire Marshal. Retail sales from
temporary stands require a specific permit. Sellers must collect a 5% Fireworks
Public Safety Fee and 7% retail sales tax on gross retail income. Public
display fireworks require a permit from the State Fire Marshal and written
notice to residences within one mile at least 48 hours in advance.
      (6)   Safety requirements:
         (a)   Users shall use fireworks in a clear, open area away from
buildings, vehicles, and flammable materials;
         (b)   Users shall keep a fire extinguisher, hose, or bucket of water
nearby;
         (c)   Users shall not relight or handle malfunctioning fireworks; soak
them in water and dispose of them safely;
         (d)   Users shall never aim or throw fireworks at people or animals;
         (e)   Users shall store fireworks in a cool, dry place out of
children’s reach; and
         (f)   Users shall avoid using fireworks while under the influence of
alcohol.
(Penalty, see §
130.99)
FIREARMS, WEAPONS, AND AMMUNITION
§ 130.15 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot, fire, or discharge any firearm
within the town limits, as provided herein. For purposes of this section,
FIREARM shall mean any weapon that is capable of expelling, designed to expel
or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by means of an explosion. The
term FIREARM shall include handguns, machine guns, rifles, shotguns, and all
other weapons which fit the definition of FIREARM as provided herein, as
defined by I.C. 35-47-1 et seq., or any other applicable state or federal laws.
(Penalty, see §
130.99)
§ 130.16 PROHIBITION.
   This subchapter shall not prohibit the discharge of firearms by certain
exempted persons, namely:
   (A)   Any legally appointed local or federal law enforcement officer acting
within the capacity of his or her authorized duty;
   (B)   Any person, who is legally authorized and licensed to own and possess
a firearm, is acting in self-defense, the defense of their dependents, or the
defense of a fellow citizen(s), if the circumstances are such that a reasonable
and responsible adult would determine that discharging the firearm is of
absolute and immediate necessity, and that no alternative and less dangerous
solution is feasible at the time, and in doing so, does not violate any local,
state, or federal laws;
   (C)   Any duly licensed hunters, provided all applicable hunting laws and
regulations are adhered to;
   (D)   Any person discharging a weapon at lawfully operated shooting range,
skeet range, or gun club; and
   (E)   This subchapter shall not be construed to restrict or otherwise
prohibit the legal possession, purchase or use of firearms in accordance with
applicable state law, the State Constitution or the United States Constitution.
(Penalty, see §
130.99)
§ 130.17 REGULATIONS.
   This subchapter only regulates the discharge of firearms within the town
municipal corporate boundaries and shall not be construed to regulate or
otherwise restrict the following:
   (A)   Firearms, ammunition, and firearm accessories;
   (B)   The ownership, possession, carrying, transportation, registration,
transfer, and storage of firearms, ammunition, and firearm accessories; and
   (C)   Commerce in and taxation of firearms, firearm ammunition, and firearm
accessories.
PARADES
§ 130.35 PARADES GENERALLY.
   No person shall conduct, organize, or participate in any parade of persons
or vehicles, other than a motorcade for a funeral, upon the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or public property of the town without obtaining a license.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.36 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a license under this subchapter shall be filed with
the Town Clerk-Treasurer and conform to this section.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-1)
   (B)   The application shall be made on a form prescribed by the Town Council
and shall state, under oath:
      (1)   The name, address, date of birth, and Social Security number of the
applicant;
      (2)   The complete address of the applicant’s residence and domicile;
      (3)   The name, complete address, and telephone numbers of the persons or
organizations sponsoring the parade;
      (4)   The proposed date(s) of the parade together with its beginning and
ending times;
      (5)   A description of proposed route and direction of travel for any
parade;
      (6)   A description of the purpose of such parade;
      (7)   Whether anything will be sold or offered for sale in connection
with the parade and, if so, a description of the things and the name(s) and
address(es) of the person or persons selling or offering the same for sale;
      (8)   The name, state, and county of the three municipalities in which
the applicant most recently organized, participated in, or conducted a parade
together with the complete address(es) at which the applicant then resided and
did business;
      (9)   Whether any live music will be played and, if so, the times during
which it will be played and the names and addresses of the musicians;
      (10)   Whether any recorded music will be played and, if so, the times
during which it will be played; and
      (11)   A copy of the insurance policy referred to by §
130.37.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-2)
§ 130.37 INSURANCE.
   Every applicant for a license under this subchapter shall file with the Town
Clerk-Treasurer proof of a policy of insurance for personal injury, property
damage in a minimum claim amount equal to $1,000,000 together with a letter
from the insurer on its letterhead dated and signed within ten days of the
application by a duly authorized representative of the insurer stating:
   (A)   The signatory is duly authorized by the insurer to make the
representations in the letter;
   (B)   The applicant or sponsoring organization holds a valid insurance
policy as stated on the proof;
   (C)   The proposed parade is of a kind that is covered by the insurance
policy in accordance with the policy terms for personal injury, property damage
in the minimum claim amount required by this section; and
   (D)   The applicant or sponsoring organization has not been precluded from
coverage by the meeting of any aggregate limit on the policy.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-3)
§ 130.38 FEE.
   Upon submitting an application to the Town Clerk-Treasurer, the applicant
shall pay a non- refundable fee of $75, which the Clerk-Treasurer shall deposit
into the General Fund. An organization determined by the Internal Revenue
Service to be exempt under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) of the United States is exempt
from payment of the application fee.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-4)
§ 130.39 INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receiving an application, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall transmit a
copy thereof to the Town Marshal, who shall immediately institute such
investigation of the applicant and the applicant’s business, employer,
contractor, principal, or supervisor as the Town Marshal shall deem necessary
for the protection of the public. If, as a result of such investigation, the
applicant is found to be disqualified under §
130.40, the Town Marshal shall report the same to the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-5)
§ 130.40 LICENSE DENIED.
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall deny the application, and shall not issue any
license, if the application or the Town Marshal’s investigation shows:
   (A)   The application demonstrates on its face that violations of the laws
of the state or the United States will, or are likely to, occur;
   (B)   The application is not complete; or
   (C)   The application contains information which is false, misleading, or
inaccurate.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-6)
§ 130.41 LICENSE GRANTED.
   If the Town Clerk-Treasurer grants an application, he or she shall issue the
applicant a license in a form approved by the Council setting forth the
information in §
130.36(B)(1) to (B)(7), (B)(9), and (B)(11), together with a copy of the letter
issued under §
130.37. The license shall also contain a statement that other information, with
respect to the applicant, is available for inspection at the Clerk-Treasurer’s
office during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-7)
§ 130.42 DURATION, TRANSFER.
   No license issued for a parade shall authorize a parade for more than 24
hours after its beginning time. Licenses issued under this subchapter cannot be
assigned, sold, or transferred in any manner, and do not authorize any person
other than the applicant to organize, participate, or conduct a parade.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-8)
§ 130.43 REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any license issued under this subchapter may be revoked by the Town
Council in accordance with this section.
   (B)   A license issued or renewed may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Misrepresentation or any inaccurate statement contained in the
application;
      (2)   Misrepresentation or any inaccurate statement contained in a
renewal statement; and
      (3)   Any violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   Requests to revoke a license may be made by any person in a form to be
prescribed by the Town Council. Notice of the request, including a copy thereof
and the date, time, and place of the hearing thereon, shall be mailed by the
United States Mail, properly addressed and with sufficient first- class postage
affixed, to the licensee at his or her last known address at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing, or shall be personally delivered to the
licensee by the Town Marshal in the manner of a summons at least three days
prior to the date set for the hearing. Notice of the request, including a copy
thereof and the date, time, and place of the hearing thereon, shall be mailed
by United States Mail, properly addressed and with sufficient first-class
postage affixed, to the person requesting revocation at his or her last known
address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing, or shall be
personally delivered to the licensee by the Town Marshal in the manner of a
summons at least three days prior to the date set for the hearing, and shall
state that the person must be personally present for the request to be
considered.
   (D)   The request for revocation shall be heard by the Town Council at the
time, date, and place set forth in the notice. The person making the request
for revocation must personally appear at the hearing. If the Council finds, by
a majority affirmative vote of the members then present, that grounds exist for
the revocation of the license, it shall so declare and the license shall be
revoked and of no further force or effect. The licensee shall, within 24 hours
of such declaration, surrender the license to the Town Clerk-Treasurer or the
Town Marshal. If the person making the request for revocation is not personally
present, the request shall fail unless the Town Council, by majority
affirmative vote of those members present, adjourn consideration of the request
to another time, date, or place. A request which has twice failed to be
considered due to the absence of any required person shall be deemed denied.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-9)
§ 130.44 CONDUCT OF PARADE OR GATHERING.
   No one shall conduct, organize, or participate in a parade or organization
in a manner inconsistent with the license granted therefor.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-10) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.45 CITATION.
   (A)   Unless a shorter time is specified, a person cited for violation of
any provision of this chapter shall have five business days after receiving
said citation to appear at the Town Hall during its posted hours of regular
business and pay in full such fine as shall be designated on the citation.
   (B)   If the designated fine is not so paid, notice and complaint on such
violation shall be submitted to a court of competent jurisdiction for
adjudication. Upon an adjudication, the fine designated plus any and all court
costs and reasonable attorney’s fees which the town must expend for said
proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-7)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A person who violates §
130.02 shall be fined and be liable to the town for $50 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1)
   (C)   A person who violates §
130.03 shall be fined and be liable to the town for $50 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-2)
   (D)   (1)   A person who violates §
130.04 shall be fined and be liable to the town for $100 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-4-3)
      (2)   Class C infraction: Using fireworks outside permitted times,
locations, or by those under 18 without adult supervision. Fine up to $500 per
citation.
      (3)   Class A misdemeanor: Recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally
causing property damage with fireworks. Fine up to $5,000 and up to one year in
jail.
      (4)   Level 6 felony: Causing bodily injury to another person with
fireworks. Fine up to $10,000 and six months to two and one-half years in
prison.
      (5)   Level 5 felony: Causing death with fireworks. Fine up to $10,000
and one to six years in prison.
      (6)   Littering (Class B infraction): Leaving spent fireworks on
another’s property.
   (E)   (1)   Any violations of §§
130.15 through
130.17 shall result in the following penalties:
         (a)   First offense: $250 fine;
         (b)   Second offense: $750 fine; and
         (c)   Third offense and subsequent offenses: $7,500 fine.
      (2)   Any second and subsequent offenses shall be determined based upon a
calendar year.
   (F)   A person who violates §
130.39 shall be fined and be liable to the town for $100 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5-11)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   PUBLIC WAYS
      
151.   BUILDINGS, CONSTRUCTION, AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 150: PUBLIC WAYS
Section
   
150.01   Definitions
   
150.02   Sidewalks
   
150.03   Alleys
   
150.04   Construction of sidewalks
   
150.05   Spitting
   
150.06   Utility and emergency access ways
   
150.07   Citation
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public way, whether or not paved, that is:
      (1)   Not a street or sidewalk;
      (2)   Publicly maintained and open to public vehicular traffic; and
      (3)   Less than two lanes wide.
   NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Any machine or device that is designed, intended,
modified, or used to travel across, along, or over the ground that is:
      (1)   Capable of being occupied by or carrying one or more things,
animals, or human beings; and
      (2)   Designed, intended, modified, or used to move by means of power
derived from the physical effort of human beings.
   SIDEWALK. The part of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines
of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   VEHICLE. Any machine or device that is designed, intended, modified, or used
to travel across, along, or over the ground that is:
      (1)   Capable of being occupied by or carrying one or more things,
animals, or human beings; and
      (2)   Designed, intended, modified, or used to move, in whole or in part,
by means of power derived from a source other than the physical effort of human
beings.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-1)
§ 150.02 SIDEWALKS.
   The following provisions apply to sidewalks within the town.
   (A)   Ice and snow. Each owner of real property within the town shall clear,
or ensure clearance, of any accumulation of ice or snow on sidewalks abutting
his, her, or its property within 24 hours of such accumulation.
   (B)   Obstructions. No owner shall place, or allow to become placed, any
obstruction upon a sidewalk abutting his, her, or its property that
substantially interferes with the normal movement of pedestrian traffic.
   (C)   Use. No person shall use the sidewalks of the town for any purpose
other than walking, running, or jogging. No person shall use the sidewalks of
the town for any race, contest, or game without the permission of the Town
Council. No person shall use the sidewalks of the town in a manner which
obstructs the safe and orderly flow of pedestrian traffic or which endangers
any person.
   (D)   Vehicles on sidewalks. No person shall place or allow to move on the
sidewalks of the town any motorized or non-motorized vehicle unless:
      (1)   The vehicle is a tricycle used by a child;
      (2)   The vehicle is a cart used by patrons of a grocery store;
      (3)   The vehicle is a wagon or cart used by a child;
      (4)   The vehicle is a wagon or cart used by parents to transport young
children; or
      (5)   The vehicle is a moveable seat used by a disabled person for
personal transportation.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-1) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.03 ALLEYS.
   No person shall place, or allow to become placed, any obstruction upon an
alley that substantially interferes with the normal movement of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-2) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The town may, from time to time, apply for and receive grants for the
construction of sidewalks. In accordance with the terms of such grants, these
ordinances, and applicable laws, the town shall construct said sidewalks under
the supervision of the Building Inspector and according to regulations
therefor.
   (B)   Upon installation, the owner of the real property on which such
sidewalk is built shall be responsible for maintenance and repair thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-3)
§ 150.05 SPITTING.
   No person shall deposit saliva, phlegm, or a mixture of either with the
juice of any plant or substance, upon the sidewalks, streets, alleys, or
property of the town. No person shall defecate or urinate upon the sidewalks,
streets, alleys, or property of the town.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-4) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.06 UTILITY AND EMERGENCY ACCESS WAYS.
   (A)   There have been established within the town utility and emergency
access ways, designated upon the plat map of the town as 12- and ten-foot wide
lanes between towns.
   (B)   Utility and emergency access ways shall be maintained by the owner of
the real property over which they are designated free and clear of obstructions
to travel by utility and emergency vehicles.
   (C)   Utility and emergency access ways are not alleys, and no person shall
travel or be upon the same without the prior permission of the town or the
owner of said real property.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-5) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.07 CITATION.
   A person cited for violation of this chapter shall have five business days
after receiving said citation to appear at the Town Hall during its posted
hours of regular business and pay in full such fine as shall be designated on
the citation. If the designated fine is not so paid, notice and complaint on
such violation shall be submitted to a court of competent jurisdiction for
adjudication. Upon an adjudication adverse to the alleged violator, he or she
shall be liable for and pay the fine designated plus any and all court costs
and reasonable attorney’s fees which the town must expend for said proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-12)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who violates §
150.02(A) or (B) shall be fined and liable to the town for $10, and for $20 for
each subsequent violation within a 24-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-6)
      (2)   A person who violates §
150.02(C) shall be fined and liable to the town for $50 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-7)
      (3)   A person who violates §
150.02(D) shall be fined and be liable to the town for $50 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-8)
   (C)   A person who violates §
150.03 shall be fined and liable to the town for $10, and for $20 for each
subsequent violation within a 24-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-9)
   (D)   A person who violates §
150.05 shall be fined and liable to the town for $100 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-10)
   (E)   A person who violates §
150.06 shall be fined and liable to the town for $50 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-11)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDINGS, CONSTRUCTION, AND PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   County Building and Zoning Administrator
Mobile Homes and Recreational Vehicles
   
151.15   Mobile homes prohibited
   
151.16   Use of recreational vehicles
   
151.17   Modular homes
   
151.18   Citation
Building Code
   
151.30   Purpose and scope
   
151.31   Administration and authority
   
151.32   Violation
   
151.33   Adoption by reference
   
151.34   Permits required
   
151.35   Plans
   
151.36   Other ordinances
   
151.37   Fees
   
151.38   Review
   
151.39   Inspection
   
151.40   Stop orders
   
151.41   Certificate of occupancy
   
151.42   Standards
   
151.43   Remedies
   
151.44   Appeal
Unsafe Building Law and Administration
   
151.55   Unsafe Building Law
   
151.56   Nuisance
   
151.57   Building Safety Commissioner
   
151.58   Unsafe building
   
151.59   Construction, alteration, and demolition
   
151.60   Unsafe Building Fund
   
151.61   Violations
   
151.62   Hearing
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE HOME. A thing which is:
      (1)   Designed, manufactured, modified, or remanufactured, for occupancy
as a dwelling or sleeping place; and
      (2)   Readily capable of movement by towing.
   MODULAR HOME. Any structure which is:
      (1)   Designed, manufactured, modified, or remanufactured, for occupancy
as a dwelling or sleeping place; and
      (2)   Whose major components or structures have been manufactured or
assembled away from the site on which it is being erected.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is designed, manufactured, modified,
or remanufactured, for occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place and which
contains or is able to accept a sink, toilet, stove, refrigerator, faucet,
shower, or bathtub.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)
§ 151.02 COUNTY BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   In Montgomery County, the position of Building Commissioner is part of the
County Building and Zoning Department. This Department is responsible for
reviewing and issuing permits for building construction, demolitions, and
electrical inspections, as well as handling zoning, floodplain approvals, and
maintaining the county’s address database for unincorporated and incorporated
areas (excluding the City of Crawfordsville and its two-mile jurisdiction). The
Building and Zoning Department is overseen by the County Board of
Commissioners, which serves as the executive and legislative authority for the
county.
MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 151.15 MOBILE HOMES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place, construct, install, or allow the placement,
construction, or installation of any mobile home within the town. This section
does not apply to any mobile home which has been placed, constructed, or
installed within the town on the effective date of the code. This section does
not apply to any mobile home whose placement, construction, or installation
within the town has begun or has been completed on the effective date of the
code. The complete or partial placement, construction, or installation of a
mobile home in violation of this section shall be and be dealt with as an
unsafe building under §§
151.55 to
151.62.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-1) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.16 USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   No owner of a recreational vehicle shall use, or allow any other person to
use, the vehicle as a dwelling or place of abode for a period in excess of
seven days. No owner of a recreational vehicle shall park it, or allow it to be
parked, on any street or alley in the town for a period of time longer than
three days.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.17 MODULAR HOMES.
   No modular home shall be placed, constructed, installed, or built within the
town unless the same be placed on a permanent foundation which meets the
requirements of these ordinances and applicable laws.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.18 CITATION.
   (A)   A person cited for violation of any provision of this subchapter shall
have five business days after receiving said citation to appear at the Town
Hall during its posted hours of regular business and pay in full such fine as
shall be designated on the citation.
   (B)   If the designated fine is not so paid, notice and complaint on such
violation shall be submitted to a court of competent jurisdiction for
adjudication. Upon an adjudication adverse to the alleged violator, he or she
shall be liable for and pay the fine designated plus any and all court costs
and reasonable attorney’s fees which the town must expend for said proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)
BUILDING CODE
§ 151.30 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, limb, health, environment, public safety, and welfare, and
for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and
structures. The provisions of this subchapter apply to the construction,
alteration, repair, use, occupancy, and maintenance and additions to all
buildings and structures, other than fences, in the town.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)
§ 151.31 ADMINISTRATION AND AUTHORITY.
   The County Building and Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and
directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code. Upon
presentation of proper credentials, the County Building and Zoning
Administrator or his or her duly authorized representatives may enter at
reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the town to perform
any duty imposed upon him or her by this code.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-2)
§ 151.32 VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner,
lessee, sublessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any
building or structure, other than fences, in the town, or cause or permit the
same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.33 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The following rules, regulations, and codes are hereby adopted by
reference as the rules and regulations governing the construction and
alteration of buildings and structures in the town, as the same exist on the
effective date of this code and as they may be reenacted, recodified, or
reissued in future:
      (1)   Construction Rules and Regulations, promulgated by the
Administrative Building Council of Indiana;
      (2)   One and Two Family Dwelling Code, promulgated by the Administrative
Building Council of Indiana;
      (3)   Electric Rules and Regulations, promulgated by the Administrative
Building Council of Indiana;
      (4)   Plumbing Rules and Regulations, promulgated by the Administrative
Building Council of Indiana;
      (5)   Mechanical Rules and Regulations, promulgated by the Administrative
Building Council of Indiana;
      (6)   Swimming Pool Construction Rules and Regulations, promulgated by
the Administrative Building Council of Indiana; and
      (7)   Indiana Energy Conservation Rules and Regulations for New Building
Construction, promulgated by the Administrative Building Council of Indiana.
   (B)   At least one copy of each of the foregoing rules and regulations shall
be on file for inspection and reference in the office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer or County Building and Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-4)
§ 151.34 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration, or
repair of any building or structure. No fee shall be charged for any permit for
such construction, alteration, or repair if the bona fide estimated cost of the
same does not exceed $2,500. Permits shall be applied for using forms furnished
by the County Building and Zoning Administrator. All permits shall be issued by
the County Building and Zoning Administrator, and all fees provided for herein
shall be paid to the County Building and Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-5) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.35 PLANS.
   No permit shall be issued unless the application is accompanied by a plat or
sketch of the proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and
specifications showing the work to be done. All plans and specifications for
construction under the authority of the Administrative Building Council of the
state must also be filed with the Administrative Building Council, who will
issue an approved certificate of compliance, under the provisions of state law.
In all cases under the authority of the Administrative Building Council, no
town permits shall be issued until a copy of the release for construction from
the Administrative Building Council is received by the County Building and
Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-6)
§ 151.36 OTHER ORDINANCES.
   All work done under any permit issued hereunder shall be in full compliance
with all other ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for
permits hereinafter provided for there shall be paid the fees prescribed in
such ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-7) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.37 FEES.
   The fees for building permits shall be the same as are applicable under the
present ordinances of the County Department of Buildings and Office of County
Building and Zoning Administrator, or as may hereafter be amended.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-8)
§ 151.38 REVIEW.
   Prior to the issuance of any building permit hereunder, the County Building
and Zoning Administrator shall review all building permit applications to
determine compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-9)
§ 151.39 INSPECTION.
   After the issuance of any building permit hereunder, the County Building and
Zoning Administrator shall make such inspections of the work being done under
such permit as are necessary to ensure full compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter and the terms of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-10)
§ 151.40 STOP ORDERS.
   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, the
County Building and Zoning Administrator may order the work stopped by notice
in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to
be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized
by the County Building and Zoning Administrator to proceed with the work.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-11) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.41 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No person shall inhabit an building or structure erected, altered, or
repaired after the adoption of this subchapter without a certificate of
occupancy signed by the County Building and Zoning Administrator. No
certificate for occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered, or
repaired after the adoption of this subchapter shall be issued unless such
building or structure was erected altered or repaired in compliance with the
provisions of the code.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-12) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.42 STANDARDS.
   All work on the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to
accepted standards and practices in the trade.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-13) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.43 REMEDIES.
   The County Building and Zoning Administrator shall, in the name of the town,
bring actions in the County or Circuit Courts of the county for mandatory and
injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order
or orders made by the County Building and Zoning Administrator, and any such
action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to
recover the penalties provided for in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-14)
§ 151.44 APPEAL.
   All persons shall have the right to appeal the County Building and Zoning
Administrator’s decision, first through the Commissioners of the county, and
then through the executive committee of the Administrative Building Council of
Indiana, in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 22-11-21-6.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-15)
UNSAFE BUILDING LAW AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.55 UNSAFE BUILDING LAW.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-3, I.C. 36-7-9 is established and adopted by
reference as the town’s Unsafe Building Law. The definition of SUBSTANTIAL
PROPERTY INTEREST set forth in I.C. 36-7-9-2 is hereby incorporated by
reference. In the event the provisions of this code conflict with said chapter
of the Indiana Code, the provisions of said chapter of the Indiana Code shall
control. The town’s Unsafe Building Law shall be said chapter of the Indiana
Code as the same presently exists and as may be amended, recodified, or
reenacted from time to time hereafter and as may be amplified herein.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-1)
§ 151.56 NUISANCE.
   All buildings or portions thereof within the town determined, upon
inspection by the Building Safety Commissioner, to be unsafe as defined in this
subchapter are hereby declared public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-2) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.57 BUILDING SAFETY COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   The Town Building Safety Commissioner, as chief administrative officer
of the Department of Buildings Safety, shall be appointed by and serve at the
will and pleasure of the Town Council. He or she shall be authorized to
administer and proceed under this law in ordering the repair or removal of any
buildings found to be unsafe or nuisances.
   (B)   (1)   Wherever in the building regulations of the town or the town’s
Unsafe Building Law, it is provided that a thing must be done to the approval
of or subject to the direction of the Building Safety Commissioner, or any
other officer of the town, the same shall be construed to give such officer
only the discretion of determining whether the rules and standards established
by ordinance have been complied with.
      (2)   No such provision shall be construed to give any officer
discretionary powers to determine what such regulations or standards shall be,
to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance, or to enforce ordinances in
an arbitrary or discretionary manner.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-3)
§ 151.58 UNSAFE BUILDING.
   (A)   The definition of an UNSAFE BUILDING contained in said chapter of the
Indiana Code is hereby supplemented by adding the definitions in this section.
   (B)   Any building or structure which has any of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described shall be deemed an UNSAFE BUILDING and a nuisance,
provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life,
health, property, or safety of any person is endangered:
      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, or other means of exit is of
insufficient size, or is otherwise not arranged, to provide safe and adequate
means of exit in case of fire or other emergency;
      (2)   Whenever the stress in any material, member, or portion, due to all
dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or
stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location;
      (3)   Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind,
flood, or any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or
stability is:
         (a)   Materially less than it was before such event; and
         (b)   Less than the minimum requirements for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose, or location.
      (4)   Whenever any portion, member, or appurtenance is likely to fail,
become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby risking injury to
persons or property;
      (5)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or
ornamentation on its exterior is:
         (a)   Of insufficient strength or stability; or
         (b)   Is not so anchored, attached, or fastened as to be capable of
resisting a wind pressure of one-half that specified for new buildings of
similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses
permitted for such buildings.
      (6)   Whenever any portion has cracked, warped, buckled, or settled to
such an extent that walls or other structural parts have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required for new buildings of
similar structure, purpose, or location;
      (7)   Whenever any part of the building or structure has a substantial
risk of collapse due to:
         (a)   Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;
         (b)   Faulty construction;
         (c)   Removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary to support such building;
         (d)   Deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
         (e)    Any other cause.
      (8)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any part
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
      (9)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-fifth of the base;
      (10)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members,
or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing walls,
outside walls, or coverings;
      (11)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged or has
become so dilapidated or deteriorated so as to become:
         (a)   An attractive nuisance to children; or
         (b)   Easily accessible to persons for the purpose of committing
unlawful acts.
      (12)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists,
or is maintained in violation of:
         (a)   Any specific requirement or prohibition made applicable by the
ordinances of this town; or
         (b)   Any law of this state or town relating to the condition,
location, or structure of buildings.
      (13)   Whenever any building or structure, regardless of whether it was
erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-
supporting part, member, or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting part,
member, or portion less than 60%, of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by
law in the case of a newly constructed building of similar area, height,
occupancy, and location;
      (14)   Whenever a building or structure, used, or intended to be used, as
a dwelling, is determined by any official charged with maintaining or
preserving public health to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in a
condition that poses a substantial risk of contributing to or causing illness;
      (15)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used as a
dwelling, is determined by any official charged with maintaining or preserving
public life or property from damage by fire to be a fire hazard;
      (16)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains after
demolition or destruction of the building or structure so as to constitute an
attractive nuisance to children or hazard to the public;
      (17)   Whenever any building or structure is so abandoned for a period in
excess of six months so as to constitute an attractive nuisance to children or
hazard to the public; or
      (18)   A mobile home which has been or is in the process of being placed,
constructed, or installed in violation of the code.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-4)
§ 151.59 CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, AND DEMOLITION.
   (A)   All reconstruction, alteration, repair, or demolition of buildings and
structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to
standards and practices the accepted in the trade.
   (B)   The rules pertaining to construction, alteration, repair, or
demolition of buildings or structures promulgated by the Administrative
Building Council of Indiana shall be considered standard and acceptable
practice for all matters covered by this subchapter or orders issued pursuant
hereto.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-5) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.60 UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
   An Unsafe Building Fund is hereby established in the operating budget of the
town in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-14.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-6)
§ 151.61 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or
occupant, who erects, constructs, enlarges, alters, repairs, moves, improves,
removes, demolishes, equips, uses, occupies, or maintains any building,
structure, or premises, or cause or allow any of the same to be done, in a
manner contrary to any of the provisions of this subchapter or any order issued
pursuant hereto commits a Class C infraction for each day such violation
continues.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-7) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.62 HEARING.
   Assessment and calculation of costs of hearing pursuant to this chapter
shall be as follows.
   (A)   In the event a hearing is conducted as a result of the issuance of a
notice pursuant to the Unsafe Building Law, and the hearing results in a
finding that the subject property is in violation of this subchapter, the costs
of such hearing shall be assessed against and payable by the owner and/or
possessor such property.
   (B)   Costs of the hearing are deemed and designated to be those incurred
for initial inspection of the building, preparation of notice, costs of service
of notice, hearing officer per diem payment, attorney fee, post hearing
inspection fee, and any other costs directly associated with the hearing
procedure.
   (C)   Per diem allowance for the hearing examiner shall be $50.
   (D)   Attorney fees shall be that amount invoiced to the town by the
attorney for his or her services directly associated with the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-8)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A person who violates §
151.16 shall be fined $100 for the first violation, and $200 for second and
subsequent violations involving the same recreational vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2)
   (C)   If any person, firm, or corporation shall violate any of the
provisions of §§
151.30 to
151.44, or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall fail to perform any
duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the County Building and
Zoning Administrator, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order
given by the County Building and Zoning Administrator in connection with the
provisions of §§
151.30 to
151.44, for each such violation, failure, or refusal, such person, firm, or
corporation, shall be fined in any sum not less than $10 nor more than $500.
Each day of such unlawful activity as is prohibited by the first sentence of
this division (C) shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-16)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Cite Code Section
I.C. Cite             Code Section
1-1-1-5               10.04
1-1-1-7               10.12
1-1-1-8               10.06
1-1-4-5               10.05
1-1-5-1               10.11
1-1-6-1               10.08
5-2-1-2(1)            31.36
5-11-10-1.6           32.40
5-11-10-1.6(c)        32.04
5-14-1.5              30.01
5-14-1.5-1 et seq.    30.03;
                      30.04
8-1.5-3-3             50.001
                      50.021;
8-1.5-3-4             50.026;
                      50.027
                      50.021;
8-1.5-3-8             50.061;
                      50.027
8-1.5-5-4             50.001
8-1.5-5-6             50.021;
                      50.026
8-1.5-5-7             50.021;
                      50.024
9-13-2-1              92.03
9-13-2-196            92.41
9-13-2-198.5          92.41
9-18.1-2-2            92.41
9-18.1-2-3            92.41
9-18.1-2-4 9-18.1-2-9 92.41
9-18.1-4-4            92.41
9-21-1-3.3            71.99
9-21-9-2              71.09
9-21-9-4              71.05
9-22-1                92.40
9-22-1-1 et seq.      70.04
9-24-1-7(b)           71.03
9-25-4                71.01;
                      71.04
9-26-6                71.08
9-30-3-6              92.25
9-32                  92.40
13-17-9               91.03
14-8-2-185            92.41
14-16-1-1 et seq.     71.02
15-20-1-4             90.11
15-20-l-5(a)(l)       90.01
15-20-1-5(a)(3)       90.01
22-11-14              130.04
22-11-14-8(a)         130.01
22-11-14-10.5         130.04
22-11-21-6            151.44
22-22-2-12            151.35
25-6.1-1-1 et seq.    110.30
34-28-5-1             92.25
                      110.18;
35-43-2-1             110.34;
                      110.37
                      110.18;
35-43-2-1.5           110.34;
                      110.37
                      110.18;
35-43-2-2             110.34;
                      110.37
                      50.999;
35-43-4-2             110.18;
                      110.34;
                      110.37
                      110.18;
35-43-5-1 et seq.     110.34;
                      110.37
35-43-5-3             50.999
35-46-3               90.11
35-47-1 et seq.       130.01;
                      130.15
36-1-3-8(a)(10)       10.99
36-1-5-4              31.01
36-1-6-2              92.02
36-1-20.2             31.01
36-1-21               31.01
36-4-6-11             31.01
36-5-2-2              10.15
36-5-2-9.4            31.01
36-5-4-12             32.04
36-7-9                151.55
36-7-9-2              151.55
36-7-9-3              151.55
36-7-9-14             151.60
36-8-2-4              92.99
                      
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
2-1-1              30.01;
                   32.05
2-2-1              30.02
2-2-2              30.03
2-2-3              30.04
2-2-5              30.05
2-2-6              30.06
2-2-7              30.07
2-2-8              30.08
2-3-1              31.15
2-3-2              31.16
2-3-3              31.17
2-3-4              31.18
2-3-5              30.09
2-3-6              31.19
2-3-7              31.20
2-3-8              31.21
2-5-1              151.02
2-5-2              151.02
2-5-3              151.02
2-5-4              151.02
2-5-5              151.02
2-7-1              31.35
2-7-2              31.36
2-7-3              31.37
2-7-4              31.38
2-8-1              50.001
2-8-3              50.001
2-8-4              50.002
2-8-5              50.003
2-8-6              50.004
2-8-7              50.005
2-8-8              50.006
2-8-9              50.007
2-8-10             50.008
2-8-11             50.009
2-8-12             50.010
2-8-13             50.011
2-8-14             50.012;
                   50.999
2-8-15             50.013
2-8-16             50.014
2-8-17             50.015
2-8-18             50.016
2-8-19             50.017
2-8-20             50.017
2-8-21             50.018
2-8-22             50.019
2-8-23             50.019
2-8-24             50.019
2-8-25             50.019
2-9-1              93.01;
                   93.02
2-9-2              93.01
2-9-3              93.01
2-10-1             31.02
2-10-2             31.03
2-10-3             32.05
2-10-4             31.04
3-1-1              151.01
3-2-1              151.15
3-2-2              151.16;
                   151.99
3-2-3              151.17
3-2-4              151.18
3-3-1              151.30
3-3-2              151.31
3-3-3              151.32
3-3-4              151.33
3-3-5              151.34
3-3-6              151.35
3-3-7              151.36
3-3-8              151.37
3-3-9              151.38
3-3-10             151.39
3-3-11             151.40
3-3-12             151.41
3-3-13             151.42
3-3-14             151.43
3-3-15             151.44
3-3-16             151.99
3-4-1              151.55
3-4-2              151.56
3-4-3              151.57
3-4-4              151.58
3-4-5              151.59
3-4-6              151.60
3-4-7              151.61
3-4-8              151.62
4-1-1              150.01
4-2-1              150.02
4-2-2              150.03
4-2-3              150.04
4-2-4              150.05
4-2-5              150.06
4-2-6              150.07
4-2-7              150.07
4-2-8              150.07
4-2-9              150.99
4-2-10             150.99
4-2-11             150.99
4-2-12             150.07
5-1-1              70.01
5-2-1              70.02
5-2-1-5            70.99
5-2-1-6            70.99
5-2-2              70.03
5-2-2-8            70.99
5-2-3              70.04
5-2-3-5            70.99
5-2-4              70.05
5-2-5              70.06;
                   70.99
6-1-1              110.01
6-2-1              110.15
6-2-1-4            130.01
6-2-2              110.16
6-2-2-5            130.01
6-2-3              110.17
6-2-4              110.18
6-2-5              110.19
6-3-1              110.30
6-3-2-1            110.31
6-3-2-2            110.32
6-3-2-3            110.32
6-3-2-4            110.33
6-3-2-5            110.34
6-3-2-6            110.35
6-3-2-7            110.36
6-3-2-8            110.37
6-3-3              110.38
6-3-4              110.39
6-3-5              110.40
6-3-6              110.99
6-3-7              110.41
7-1-1              130.01
7-3-1              130.02;
                   150.01
7-3-2              150.01
7-3-2              130.03
7-3-4              130.04
7-3-4-3            150.01
7-3-5              130.30
7-3-5-1            130.31
7-3-5-2            130.31
7-3-5-3            130.32
7-3-5-4            130.33
7-3-5-5            130.34
7-3-5-6            130.35
7-3-5-7            130.36
7-3-5-8            130.37
7-3-5-9            130.38
7-3-5-10           130.39
7-3-5-11           130.99
7-3-7              130.45
                   
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2015-3   8-26-2012   31.01
2020-01  6-16-2020   32.02
2021-01  4-13-2021   32.01
2023-01  5-16-2023   32.20 -
                     32.28
2023-02  8-8-2023    30.10
                    
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         50.060 -
                     50.068
2014-2   4-24-2014   50.060
2015-2   4-14-2015   50.093
                     71.01 -
2015-3   8-11-2015   71.11;
                     71.99
2018-01  1-9-2018    32.04
2018-02  1-9-2018    32.03
                     50.035 -
2018-03  5-8-2018    50.047;
                     50.999
2019-03  12-10-2019  50.092
2019-04  12-10-2019  50.091
2020-02  11-13-2020  92.20 -
                     92.25
2021-001 5-12-2021   32.40
                     91.01 -
2023 02  8-8-2023    91.05;
                     91.99
2022-01  3-14-2023   90.15;
                     92.15
                     50.001;
                     50.002;
2025     - -2025     50.020 -
                     50.026;
                     50.999
2025-    - -2025     50.027;
                     50.999
2025-01  3-8-2025    50.062
2025-02  3-8-2025    50.061
                    
 
 
