CITY CODE
of
ALEDO, ILLINOIS
1969
Code current through:
Ord. 14/2025, passed June 2, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Aledo, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 14/2025, passed June 6, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
CITY OF ALEDO
ORDINANCE NO. 22
Series of 2005
SECTION 1: That Title 1, "Administrative" Chapter 21, "Administrative Hearings
Program" of the Aledo City Code be added as follows:
1-21-1: CREATION AND PURPOSE.
A.    There is hereby established an Administrative Hearings System which is
authorized to conduct administrative hearings on citations charging violations
of municipal ordinances and/or the building code of the City of Aledo,
Illinois.
B.    The City adopts and hereby incorporates by reference 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1 - 2.2.1 et seq., and 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., as each may be amended
from time to time. In the event of a conflict between said statutes and this
Chapter, the statute shall prevail.
C.    The Administrative Hearings System shall be conducted by the Code Hearing
Department for General City Ordinances as provided for in 5/1-2.2.1 et seq.,
and Building Code Violations as provided for in 5/11 -31.1 -1 et seq.
1-21-2: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS - GENERAL CITY ORDINANCES
A.    DEFINITIONS (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-5)
As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
"Code" means any municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations
that must be adjudicated pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 and (ii) any offense
under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic
regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable
offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
"Hearing officer" means a municipal employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
(1)    preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not
a code violation exists;
(2)    hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant
to the existence of a code violation;
(3)    preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
(4)    issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a
code violation exists.
B.    CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-10)
The Aledo corporate authorities hereby establish a code hearing department
within the Aledo municipal government. The function of the hearing department
is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner
set forth in this Division.
1
The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a municipal
ordinance except for (i) building code violations that must be adjudicated
pursuant to Division 31.1 of Article 11 of this Act and (ii) any offense under
the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar offense that is a traffic regulation
governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under
Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
C.    HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE. ((65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-15)
The adoption and usage of the Code Hearing Department and the administrative
hearings provided for in this Chapter does not preclude the municipality from
using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
D.    INSITUTING CODE HEARINGS (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-20)
When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code violation
finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a
multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates (i) the name and
address of the defendant, (ii) the type and nature of the violation, (iii) the
date and time the violation was observed, and (iv) the names of witnesses to
the violation.
The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department
where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a
hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on
the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more than 40 days
after the violation is reported.
One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the
code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of
the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the
municipality in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy
of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along
with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing. If the
violation report form requires the respondent to answer within a certain amount
of time, the municipality must reply to the answer within the same amount of
time afforded to the respondent.
E.    SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-25)
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the
case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for hearing the defendant or his
or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation.
F.    CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-30)
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under
this Chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not he grounds
for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
Division shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the municipality may be
presented by an attorney designated by the municipality or by any other
2
municipal employee, except that the case for the municipality shall not be
presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The case for the
defendant may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other
agent or representative of the defendant.
G.    HEARING; EVIDENCE.
At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-existence of a code
violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply to hearings authorized by this Division.
H.    QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-40)
Prior to conducting proceedings under this Chapter, hearing officers shall
successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following:
(1)    instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
(2)    orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will
administer;
(3)    observation of administrative hearings; and
(4)    participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law
in the State of Illinois for at least 3 years.
I.    FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-45)
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings,
decision, and order shall include (i) the hearing officer's findings of fact;
(ii) a decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact; and (iii) an order that states the sanction or dismisses the
case if a violation is not proved. A monetary sanction for a violation under
this Division shall not exceed $750.00 for each violation, as provided the
amount provided for by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, as amended. A copy of the findings,
decision, and order shall be served on the defendant within 5 days after it is
issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report form and summons
are served under this Chapter.
J.    REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-50)
The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of the county in which the municipality is located.
The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the
findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer under this Division.
K.    JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS; DECISION AND ORDER (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55)
(1)    Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
3
(2)    After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of
the county in which the municipality is located for purpose of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and
orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action,
the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in
accordance with this Division and the applicable municipal ordinance. Service
of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by
Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions,
and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed $2,500.
If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and. order was entered
in accordance with the requirements of this Division and the applicable
municipal ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing
under this Division and for judicial review as provided in this Division:
(a)    The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and against
the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order,
plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
(b)    The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation.
1 -21 -3: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS - BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS
A.    DEFINITIONS (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1)
As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
"Code" means any municipal ordinance, law, housing or building code or zoning
ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable
to structures in a municipality or any municipal ordinance that requires, after
notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of
inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property
-
“Building inspector” means a full-time state, county or municipal employee
whose duties include the inspection or examination of structures or property in
a municipality to determine if zoning or other code violations exist.
“ Property owner” means the legal or beneficial owner of a structure;
"Hearing officer" means a municipal employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality, other than a building inspector or law enforcement officer, whose
duty it is to:
(1)    preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not
a code violation exists;
(2)    hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, the
building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code
violation;
(3)    preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
(4)    issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a
code violation exists.
B.    CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1 -2)
The Aledo corporate authorities hereby establish a code hearing department
within the Aledo municipal government. The function of the hearing department
is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner
set forth in this Chapter.
The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a code, as defined
in 1-21-3-A of this Chapter.
C.    HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE. (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-3)
The adoption and usage of the Code Hearing Department and the administrative
hearings provided for in this Chapter does not preclude the municipality from
using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
D.    INSITUTING CODE HEARINGS (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-4)
When a building inspector finds a code violation while inspecting a structure,
he shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form
that indicates (i) the name and address of the structure owner, (ii) the type
and nature of the violation, (iii) the date and time the violation was
observed, (iv) the names of witnesses to the violation; and, (v) the address of
the structure where the violation is observed.
The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building inspector to the
code hearing department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of
the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for
that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more
than 40 days after the violation is reported by the building inspector.
One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the
code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of
the report form shall be returned to the building inspector so that he may
prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the
date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class
mail to the owner of the structure, along with a summons commanding the owner
to appear at the hearing. If the City of Aledo has an ordinance requiring
property owners to register with the municipality, service may be made on the
owner by mailing the report and summons to
the owner’s address registered with the municipality. If the name of the owner
of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service cannot be made by mail,
service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation
report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is found,
not less than 20 days before the hearing is scheduled.
E.    SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-5)
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the
case may, at the request of the building inspector or the attorney for the
municipality, or the owner or his attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses
to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for hearing the
defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find
the defendant in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence
relevant to the existence of a code violation.
F.    CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1)
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under
this Chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds
for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
Chapter shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the municipality may be
presented by the building inspector, by any other municipal employee or by an
attorney designated by the municipality. However, in no event shall the case
for the municipality be presented by an employee of the code hearing
department. The case for the property owner may be presented by the defendant,
his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative of the defendant.
G.    HEARING; EVIDENCE (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-7)
At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-existence of a code
violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this Chapter.
H.    EVICTION - RIGHTS OF THE OCCUPANTS (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-8)
No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or
other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant
of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a
code violation hearing.
I.    DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS (5/11-31.1-9)
It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under Section 1-21-3 if the
owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the hearing
officer’s satisfaction that:
(a)    The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at
the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
(b)    The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and
that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling free
of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the violations;
(c)    An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his agent to all or part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the
code violation.
6
J.    FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-10)
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings,
decision, and order shall include (i) the hearing officer's findings of fact;
(ii) a decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact; and (iii) an order, ordering the owner to correct the
violation or dismissing the case if a violation is not proved. A copy of the
findings, decision, and order shall be served on the defendant within 5 days
after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report form
and summons are served under this Chapter. Payment of any penalty or fine and
the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the
code, unless the corporate authorities adopting this Chapter provide otherwise.
K.    REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11)
The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of the county in which the municipality is located.
The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the
findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer under this Chapter.
L.    JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS; DECISION AND ORDER (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55)
(1)    Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, or portions thereof, remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the
Administrative Review Law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and,
as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
(2)    After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of
the county in which the municipality is located for purpose of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and
orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action,
the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in
accordance with this Chapter and the applicable municipal ordinance. Service of
the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by
Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions,
and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed $2,500.
If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in
accordance with the requirements of this Division and the applicable municipal
ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this
Division and for judicial review as provided in this Chapter:
(a)    The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and against
the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order,
plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other
7
(b)    The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation.
M.    SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER - PROPERTY (65 ELCS 5/11-31.1-12)
The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the City of
Aledo as the result of a finding of a code violation under this Section shall
attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a
finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or
transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner
of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing
officer under this Section.
N.    FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS - MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY - PENALTIES (65
ILCS 5/11-31.1-12.2)
1.    A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including without limitation, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct municipal health and
sanitary code violations.
2.    A person who intentionally violates this Section is guilty of a business
offense and shall be fined not less than $501.00 and not more than $1,000.00.
1-21-4 PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, penalties upon conviction of an offense brought
forward under the auspices of this Chapter shall be as follows. Each day that
the violation exists constitutes a separate violation for purposes of
prosecution and subsequent penalties,
A.    Each violation constituting a first offense by the defendant at the
property in question shall carry a fine of up to $750.00.
B.    Each subsequent violation by the defendant at the property in question
shall carry a fine of a minimum of $50.00 and a maximum of $750.00.
C.    Other sanctions may be applied as provided for by law.
D.    The Hearing Officer may, in addition to the imposition of a fine, order
the defendant to perform community service unless otherwise precluded by law.
SECTION 2.    SEVERABILITY.
In the event that any portion of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional
or unlawful, the specific portion of the ordinance shall be stricken and the
unaffected portion of the ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 3.    EFFECT
The ordinance shall take effect upon adoption by a majority of the Aledo City
Council and upon publication by the corporate authorities in pamphlet form.
SECTIONS. EFFECT
The ordinance shall take effect upon adoption by a majority of the Aledo City
Council and upon publication by the corporate authorities in pamphlet form.
ADOPTED  by the City Council for the CITY OF ALEDO, in MERCER COUNTY, ILLINOIS,
on the I YMt day of April, 2006 and approved by the Mayor on this |TWl Day of
April, 2006.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c3eb05a27cf5e864c8b3f79f7efde5ad5a8f9004/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1682_4646x1258.jpg]
Aledo, Illinois municipality, Mercer County, Illinois
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c3eb05a27cf5e864c8b3f79f7efde5ad5a8f9004/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1685_4406x1536.jpg]
First Reading:   Qpr’ I   , 2006
Second Reading:   ri /   I Y   , 2006
Passed:   Apri ( I *"?   . 2006
Approved:   )Qn r M I *7   2006
Published:   p h I ~F 2006
 
ayes:   ri ?   t
NAYS: Wl SCO cX £
ABSENT:   qy-,    
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1:      Title
1-1-2:   Acceptance
1-1-3:   Amendments
1-1-4:   Interpretations
1-1-5:   Reading Of Ordinances
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the governing body, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Aledo. Any
reference made to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate chapter
and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any
legal document. (1969 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect. (1969
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to Sterling
Codifiers, Inc., and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for
insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement
page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy
of the city code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage.
(1969 Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1969 Code)
1-1-5: READING OF ORDINANCES:
No ordinance shall be adopted by the city council at the same meeting at which
it is offered for consideration, but each ordinance shall pass to a second
reading and shall not be adopted at a meeting occurring less than five (5) days
after the meeting at which its consideration was moved or at which it was
offered; provided, however, that if a motion or resolution to suspend the
operation of this rule shall be adopted by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all of
the members elected, then the said ordinance may be adopted on proper motion in
the said meeting. (Ord. 7/75, 7-21-1975)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1:   Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2:   Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3:   Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (1969 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1969 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1969 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1:   Definitions, General
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the content makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: As used in this code shall mean a person acting on behalf of another.
   CITY: As used in this code shall mean the city of Aledo, county of Mercer,
state of Illinois.
   CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this city code.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Aledo".
   FEE: As used in this code shall mean a sum of money charged by the city for
the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
   KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the
act or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
   LICENSE: As used in this code shall mean the permission granted for the
carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
   NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent", as well as "neglect", "negligence", and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
   OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Aledo".
   OPERATOR: As used in this code shall mean the person who is in charge of any
operation, business or profession.
   OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or any other
form of association or organization.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   RETAILER: As used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
in small quantities direct to the consumer.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
square, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
   WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this
code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The words "written" or "in writing" may include
printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the
written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public
writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such
person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (1969 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY 1
(Rep. by Ord. 17/2016, 1-3-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12, chapter 1 of this code.
CHAPTER 5
COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election; Functions
1-5-2: Meetings
1-5-3: Presiding Officers
1-5-4: Quorum
1-5-5: Standing Committees
1-5-6: Special Committees
1-5-7: Membership In Committees
1-5-8: Records
1-5-9: Disturbing Meetings
1-5-10: Council Approval
1-5-11: Comments From The Public
1-5-1: ELECTION; FUNCTIONS:
The members of the council shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term.
The council shall be the legislative division of the city government and shall
perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute. (1969
Code)
1-5-2: MEETINGS:
Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of
each month. (1969 Code)
1-5-3: PRESIDING OFFICERS:
The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the council at all regular or
special meetings and when the council meets as a committee of the whole. (1969
Code)
1-5-4: QUORUM:
A majority of the elected members of the council shall constitute a quorum
thereof, but no ordinance or measure for the expenditure of money shall be
passed except upon the favorable vote of a majority of the elected members as
provided by statute. (1969 Code)
1-5-5: STANDING COMMITTEES:
The following shall be the standing committees of the council:
      Cemetery
      Electric lights
      Finance
      Gas
      Ordinance
      Police
      Public property
      Sewer
      Sidewalks
      Streets
      Water
   (1969 Code)
1-5-6: SPECIAL COMMITTEES:
The mayor shall appoint such special committees as he may deem necessary or as
may be directed by the council. (1969 Code)
1-5-7: MEMBERSHIP IN COMMITTEES:
The mayor shall appoint the members of all standing and special committees, in
the absence of specific direction by the council, and shall designate the
chairman thereof.
Every committee of the council shall consist of at least three (3) members
including the chairman, unless the council shall provide otherwise. (1969 Code)
1-5-8: RECORDS:
The clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the council proceedings. (1969
Code)
1-5-9: DISTURBING MEETINGS:
It shall be unlawful to disturb any meeting of the council or of any committee
thereof or to behave in a disorderly manner at any such meetings. (1969 Code)
1-5-10: COUNCIL APPROVAL:
   (A)   Ordinance Passage: No ordinance shall be adopted by the city council
at the same meeting at which it is offered for consideration, but each
ordinance shall pass to a second reading and shall not be adopted at a meeting
occurring less than five (5) days after the meeting at which its consideration
was moved or at which it was offered; provided, however, that if a motion or
resolution to suspend the operation of this rule shall be adopted by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of all of the members elected then the said ordinance may be
adopted on proper motion in the said meeting.
   (B)   Consent Agenda: The city council at any meeting may by unanimous
consent take a single vote by yeas and nays on the several questions of the
passage of any two (2) or more of the designated ordinances, orders,
resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes in a single group.
The single vote shall be entered separately in a journal under the designation
"omnibus vote," and in such event the clerk may enter the words "omnibus vote"
or "consent agenda" in the journal in each case in lieu of entering the names
of the members of the city council voting yea and of those voting nay on the
passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions and motions
included in such omnibus group or consent agenda.
The taking of such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the words
"omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" in the journal shall have like effect as if
the vote in each case has been taken separately by yeas and nays on the
question of the passage of each ordinance, order, resolution and motion
included in such omnibus group, and separately recorded in the journal.
In any event, however, a separate vote by yeas and nays shall be taken on any
ordinance, order, resolution or motion at the request of the mayor or of any
council member. (Ord. 7/75, 7-21-1975; amd. Ord. 10/2021, 5-3-2021)
1-5-11: COMMENTS FROM THE PUBLIC:
   (A)   Each person speaking at any time set aside during a regular or special
meeting of the City Council or any committee thereof for comments from the
audience shall state his or her name. Each speaker shall confine comments to
five (5) minutes or less, restrict remarks to matters relevant to the
governance of the City, avoid repetitious statements and refrain from vulgar or
otherwise inappropriate language or references. Complaints regarding the
performance of an employee of the City shall if directed by the officer
presiding at the meeting be addressed only in closed session. If the presiding
officer concludes that a speaker has unnecessarily exceeded the five (5) minute
limitation, is addressing areas not relevant to the governance of the City, has
been needlessly repetitious or has used vulgar or otherwise inappropriate
language, the speaker shall at the request of the presiding officer immediately
conclude his or her comments. The presiding officer may grant additional time
to a speaker upon the request of any member of the Council or the speaker.
   (B)   During public hearings, each speaker addressing the matter which is
the subject of the hearing shall state his or her name. Each speaker shall be
allowed a reasonable amount of time to state his or her position on the matter
which is the subject of the public hearing. Each speaker shall restrict his or
her remarks to the matter which is the subject of the public hearing, avoid
repetitious statements and refrain from vulgar or otherwise inappropriate
language or references. If the presiding officer concludes that a speaker has
spoken for a period of time in excess of what is reasonably required to address
the subject of the hearing, has been needlessly repetitious or has used vulgar
or otherwise inappropriate language, the speaker shall at the request of the
presiding officer immediately conclude his or her comments.
   (C)   Any person wishing to present public comments at any meeting shall
sign in on forms provided by the City and made available at the meeting. (Ord.
06/2020, 3-16-2020)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election
1-6-2: Duties
1-6-3: Appointment Of Officers
1-6-4: Designation Of Officers' Duties
1-6-5: Mayor Pro Tem
1-6-6: Acting Mayor
1-6-7: Formal Occasions
1-6-8: Emergency Powers Of The Mayor
1-6-1: ELECTION:
The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term and shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute. (1969 Code)
1-6-2: DUTIES: The mayor shall:
   (A)   Be the chief executive officer of the city.
   (B)   Preside over the meetings of the council.
   (C)   Perform such duties as may be required of him by statute or the
provisions of this code.
   (D)   Have supervision over all of the executive officers and employees of
the city.
   (E)   Have the power and authority to inspect all books and records
pertaining to city affairs and kept by any officer or employee of the city at
any reasonable time.
   (F)   Have general supervision of all other departments of the city.
   (G)   From time to time take such measures for the preservation of the
public peace and good order and for the prompt and efficient execution of the
laws of the state and the provisions of this code, as may be deemed most
expedient and best to accomplish the purpose contemplated. (1969 Code)
1-6-3: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the council, all
officers of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided
for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the
same manner. (1969 Code)
1-6-4: DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS' DUTIES:
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any
appointed officer of the city, this dispute shall be settled by the mayor after
consultation with the city attorney; and the mayor shall have the power to
delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no
specific officer has been directed to perform that duty. (1969 Code)
1-6-5: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the council shall elect
one of its number to act as mayor pro tem, who during such absence or
disability shall possess the powers of mayor, as is provided by statute. (1969
Code)
1-6-6: ACTING MAYOR:
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the council may appoint one
of the members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a
regular or special election as provided by law. (1969 Code)
1-6-7: FORMAL OCCASIONS:
The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city on formal occasions and
receptions; but in his absence or inability to attend any such function, the
mayor may select any other city officer to so act in his place. (1969 Code)
1-6-8: EMERGENCY POWERS OF THE MAYOR:
   (A)   Declaration Of A State Of Emergency: A state of emergency exists when
one or more of the following conditions are present or imminent:
      1.   The Governor of the State of Illinois, or the President of the
United States, has declared that a state of emergency exists, and the
conditions giving rise to that declared state of emergency directly affect the
territory, populace or property of the City; or
      2.   A natural disaster or act of war or act of rebellion or terrorism or
cyber-attack has overwhelmed, or imminently threatens to overwhelm, the ability
of emergency responders or public health officials to safely, adequately of
efficiently respond to the needs of the City or protect the safety of its
residents; or
      3.   An epidemic, pandemic, health emergency, or natural disaster makes
its unsafe or imprudent for non-essential City personnel to report to work, or
for a quorum of the City Council to meet; or
      4.   Other unforeseen circumstances, of like kind or severity, arise and
affect the safety or welfare of the residents, employees or officers of the
City.
   Should the Mayor determine that one or more of the above conditions exists
or is imminent, and should the Mayor further determine that it is in the best
interest of the City to declare a state of emergency, the Mayor shall sign,
under oath, a statement finding that such standards have been met, setting
forth facts to substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the
emergency, and declaring that a state of emergency exists. Such statement shall
be filed with the City Clerk as soon as practicable.
   (B)   Expiration Of A State Of Emergency: A declaration of a state of
emergency, made pursuant to paragraph (A) of this section, shall expire not
later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the City Council
after the state of emergency is declared. If the next scheduled regular session
of the City Council cannot be held, because conditions make it unsafe or
impractical to hold a meeting, or because a quorum of the City Council is not
present at the appointed time for its meeting, the state of emergency shall
continue until such time that a quorum of the City Council can convene,
provided further that the Mayor may, at any time, declare that the state of
emergency has ended.
   (C)   Emergency Powers Of The Mayor: Upon a declaration of a state of
emergency, until the expiration or revocation of the declaration (The
"Emergency Period"), the Mayor shall have and may exercise the following
emergency powers; provided, however, that the lapse of the emergency powers
shall not, as regards to any act or acts occurring or committed within the
Emergency Period or any extension thereof, deprive any person, firm,
corporation, political subdivision, or body politic of any right or rights to
compensation or reimbursement which they may have under the provisions of this
section.
      1.   To enter into contracts, incurring of obligations, the employment of
temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and
materials and the appropriate expenditures and disposition of public funds and
property as necessary.
      2.   To suspend the provisions of any regulatory ordinance prescribing
procedures for conduct of City business, or the orders and rules of any City
agency, if strict compliance with the provision would in any way prevent,
hinder or delay necessary action, including emergency purchases.
      3.   To utilize all available resources of the City government as
reasonably necessary.
      4.   To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of City
departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or
facilitating response and recovery programs.
      5.   To recommend the evacuation of all or part of the population from
any stricken or threatened area within the City if he deems this action
necessary.
      6.   To prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in
connection with evacuation.
      7.   To control ingress and egress to and from a disaster area, the
movement of persons within the area, and the occupancy of premises therein.
      8.   To make provision for the availability and use of temporary
emergency housing.
   (D)   Public Notification Of State Of Emergency: Upon the Mayor issuing the
declaration herein authorized, and as soon as may be safe or practical, the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall notify the news media situated
within the City and shall cause three copies of the declaration declaring the
existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the
City: City Hall, the Police Station, and the Post Office. However, the failure
of the Chief of Police to provide such notice shall not operate to limit or
invalidate the Mayor's emergency powers. (Ord. 07/2020, 3-18-2020)
CHAPTER 7
CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1:   Duties
1-7-2:   Fees For Clerk's Services
1-7-3:   Fees To Be Paid To Treasurer
1-7-1: DUTIES:
The duties of the clerk shall be as follows: (1969 Code)
   (A)   He shall keep his office at the city hall and his office hours shall
be from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., to three o'clock (3:00) P.M., Monday through
Friday of each respective week during each respective year, except legal
holidays when said office shall be closed. (Ord. 16/76, 2-7-1977)
   (B)   The clerk shall exercise a general supervision over all the officers
of the city charged in any manner with the receipt, collection, or disbursement
of corporation revenue, and the collection and return of all such revenues to
the treasurer. He shall have the charge, custody and control of all deeds,
leases, warrants, vouchers, books and papers of any kind, the custody and
control of which is not by this code given to any other officers; and he shall,
on or before May 15 in each year, and before the annual appropriations to be
made by the council, submit to the council a report of his estimates, as nearly
as may be, of monies necessary to defray the expenses of the corporation during
the current fiscal year. He shall, in said report, class the different objects
and branches of expenditures, giving, as nearly as may be, the amount required
for each; and for the purpose of making such report, he is authorized to
require of all officers their statement of the condition and expenses of their
respective offices, or departments, with any proposed improvements and probable
expense thereof, all contracts made and unfinished, and the amount of any and
all unexpended appropriations of the preceding year. He shall, in such report,
show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year, from all sources, the
amount of liabilities outstanding upon which interest is to be paid, the bonds
and debts payable during the year, when due and when payable; and in such
report he shall give such other information to the council as he may deem
necessary to the end that the council may fully understand the money exigencies
and demands upon the corporation for the current year.
The clerk shall attend all meetings of the council and shall keep a full and
correct record of all of its proceedings and shall perform all duties which may
be required of him by law, and all other duties which, by usage and custom,
devolve upon clerks of incorporated bodies. He shall also be authorized to
administer oaths.
   (C)   The clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the city, and all
licenses, permits and other documents which require this formality.
   (D)   The clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received by him, and
the source and disposition thereof; and such other accounts as may be required
by statute or the applicable provisions of this code.
The clerk, upon receipt by him of any money in payment for licenses or permits
of any kind or nature whatsoever, shall deposit the money in the treasury in
the proper account thereof.
   (E)   In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the
clerk is required by statute to keep, he shall keep a register of all licenses
and permits issued, and a record of the payment thereon; he shall keep a record
showing all of the officers and regular employees of the city, and such other
records as may be required by the council.
   (F)   The clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal and shall affix its
impression on documents whenever required.
   (G)   The clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and
records kept by him, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
   (H)   He shall keep all records, papers, ordinances, notes and proceedings
of the council, and of the city during the recess of the council, and of all
elections of city officers. He shall record and index in a book to be kept for
that purpose, all ordinances passed by the council, and at the foot of the
record of each ordinance so recorded shall make a memorandum of the date of the
passage, and of the publication of the ordinance, which record and memorandum,
or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the passage and
legal publication of such ordinances for all purposes whatsoever. He shall have
all ordinances published immediately after their passage, when required by law
so to do.
   (I)   He shall not suffer any records, papers or other writings belonging to
the City to be taken out of his office.
   (J)   The Clerk shall be Ex Officio Collector and shall collect all special
assessments and special taxes and perform all other duties of the Collector.
   (K)   In addition to the duties herein provided, the Clerk shall perform
such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or the provisions
of this Code. (1969 Code)
1-7-2: FEES FOR CLERK'S SERVICES:
The Clerk shall charge and receive fees for services pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 11/2017, 6-5-2017)
1-7-3: FEES TO BE PAID TO TREASURER:
The fees provided in section
1-7-2 of this chapter when collected, shall be paid by the Clerk to the
Treasurer 1 . (1969 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-10-7, 5/3-10-8.
CHAPTER 8
ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-8-1:   Creation Of Office
1-8-2:   Suits And Actions
1-8-3:   Judgments
1-8-4:   Drafting Ordinances And Contracts
1-8-5:   Other Counsel
1-8-6:   Assistant City Attorney
1-8-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the office of city attorney, an executive office of the
city. The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of
the council. (1969 Code)
1-8-2: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The city attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law
or equity to which the city may be a party, or in which it may be interested,
or which may be brought against, or by any officer of the city on behalf of the
city, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the city. (1969 Code)
1-8-3: JUDGMENTS:
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city, and shall render
advice on all legal questions affecting the city, whenever requested to do so
by any city official. Upon request by the mayor or council, he shall reduce
such opinion to writing. (1969 Code)
1-8-4: DRAFTING ORDINANCES AND CONTRACTS:
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology
of any contracts, leases or other documents or instruments, to which the city
may be a party; and to draft ordinances and resolutions covering any subjects
within the powers of the city. (1969 Code)
1-8-5: OTHER COUNSEL:
The council may retain or authorize the employment of other counsel to give
advice or render service to the city. (1969 Code)
1-8-6: ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY:
There is hereby created the office of assistant city attorney, an executive
office of the city. The assistant city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor
with the approval of the council.
The assistant city attorney shall do and perform all the aforesaid acts
required of the city attorney in the absence of said city attorney or upon his
direction.
The assistant city attorney shall receive such compensation as is authorized by
the council. (1969 Code)
CHAPTER 9
OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-9-1:   Appointment
1-9-2:   Bonds; Salaries
1-9-3:   Treasurer
1-9-4:   Retirement Fund; Participate In
1-9-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall on the first Monday in May, and annually on said day, or as
soon thereafter as may be convenient, subject to confirmation by the council,
appoint officers as follows: chief of police, general superintendent, street
commissioner and any other officers that may be deemed expedient who shall each
hold their respective positions until the first Monday in May next succeeding
their appointment and until their successors be appointed, unless their
services should be otherwise dispensed with, except that for good cause the
mayor with the approval of the council may remove any of said officers at any
time. (1969 Code)
1-9-2: BONDS; SALARIES:
The officers named in section
1-9-1 of this chapter shall each, before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, give bonds for the faithful performance of their duties as
such officers, with good and sufficient security, to be approved by the mayor
and council in such sums as the council may require; and shall receive such
compensation for their services rendered as the mayor and council shall from
time to time provide. (1969 Code)
   (A)   Elected Officials, Schedule Of Salaries: The schedule of salaries of
the mayor, city treasurer, and city clerk designated below is hereby
established for each respective fiscal year as indicated below:
Elected Office Fiscal Year Salary
Elected Office Fiscal Year                        Salary
                                                 
Mayor          May 1, 2025 through April 30, 2026 $5,000.00 annually
Mayor          May 1, 2026 through April 30, 2027 5,000.00 annually
Mayor          May 1, 2027 through April 30, 2028 5,000.00 annually
Mayor          May 1, 2028 through April 30, 2029 5,000.00 annually
City treasurer May 1, 2025 through April 30, 2026 3,000.00 annually
City treasurer May 1, 2026 through April 30, 2027 3,000.00 annually
City treasurer May 1, 2027 through April 30, 2028 3,000.00 annually
City treasurer May 1, 2028 through April 30, 2029 3,000.00 annually
City clerk     May 1, 2025 through April 30, 2026 3,000.00 annually
City clerk     May 1, 2026 through April 30, 2027 3,000.00 annually
City clerk     May 1, 2027 through April 30, 2028 3,000.00 annually
City clerk     May 1, 2028 through April 30, 2029 3,000.00 annually
 
The mayor, treasurer, alderman and city clerk shall receive the sum of seventy-
five dollars ($75.00) for each regularly scheduled meeting actually attended;
provided, however, that any alderman shall still be entitled to be paid for any
meeting not attended if his or her absence is excused by the mayor for good
cause shown.
The mayor, treasurer, city clerk and any alderman shall also receive a per diem
allowance of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per day for attending any special
committee meetings, special council meetings, or other city conferences, or
business authorized by the corporate authorities.
In addition, the city shall reimburse the latter designated officers and
aldermen for any necessary travel beyond city hall, or any necessary food and
lodging expenses incurred in attending any of the authorized city functions
specified herein. Travel mileage shall be reimbursed at the amount allowable
per mile by the internal revenue service at the beginning of each fiscal year.
The respective annual salaries of the mayor, city treasurer, city clerk and the
aldermen for any particular fiscal year shall be paid on a monthly basis.
   (B)   Appointed City Officers; Schedule Of Salaries: The schedule of
salaries for various appointed city officers and employees shall be as
designated below until amended by appropriate action of the corporate
authorities of the city as required by law at the time:
               Annual Salary
Salaried Office (Effective May 1, 2004)
                                      Annual Salary
Salaried Office                        (Effective May 1, 2004)
Administrator                          As set by Mayor with approval of City
                                       Council
Director of public works and utilities 47,500.00
Police chief                           52,531.00
Office manager                         31,068.00
Director of economic development       17,739.00
City attorney                          600.00
Zoning officer                         1,000.00
 
The annual salary of all regular, salaried employees listed above (not
including the city attorney and zoning officer) will be adjusted on May 1,
2005, according to the consumer price index as described in subsection (C) of
this section for hourly employees and the personnel code of the city of Aledo
without further action being required by the corporate authorities of the city
of Aledo.
   (C)   Discretionary Range/Rate Differential For Hourly Employees: The hourly
rate range (discretionary range) described herein shall be effective for all
city hourly paid employees, part time or full time as described, based on
gainful experience either within or outside city employment. The range shall be
established by the corporate authorities and the same may, from time to time,
adjust said range based primarily on the consumer price index as supplied by
the U.S. department of labor for urban and clerical workers - United States
average. The department head shall first ascertain the appropriate range for a
particular employee, either existing or new, based upon experience, and suggest
that hourly rate to the corporate authorities for final approval.
CITY OF ALEDO PAYROLL RANGE
Hourly Rate Of Pay
 
                      Public Works And  
Months Of Service     Utilities And    Police
(Discretionary Range) Administrative   Effective
                      Effective        May 1, 2004
                      May 1, 2004
0 - 12                $10.08           $11.34
13 - 24               10.75            13.44
25 - 36               11.42            13.86
37 - 48               12.10            14.28
49 - 60               12.76            14.70
61 plus               13.44            15.01
 
Part Time Employees:
 
Months Of Service
(Discretionary Range)
0 - 6                 Minimum wage plus $1.00
7 - 12                Minimum wage plus 1.25
13 - 18               Minimum wage plus 1.50
19 - 24               Minimum wage plus 2.00
25 - 30               Minimum wage plus 2.50
31 plus               Minimum wage plus 3.00
 
The payroll range list above as it relates to all full time hourly employees
will be adjusted on May 1, 2005, according to the consumer price index for
calendar year 2004, without any further action being required by the corporate
authorities of the city of Aledo.
Hourly rate differential pay: Based on the criteria described herein for each
department, employees of the city shall receive hourly differentials.
Differential rate will be added to the employee's base rate, as described, only
when working in that eligible capacity.
      1.   Part Time Employees: Part time employees shall not be eligible for
differential pay.
      2.   Hourly Rate Differential Rate Table:
CITY OF ALEDO
Hourly Differentials
The following differentials shall be added to each full time employee's hourly
rate after meeting the criteria:
Seniority level 1 (after 6 years)                      $0.20
Seniority level 2 (after 8 years)                      0.50
Seniority level 3 (after 10 years)                     0.75
Seniority level 4 (after 15 years)                     1.50
Seniority level 5 (after 20 years)                     1.75
Seniority level 6 (after 25 years)                     2.00
Public works department superintendent                 0.50
Water class A certification                            3.00
Water class B certification                            2.00
Water class C certification                            1.00
Water class D certification                            0.50
Sewer class 1 certification                            2.00
Sewer class 2 certification                            1.50
Sewer class 3 certification                            1.00
Sewer class 4 certification                            0.50
Certified welder                                       1.00
 
Licensed plumber/plumbing inspector                    1.50
Licensed plumber/inspector (6 months' experience)      2.80
Licensed plumber/inspector (1 year's experience)       4.10
Assistant police chief                                 1.00
Police lieutenant                                      0.25
Police sergeant - day shift                            1.00
Police sergeant - evening shift                        1.00
Police investigator                                    0.50
Police juvenile officer                                0.25
Police department night differential (4 P.M. - 8 A.M.) 0.50
Police training institute completion                   1.00
 
(Ord. 14/89, 1-15-1990; amd. Ord. 15/99, 3-20-2000, eff. 5-1-2000; Ord. 7/00,
6-19-2000; Ord. 8/00, 6-19-2000; Ord. 22/01, 4-15-2002, eff. 5-1-2002; Ord. 14/
2003, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; Ord. 14/2005, 11-7-2005; Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-
2014; Ord. 41/2019, 9-16-2019; Ord. 19/2022, 10-17-2022)
1-9-3: TREASURER:
The treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the city, and shall keep
his books and accounts at all times subject to the inspection of the mayor and
council, or any member thereof, and shall also keep a separate account of each
fund or appropriation and debits and credits belonging thereto; and he shall at
least once each month report to the council a full and detailed account of all
receipts and expenditures of the city as shown by his books up to the time of
such report, and accurately make out and file with the clerk of the city a full
and detailed account of all such receipts and expenditures, and of all his
transactions as such treasurer during the preceding fiscal year; and shall do
and perform such other duties as are required of him by law and the provisions
of this code. (1969 Code)
1-9-4: RETIREMENT FUND; PARTICIPATE IN:
Now therefore, be it ordained by the council as follows:
   (A)   The city does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois municipal
retirement fund, effective January 1, 1975.
   (B)   The clerk be directed to promptly file a certified copy of this
ordinance with the board of trustees of the Illinois municipal retirement fund.
(Ord. 4/74, 5-20-1974, eff. 1-1-1975)
CHAPTER 10
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-10-1:   Seal Established
1-10-1: SEAL ESTABLISHED:
The official seal of the city shall be as follows: A circle with the word ALEDO
featured in the center, in a slightly tilted upright angle, set above the word
ILLINOIS and below the image of a rhubarb leaf. The top portion of the circle
includes text that reads, "The City Of". The bottom portion of the circle
includes text that reads, "Established in 1855". (ord. 6-2021, 4-5-2021)
CHAPTER 11
RECORDS
SECTION:
1-11-1:   Clerk To Have Custody
1-11-2:   Receipt Required
1-11-3:   Destruction Prohibited
1-11-1: CLERK TO HAVE CUSTODY:
All record books and receipt books of officers, upon the expiration of their
term of office, tax lists, poll tax lists, license register, election rolls and
poll books, and all reports of standing or special committees of the council,
and every other official record, book or paper relating to or concerning the
administration of the city government, shall be deposited with, and remain in
the custody and control of the clerk. (7-28-1979)
1-11-2: RECEIPT REQUIRED:
No such record books, receipt books, tax list, license register, election roll,
poll book, report of committees or other book or paper as abovesaid, shall be
carried away from the office of the clerk, except upon permission of the clerk,
and a receipt given therefor, describing the book or paper so taken. (7-28-
1979)
1-11-3: DESTRUCTION PROHIBITED:
No person shall alter, erase, obliterate, deface or destroy any such record
book, register, list, report, roll, book or paper as aforesaid, unless upon
special authority given by the mayor and council of the city. (7-28-1979)
CHAPTER 12
WARDS
SECTION:
1-12-1:   Wards Designated
1-12-1: WARDS DESIGNATED:
The city shall be hereafter divided into and composed of four (4) wards, the
territory to be included in each of the same to be as follows:
   Ward 1: That part of the city lying north of the centerline of East Main
Street and east of the centerline of College Avenue.
   Ward 2: That part of the city lying south of the centerline of East Main
Street and east of the centerline of College Avenue to the point where College
Avenue intersects S.E. 12th Street, and also all parts of the city lying south
of said point and east of the centerline of the road or highway now designated
as Illinois State Route 94.
   Ward 3: That part of the city lying south of the centerline of West Main
Street and west of the centerline of South College Avenue to the point where
College Avenue intersects S.W. 12th Street, and also all parts of the city
lying south of said point and west of the centerline of the road or highway now
designated as Illinois State Route 94.
   Ward 4: That part of the city lying north of the centerline of West Main
Street and west of the centerline of North College Avenue. (Ord. 6/60, 1-16-
1961)
CHAPTER 13
FISCAL YEAR
SECTION:
1-13-1:   Fiscal Year Of City
1-13-2:   Official Time
1-13-1: FISCAL YEAR OF CITY:
The fiscal year of the City shall commence on January 1 and shall end on
December 31 of each year. (Ord. 32/2019, 4-1-2019)
1-13-2: OFFICIAL TIME:
The official time of the City shall be the same as established by the State by
statute, and all business, elections and activities of the City shall be
conducted upon such time, and where any provision of this Code specifically
states the hours for the operation of any business licensed by the City, such
hours shall be reckoned, governed and regulated by such time. (1969 Code)
CHAPTER 14
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES
SECTION:
1-14-1:   Appointment
1-14-2:   Qualifications
1-14-3:   Term Of Office
1-14-4:   Removal From Office
1-14-5:   Duties
1-14-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of director of public works and utilities,
an executive office of the city. The director of public works and utilities
shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city
council. (Ord. 03/2014, 2-3-2014)
1-14-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The director of public works and utilities shall be a resident of the state of
Illinois and must be capable of performing all duties as set forth herein. Due
to his or her requirement of technical training or knowledge, the director of
public works and utilities need not be a resident of the city. (Ord. 03/2014,
2-3-2014)
1-14-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the director of public works and utilities shall
terminate at the end of the term of the appointing mayor unless otherwise
established in an employment contract. (Ord. 03/2014, 2-3-2014)
1-14-4: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The city council, at its pleasure, may remove the director of public works and
utilities for misconduct or any other cause by two-thirds (2/3) vote of
council. The mayor may remove the director of public works and utilities and
must report the reason for removal within ten (10) days to council. The
council, by two- thirds (2/3) vote, may disapprove of the removal. (Ord. 03/
2014, 2-3-2014)
1-14-5: DUTIES:
   (A)   The director of public works and utilities shall perform such duties
in addition to those which may be prescribed by Illinois state statute and be
subject to any other rules and regulations as the corporate authorities may
provide by ordinance.
   (B)   The director of public works and utilities shall have the general
management and supervision of all matters pertaining to all utilities of the
city, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, streets and alleys,
and gas services;
   (C)   The director of public works and utilities shall have the general
management and supervision over all municipal and cemetery facilities;
   (D)   The director of public works and utilities shall have the general
management and supervision over municipal zoning, code enforcement and building
construction regulations;
   (E)   The director of public works and utilities shall review annexations,
plats, and other development proposals;
   (F)   The director of public works and utilities shall plan, prioritize,
delegate, assign, and evaluate the work of all public works personnel;
   (G)   The director of public works and utilities shall develop and approve
operating procedures based upon established policies, as well as, state and
federal regulations;
   (H)   The director of public works and utilities shall review key operations
and activities in the field at regular intervals to see that performance
standards and safety measures are met;
   (I)   The director of public works and utilities shall provide long range
planning to establish future equipment, technology, manpower and funding needs;
   (J)   The director of public works and utilities shall develop, recommend,
and administer the departmental budget in conjunction with the city
administrator;
   (K)   The director of public works and utilities shall participate in
drafting bid specifications and contracts for public works services;
   (L)   The director of public works and utilities shall have the ability to
meet tactfully and effectively with public officials, professionals, and the
general public and to present ideas clearly and concisely in oral and written
form;
   (M)   The director of public works and utilities shall perform other related
duties and tasks assigned by the mayor, city council, and city administrator.
(Ord. 03/2014, 2-3-2014)
CHAPTER 15
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
SECTION:
1-15-1:   Prevailing Wage Rate
1-15-1: PREVAILING WAGE RATE:
To the extent and as required by "an Act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by State, County, City
or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for
public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing rate
of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the City is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for
construction work in Mercer County area as determined by the Department of
Labor of the State as of June 1, 1989, a copy of that determination
incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any terms appearing in this
chapter which are also used in aforesaid Act shall be the same as in said Act.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing
rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public
works construction of the City to the extent required by the aforesaid Act.
The City Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of this City this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage.
The City Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and to
any association of employers and to any person or association of employees who
have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination
stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers whose wages
will be affected by such rates.
The City Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this chapter with the
Department of Labor of the State.
The City Clerk for the City shall, within thirty (30) days after this filing,
have published in a newspaper of general circulation within the area, a notice
that its determination is effective. (Ord. 33/2019, 4-1-2019)
CHAPTER 16
ELECTION OF CITY OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-16-1:   City Clerk
1-16-2:   City Treasurer
1-16-3:   Term Of Office
1-16-1: CITY CLERK:
The city clerk shall be elected for a four (4) year term and shall serve until
his successor is elected and qualified as is provided under Illinois law and
subject to the provisions of the city code for the city. (Ord. 16/80, 4-6-1981)
1-16-2: CITY TREASURER:
The city treasurer shall be elected for a four (4) year term and shall serve
until his successor is elected and qualified as is provided under Illinois law
and subject to the provisions of the city code for the city. (Ord. 16/80, 4-6-
1981)
1-16-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office for each city council member, mayor, city clerk, and city
treasurer shall begin on the date as hereinafter defined. Each member of the
city council, the mayor, city clerk and city treasurer duly elected to any of
the aforesaid offices pursuant to the provisions of Illinois law during April
of any particular election year shall begin his term for that respective office
in question at the start of the first regular or special meeting, whichever
shall first occur, held in the month following the date of the election. Each
of the foregoing elected city officials shall serve in his respective capacity
until his successor is elected and has qualified under Illinois law and subject
to the provisions of this code for the city. (Ord. 16/80, 4-6-1981)
CHAPTER 17
ALEDO TAX INCREMENT REDEVELOPMENT AREA
SECTION:
1-17-1:   Findings And Plan For Project
1-17-2:   Redevelopment Project Area Designated
1-17-3:   Tax Increment Financing
1-17-4:   State Sales Tax Increment Applications
1-17-5:   State Sales Tax Redevelopment Project Area
1-17-1: FINDINGS AND PLAN FOR PROJECT:
   (A)   The city council hereby makes the following findings:
      1.   The area constituting the proposed central area redevelopment
project area in the city is described as provided for in section
1-17-2 of this chapter.
      2.   There exist conditions which cause the area to be designated as
redevelopment project area to be classified as a blighted/conservation area as
defined in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-3(b).
      3.   The proposed central area redevelopment project area on the whole
has not been subject to growth and development through investment by private
enterprise and would not be reasonably anticipated to be developed without the
adoption of the central area redevelopment plan.
      4.   The central area redevelopment plan and central area redevelopment
project conform to the comprehensive plan for the development of the
municipality as a whole.
      5.   The parcels of real property in the proposed redevelopment project
area are contiguous and only those contiguous parcels of real property and
improvements thereon which will be substantially benefited by the proposed
redevelopment project improvement are included in the proposed central area
redevelopment project area.
      6.   The estimated date for final completion of the central area
redevelopment project is twenty three (23) years from the effective date of
this chapter.
      7.   The estimated date for retirement of obligations incurred to finance
the central area redevelopment project area costs shall be not later than
twenty three (23) years from the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   The central area redevelopment plan and redevelopment project which
were the subject matter of the hearing held December 4, 1986, are hereby
adopted and approved. A copy of the central area redevelopment plan and central
area redevelopment project marked exhibit A is attached to and made a part of
the ordinance codified herein and by this reference made a part hereof as if
set out in full. (Ord. 13/86, 12-22-1986)
1-17-2: REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA DESIGNATED:
The area described in exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein and
by this reference made a part hereof as if set out in full, is hereby
designated as the central area redevelopment project area pursuant to section
11-74.4-4 of the real property tax increment allocation redevelopment act, PA
79-1525 1 . (Ord. 14/86, 12-22-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq.
1-17-3: TAX INCREMENT FINANCING:
   (A)   Tax increment financing is hereby adopted in respect to the central
area redevelopment area plan and project approved and adopted pursuant to this
chapter in respect to the central area redevelopment project area described in
section
1-17-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   After the total equalized assessed valuation of the taxable real
property in the central area redevelopment project area exceeds the total
initial equalized assessed value of all taxable real property in the central
area redevelopment project area, the ad valorem taxes, if any, arising from the
levies upon real property in the central area redevelopment project area by
taxing districts and the rates determined in the manner provided in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-9(b) each year after the effective date of this
chapter until the central area redevelopment project costs and obligations
issued in respect thereto have been paid shall be divided as follows:
      1.   That portion of taxes levied upon each taxable lot, block, tract or
parcel of real property which is attributable to lower of the existing
equalized assessed value or the initial equalized assessed value of each such
taxable lot, block, tract or parcel of real property in the central area
redevelopment project area shall be allocated to and when collected shall be
paid by the county collector to the respective affected taxing districts in the
manner required by law in the absence of the adoption of tax increment
allocation financing.
      2.   That portion, if any, of such taxes which is attributable to the
increase in the current equalized assessed valuation of each lot, block, tract
or parcel of real property in the redevelopment project area over and above
lower of the existing equalized assessed value or the initial equalized
assessed value of each property in the central area redevelopment project area
shall be allocated to and when collected shall be paid to the municipal
treasurer (city comptroller) who shall deposit said funds in a special fund
called "the special tax allocation fund for the central area redevelopment
project area" of the municipality for the purpose of paying the central area
redevelopment project costs and obligations incurred in the payment thereof,
pursuant to such appropriations which may be subsequently made. (Ord. 15/86,
12-22-1986)
1-17-4: STATE SALES TAX INCREMENT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   The city council makes the following findings:
      1.   The city council adopted tax increment financing pursuant to the
provisions of the act referred to in section
1-17-1 of this chapter in respect to the redevelopment project area described
in section
1-17-2 of this chapter, and all conditions and provisions of the act and
amendment have been complied with since the adoption of tax increment financing
to the date of this chapter.
      2.   The redevelopment project area would not reasonably be developed
without the use of the incremental revenues arising under the municipal
retailers' occupation tax act, the municipal service occupation tax act, the
retailers' occupation tax act, the use tax act, the service use tax act, and
the service occupation tax act.
      3.   The increment arising under the act and amendment described in
subsection (A)1 of this section will be exclusively utilized for the
development of the redevelopment project area.
      4.   The city has imposed the maximum tax allowed by law under the
municipal retailers' occupation tax act, the municipal use tax act, and the
municipal service tax act.
   (B)   The city hereby elects to utilize those incremental revenues arising
under the act and amendment described in subsection (A)2 of this section, for
the purpose of implementing the redevelopment plan and project for the
development of the redevelopment project.
   (C)   Pursuant to section 11-74.4-a(i) of the act, the department of revenue
of the state of Illinois is hereby authorized to annually certify and cause to
be paid to the city an amount equal to the increase in the aggregate amount of
taxes paid by retailers and servicemen on transactions at places of business
located within the redevelopment project area, pursuant to the retailers'
occupation tax act, the use tax act, the service use tax act, and the service
occupation tax act, for as long as the redevelopment project area exists, over
and above the aggregate amount of such taxes as certified by the Illinois
department of revenue and paid under those acts by retailers and servicemen on
transactions at places of business located in the redevelopment project area
during the base year, which shall be the calendar year immediately prior to the
year in which the municipality adopted tax increment allocation financing, less
one and six-tenths percent (1.6%) of such amounts, which sum shall be retained
by the state treasurer to cover the costs incurred by the department of revenue
in administering and enforcing the amendment.
   (D)   The city shall deposit in its special tax allocation fund all
incremental revenues from the municipal retailers' occupation tax act, the
municipal service occupation tax act, and local real property taxes, received
with respect to property within the redevelopment project area. (Ord. 16/86,
12-22-1986)
1-17-5: STATE SALES TAX REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA:
   (A)   The city council hereby makes the following findings:
      1.   The city council specifically finds that the city has imposed the
maximum tax allowed by law under the municipal retailers' occupation tax act,
the municipal use tax act and the municipal service occupation tax act.
      2.   The area constituting the proposed state sales tax boundary in the
city is described in exhibit "A" attached to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof as if set forth
verbatim in this section.
      3.   There exist conditions that cause the Aledo tax increment
redevelopment project area on the whole, and the area proposed to be designated
as the state sales tax boundary in particular, to be classified as a blighted/
conservation area as those terms are defined in section 11-74.4-3 of the act,
as amended.
      4.   The Aledo tax increment redevelopment project area on the whole, and
the state sales tax boundary in particular, has not been subject to growth and
development through investment by private enterprise and would not reasonably
be anticipated to be developed without the adoption of the tax increment
redevelopment plan and projects and without the use of tax incremental revenues
as recited in the preamble to the ordinance codified herein.
      5.   The tax increment redevelopment plan and projects for the city
conform to the comprehensive plan for the development of the city as a whole.
      6.   The city is a labor surplus municipality and implementation of the
redevelopment plan and projects will reduce unemployment, create new jobs, and
by provision of new facilities, enhance the tax base of the taxing districts
that extend into the redevelopment project area and proposed state sales tax
boundary.
      7.   The Aledo tax increment redevelopment project area as a whole, and
the state sales tax boundary in particular, would not reasonably be developed
without the use of incremental revenues derived from ad valorem taxes under
section 11-74.4-8 of the act and without the use of incremental revenues
derived from the retailers' occupation tax act, use tax act and service use tax
act and the service occupation tax act under section 11-74.4-8a(1) of the act,
the aggregate amount of such taxes to be certified by and received from the
Illinois department of revenue and paid under those acts by retailers and
servicemen on transactions in places of business located in the state sales tax
boundary.
      8.   The city council specifically finds that any incremental revenues
derived from ad valorem taxes under section 11-74.4-8 of the act and
incremental revenues derived from the municipal sales tax increment as defined
under section 11-74.8-3(h) of the act paid by retailers and servicemen on
transactions at places of business located within the state sales tax boundary
as certified by and received from the Illinois department of revenue under
section 11-74.4-8a(1) of the act shall be deposited into a "special tax
allocation fund of the city of Aledo" and used exclusively for the development
of the redevelopment project area as provided in the act as now in force or as
may hereinafter be amended. In addition, if the city so elects (such election
to be made annually), the city shall deposit in such fund any other municipal
sales tax increment resulting from taxes paid by retailers and servicemen on
transactions at places of businesses located within the redevelopment project
area but not within the state sales tax boundary as provided in section 11-
74.4-8a(1) as now in force or as may hereinafter be amended.
      9.   The city council specifically finds that any revenues derived from
the state sales tax increment as defined under section 11-74.4-8a(1) of the act
as certified by and received from the Illinois department of revenue under
section 11-74.4-3(s) of the act shall be deposited into a "special tax
allocation fund of the city of Aledo" and used exclusively for the development
of the state sales tax boundary as provided in the act as now in force or as
may hereinafter be amended.
      10.   The Aledo tax increment redevelopment project area on the whole,
and the proposed state sales tax boundary in particular, includes only those
contiguous parcels of real property and improvements thereon substantially
benefited by the proposed redevelopment plan and projects.
   (B)   The Aledo tax increment redevelopment project area is amended for the
purpose of establishing as the state sales tax boundary pursuant to section 11-
74.4-3(r), section 11-74.4-4 and section 11-74.4-8a(1) of the tax increment
allocation redevelopment act 1 , as amended, the area described in exhibit A
attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by reference
and made a part hereof as if set forth verbatim in this section.
   (C)   The Aledo tax increment redevelopment project area, except as amended
herein solely for the purpose of establishing the state sales tax boundary,
shall remain in full force and effect as to all the area originally described
and designated pursuant to special ordinance 14-86. (Ord. 11/89, 10-2-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq.
CHAPTER 18
ETHICS ACT
SECTION:
1-18-1:   State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-18-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   (A)   The regulations of sections 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in this section) are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the City to
the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the City, is hereby
prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the City under the Act is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the City, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of City officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
Corporate Authorities of the City.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the City if the Act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of
the City. (Ord. 5/2004, 5-17-2004; amd. Ord. 34/2019, 4-1-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 - 10-40.
CHAPTER 19
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-19-1:   Creation Of Position
1-19-2:   Appointment
1-19-3:   Tenure Of Position
1-19-4:   Bond And Oath
1-19-5:   Compensation
1-19-6:   Authority
1-19-7:   Powers And Duties With Regard To Fiscal Matters
1-19-8:   Powers And Duties With Reference To City Administration
1-19-9:   Assistant City Administrator
1-19-1: CREATION OF POSITION:
There is hereby created the position of city administrator ("administrator"),
an administrative position in the municipal government of the city. (Ord. 14/
99, 3-6-2000)
1-19-2: APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   The administrator shall be appointed by the mayor, but only with the
advice and majority approval of the aldermen then holding office. The aldermen
then holding office shall evaluate the candidate upon the basis of executive
and administrative qualifications with reference to actual experience in or
knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the position as
hereinafter set forth, and such requirements and qualifications are hereby
declared to be of a nature as to require specialized training and knowledge.
The appointment shall be made without regard to political considerations, race,
religion, age, or sex. At the time of appointment, the individual need not be a
resident of the city or of the state, but the administrator shall assume
residence within the city within one hundred twenty (120) days after his or her
appointment and shall thereafter reside within the city so long as the
administrator shall continue to serve the city in that capacity.
   (B)   Appointment shall include city council approval of a written contract
of appointment, including a stated term of employment and a specified amount of
compensation, together with a delineation of duties and responsibilities.
   (C)   During the absence or disability of the administrator, the mayor, with
the advice of the city council, may designate some properly qualified person to
act as a temporary administrator to perform the duties of the position. (Ord.
14/99, 3-6-2000)
1-19-3: TENURE OF POSITION:
The term of the position of administrator shall not be shorter than one year
nor longer than the remainder of the term of office of the mayor who made the
appointment and shall be established by the contract of appointment. The
administrator may resign from the position upon ninety (90) days' written
notice (said 90 days to begin the date the notice is filed with the city clerk)
or may be removed therefrom by the mayor by and with the consent of a two-
thirds (2/3) majority of the aldermen then holding office and in accordance
with the provisions of any contract of appointment. All appointments shall be
based solely upon merit and fitness for the position, without regard to race,
sex, religious convictions, or political belief or affiliation. Upon the
administrator's giving said ninety (90) days' written notice, the city council
may terminate the position of administrator or may terminate the employment of
the then administrator without cause (so long as all applicable provisions of
any contract of employment [contract of appointment] are complied with). (Ord.
14/99, 3-6-2000)
1-19-4: BOND AND OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of the position, the administrator shall
furnish a surety bond, to be conditioned on the faithful performance of the
duties of the position, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to
be approved by the city council. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the
city. (Ord. 14/99, 3-6-2000)
1-19-5: COMPENSATION:
The administrator shall receive compensation in such amount and manner, as the
city council shall periodically fix by ordinance or resolution and in
accordance with any contract of employment (contract of appointment) with the
administrator. The city administrator shall be subject to the vacation schedule
as authorized by the mayor and city council, but not less than the provisions
in existence in any contract of employment with the administrator. Further, the
city administrator shall be subject to the same sickness and disability
provisions as other city employees, other than to the extent the same are
modified by a contract of employment with the administrator. (Ord. 14/99, 3-6-
2000)
1-19-6: AUTHORITY:
The corporate authorities then holding office may override any decision of the
administrator. (Ord. 14/99, 3-6-2000)
1-19-7: POWERS AND DUTIES WITH REGARD TO FISCAL MATTERS:
   (A)   The administrator shall prepare an annual budget and an annual long
range capital improvement program for the city in connection with the finance
committee for presentation to the city council. He or she shall prepare and
submit to the mayor and city council, at monthly intervals, reports which will
advise the city council of the financial condition and future needs of the
city, and in so doing the administrator shall assemble and make available such
other information concerning the fiscal matters of the city as the mayor or
city council shall periodically request.
   (B)   On or before March 15 in each calendar year and before the annual
appropriation ordinance is prepared by the corporate authorities, the
administrator shall submit to the corporate authorities an estimate of the
money necessary to defray the city's expenses during the current fiscal year;
this estimate shall classify in detail the purposes of the expenditures and
shall further provide necessary information as to the income of the city from
all sources during the preceding fiscal year and any liabilities, contingent or
noncontingent, together with such other information as may be required to
assist the mayor and city council in the preparation and adoption of the annual
ordinance. For the purpose of preparing the above estimate, the administrator
shall work with the committees of the city council and the other appointive and
elected officers of the city to obtain statements of the conditions and
expenses of the respective offices and departments, together with a description
of necessary city repairs and improvements, and the probable expense thereof.
The administrator, at the request of the city council, shall also be
responsible for the preparation of the annual appropriation ordinance and/or
the annual tax levy ordinance.
   (C)   The administrator shall supervise the issuance and sale of all bonds
and obligations, after approval of any bond issue by the city council.
   (D)   The administrator shall act as purchasing agent for the city within
the limitations and under conditions as periodically established by the city
council and shall make, in the ordinary course of business, all purchases of
materials and supplies necessary for the city as provided in the annual
appropriation ordinance; provided, however, that for purchases of more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the administrator shall first procure the city
council's approval before making such purchases, and in all cases the
administrator shall comply with all applicable statutory and municipal
ordinance provisions regulating the solicitation and award of bids. (Ord. 14/
99, 3-6-2000; amd. Ord. 16/2022, 7-18-2022)
1-19-8: POWERS AND DUTIES WITH REFERENCE TO CITY ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   The administrator shall have the responsibility of carrying out the
city council's policies and to assist in the enforcement of the laws and
ordinances of the city. The administrator shall keep the mayor and city council
apprised of all personnel matters. The administrator shall assign and carry out
all other duties specifically delegated and assigned to this position by the
city council through ordinance or resolution. It is not the intention of this
chapter that the administrator's duties and responsibilities be in any way in
derogation of the common law, Illinois statutes, or the contractual duties and
responsibilities of the city under any existing contract.
   (B)   If requested by the mayor or city council, the administrator shall
recommend the appointment of such officers as may be required by statute or
ordinance to be appointed by the mayor or with the advice and consent of the
city council; likewise, if requested by the mayor and city council the
employment of department heads or other employees. If requested, the
administrator shall make recommendations for or against (as may be in the
city's best interest) the removal or suspension of any appointed officer or
employee when such removal or suspension is appropriate to be considered.
   (C)   The administrator shall attend all meetings of the city council, both
regular and special, together with any other work sessions of the city council,
and when requested shall attend any meeting of any committee or commission of
the city council or of the city, unless excused therefrom by the mayor and city
council, or committee, except when removal of the administrator is under
consideration by the city council. The administrator shall prepare the agenda
for the city council meetings and committee meetings, whether regular or
special, and any other regular or special reports as are necessary for the
efficient operation of the city government. Agendas shall be prepared and
distributed to all interested parties in advance of said meetings, according to
the open meetings act. The administrator shall conduct and prepare necessary
studies and/or research to assist the city council in making policy decisions.
The administrator shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of
all matters coming before the city council or any committee or commission
thereof, in any open meeting or open session of any meeting, and shall be given
notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the full city council, or of
any committee or commission thereof. The administrator shall have no vote in
any city council meeting or committee meeting, but shall make recommendations
to the mayor, city council, or any committee or commission thereof, or to any
elected or appointed officer, as the administrator deems in the city's best
interest.
   (D)   The administrator shall conduct investigations into the affairs of the
city or any department thereof as may be required by complaints made regarding
city services and city administration.
   (E)   The administrator shall enforce or oversee enforcement of the city's
ordinances and promulgate administrative rules and regulations as long as they
are not in conflict with other local or state law.
   (F)   The administrator shall periodically recommend to the city council the
adoption of such measures as the administrator may deem necessary or expedient
for the health, welfare, and safety of the citizenry or the future improvement
of administrative services.
   (G)   The administrator shall have no employment other than the fulfillment
of the obligations of the position of administrator. The administrator shall
not be prohibited from occasional teaching, writing, consulting, speaking, or
self-employed activities not in conflict with the city's interests.
   (H)   The administrator shall coordinate any public relations effort with
the news media as may be reasonably required by the mayor and city council to
foster a favorable relationship with the community and promote a favorable
economic development climate.
   (I)   The administrator shall assume and carry out all other duties as
specifically delegated or assigned to him or her by contract adopted by the
city council. (Ord. 14/99, 3-6-2000)
1-19-9: ASSISTANT CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
   (A)   Creation of Position. There is hereby created the position of
Assistant City Administrator, an administrative position in the municipal
government of the City.
   (B)   Appointment and Dismissal. The assistant city administrator shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council for a
term no longer than the remainder of the term of the mayor who made the
appointment, and may be removed therefrom by the Mayor by and with the consent
of the City Council.
   (C)   Powers and Duties. The Assistant City Administrator shall be
responsible to the City Administrator and Mayor as the chief assistant for the
administration of the City. In discharging his responsibility, the Assistant
City Administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   Assist the City Administrator with special projects and daily
operations as may be specified by the City Administrator or the City Council.
      2.   In the event of a vacancy, absence from office, or disability of the
City Administrator, the Assistant City Administrator shall have all the powers
and duties assigned to the City Administrator. (Ord. 21/2023, 11-6-2023)
CHAPTER 20
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
1-20-1:   Declaration Of Policy
1-20-2:   Definitions
1-20-3:   Prohibited Acts
1-20-4:   Penalty
1-20-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its constitution
and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare, peace and health
of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is hereby declared the
policy of the city to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or physical
disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful, standard living quarters.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city that no owner, lessee, sublessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having the right
to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or
real property within the city, or any agent of these shall refuse to sell,
rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such
person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability in
the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or
services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community's total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities. (Ord. 2/00, 5-
1-2000)
1-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following
terms shall have the meanings as described in this section and as used in this
chapter:
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS: Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weathertight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: Any difference expressed in any manner
toward a person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person, institution or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a
secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or
any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
   OWNER: Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any
beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the city of Aledo, Illinois.
(Ord. 2/00, 5-1-2000)
1-20-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee, real
estate broker or salesman, financial institution or employee of the financial
institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to
the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real estate
broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial institution
dealing with housing or real property in the city:
   (A)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in
the city or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith.
   (B)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any
notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any form
of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property,
or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase,
rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or indirectly any
discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex,
creed or disability of any person.
   (C)   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing loans,
accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the
purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
any housing accommodation and/or real property.
   (D)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
   (E)   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood.
   (F)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the
anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/or
real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or
listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
   (G)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with such owner's housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
   (H)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant. (Ord. 2/00, 5-1-2000)
1-20-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code.
This section shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city to
specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 17/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 21
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
1-21-1:   Adoption
1-21-2:   Purpose And Definitions
1-21-3:   Identification Of Red Flags
1-21-4:   Detecting Red Flags
1-21-5:   Preventing And Mitigating Identity Theft
1-21-6:   Protecting Customer Identifying Information
1-21-7:   Updates
1-21-8:   Administration
1-21-1: ADOPTION:
The city of Aledo, Illinois ("city") developed this identity theft prevention
program ("program") pursuant to the federal trade commission's red flags rule
("rule"), which implements section 114 of the fair and accurate credit
transactions act of 2003 (16 CFR section 681.2). This program was developed
with oversight and approval of the city council. After consideration of the
size and complexity of the city's operations and account systems, and the
nature and scope of the city's activities, the city council determined that
this program was appropriate for the city of Aledo, Illinois, and therefore
approved this program on April 20, 2009. (Ord. 04-20-09-2, 4-20-2009)
1-21-2: PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Requirements Of The Red Flags Rule: Under the red flag rule, every
financial institution and creditor is required to establish an "identity theft
prevention program" tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its
operation. Each program must contain reasonable policies and procedures to:
      1.   Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts
and incorporate those red flags into the program;
      2.   Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program;
      3.   Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent
and mitigate identity theft; and
      4.   Ensure the program is updated periodically to reflect changes in
risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of creditors from identity
theft.
   (B)   Red Flags Rule Definitions: The red flags rule defines "identity
theft" as "fraud committed using the identifying information of another person"
and a "red flag" as a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates
the possible existence of identity theft.
   According to the rule, a municipal utility is a creditor subject to the rule
requirements. The rule defines creditors "to include finance companies,
automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility companies, and telecommunications
companies. Where nonprofit and government entities defer payment for goods or
services, they, too, are to be considered creditors".
   All the city's accounts that are individual utility service accounts held by
customers of the utility whether residential, commercial or industrial are
covered by the rule. Under the rule, a "covered account" is:
      1.   Any account the city offers or maintains primarily for personal,
family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions;
and
      2.   Any other account the city offers or maintains for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the
city from identity theft.
"Identifying information" is defined under the rule as "any name or number that
may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a
specific person", including: name, address, telephone number, social security
number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification
number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or
taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number,
computer's internet protocol address, or routing code. (Ord. 04-20-09-2, 4-20-
2009)
1-21-3: IDENTIFICATION OF RED FLAGS:
The city has considered the guidelines and the illustrative examples of
possible red flags from the FTC's identity theft rules and has reviewed the
municipality's past history with instances of identity theft, if any. The city
hereby determines that the following are the relevant red flags for purposes of
this program given the relative size of the city and the limited nature and
scope of the services that the city provides to its citizens:
   (A)   Notifications And Warnings From Credit Reporting Agencies:
      1.   Report of fraud accompanying a credit report;
      2.   Notice or report from a credit agency of a credit freeze on a
customer or applicant;
      3.   Notice or report from a credit agency of an active duty alert for an
applicant; and
      4.   Indication from a credit report of activity that is inconsistent
with a customer's usual pattern or activity.
   (B)   Suspicious Documents:
      1.   Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered
or inauthentic;
      2.   Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or
physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document;
      3.   Other document with information that is not consistent with existing
customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears
forged); and
      4.   Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged.
   (C)   Suspicious Personal Identifying Information:
      1.   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other
information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates);
      2.   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other
sources of information (for instance, an address not matching an address on a
credit report);
      3.   Identifying information presented that is the same as information
shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent;
      4.   Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent
activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address);
      5.   Social security number presented that is the same as one given by
another customer;
      6.   An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of
another person;
      7.   A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information
on an application when reminded to do so (however, by law social security
numbers must not be required); and
      8.   A person's identifying information is not consistent with the
information that is on file for the customer.
   (D)   Suspicious Account Activity Or Unusual Use Of Account:
      1.   Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the
account holder's name;
      2.   Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up to date account;
      3.   Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use
(example: very high activity);
      4.   Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as
undeliverable;
      5.   Notice to the city that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the
city;
      6.   Notice to the city that an account has unauthorized activity;
      7.   Breach in the city's computer system security; and
      8.   Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
   (E)   Alerts From Others:
      1.   Notice to the city from a customer, identity theft victim, law
enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent
account for a person engaged in identity theft. (Ord. 04-20-09-2, 4-20-2009)
1-21-4: DETECTING RED FLAGS:
   (A)   New Accounts: In order to detect any of the red flags identified above
associated with the opening of a new account, city personnel will take the
following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the
account:
      1.   Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth,
residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity,
driver's license or other identification;
      2.   Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's
license or other identification card);
      3.   Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity; and
      4.   Independently contact the customer.
   (B)   Existing Accounts: In order to detect any of the red flags identified
above for an existing account, city personnel will take the following steps to
monitor transactions with an account:
      1.   Verify the identification of customers if they request information
(in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via e-mail);
      2.   Verify the validity of requests to change billing addresses; and
      3.   Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment
purposes. (Ord. 04-20-09-2, 4-20-2009)
1-21-5: PREVENTING AND MITIGATING IDENTITY THEFT:
In the event city personnel detect any identified red flags, such personnel
shall take one or more of the following steps, depending on the degree of risk
posed by the red flag:
   (A)   Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
   (B)   Contact the customer;
   (C)   Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to
accounts;
   (D)   Not open a new account;
   (E)   Close an existing account;
   (F)   Reopen an account with a new number;
   (G)   Notify the city finance director for determination of the appropriate
step(s) to take;
   (H)   Notify law enforcement; or
   (I)   Determine that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances. (Ord. 04-20-09-2, 4-20-2009)
1-21-6: PROTECTING CUSTOMER IDENTIFYING INFORMATION:
In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with
respect to city accounts, the city will take the following steps with respect
to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying
information:
   (A)   Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the
website is not secure;
   (B)   Ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer
files containing customer information;
   (C)   Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer
screens lock after a set period of time;
   (D)   Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
   (E)   Request only the last four (4) digits of social security numbers (if
any);
   (F)   Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and
   (G)   Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are
necessary for utility purposes. (Ord. 04-20-09-2, 4-20-2009)
1-21-7: UPDATES:
This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in
risks to customers and the soundness of the city from identity theft. At least
every year, the city finance director will consider the city's experiences with
identity theft situations, changes in identity theft methods, changes in
identity theft detection and prevention methods, changes in types of accounts
the city maintains and changes in the city's business arrangements with other
entities. After considering these factors, the city finance director will
determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags,
are warranted. If warranted, the city finance director will present the city
council with his or her recommended changes and the city council will make a
determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the
program. (Ord. 04-20-09-2, 4-20-2009)
1-21-8: ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   Oversight: The city finance director will be responsible for the
program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of city staff on the
program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags
and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which
steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances
and considering periodic changes to the program.
   (B)   Staff Training And Reports: City staff responsible for implementing
the program shall be trained either by or under the direction of the city
finance director in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be
taken when a red flag is detected.
   (C)   Service Provider Arrangements: In the event the city engages a service
provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more accounts, the
city will take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its
activity in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to
detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft:
      1.   Require, by contract, that service providers have such policies and
procedures in place; and
      2.   Require, by contract, that service providers review the city's
program and report any red flags to the city finance director.
   (D)   Specific Program Elements And Confidentiality: For the effectiveness
of identity theft prevention programs, the red flag rule envisions a degree of
confidentiality regarding the city's specific practices relating to identity
theft detection, prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this program,
knowledge of such specific practices are to be limited to the city finance
director and those employees who need to know them for purposes of preventing
identity theft. Because this program is to be adopted by a public body and thus
publicly available, it would be counterproductive to list these specific
practices here. Therefore, only the program's general red flag detection,
implementation and prevention practices are listed in this document.
   (E)   Other Legal Requirements: Awareness of the following related legal
requirements should be maintained:
      1.   31 USC 5318(g): Reporting of suspicious activities.
      2.   15 USC 1681c-1(h): Identity theft prevention; fraud alerts and
active duty alerts; limitations on use of information for credit extensions.
      3.   15 USC 1681s-2: Responsibilities of furnishers of information to
consumer reporting agencies.
      4.   15 USC 1681m: Requirements on use of consumer reports. (Ord. 04-20-
09-2, 4-20-2009)
CHAPTER 22
PAYMENT/REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES
SECTION:
1-22-1:   Definitions
1-22-2:   Authorization
1-22-3:   Reimbursable, Not Reimbursable Expenses
1-22-4:   Travel, Meal, And Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form
1-22-5:   Maximum Allowable Reimbursement
1-22-6:   Requests Exceeding Maximum Allowable Reimbursement
1-22-7:   Entertainment Expenses
1-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
   ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters,
circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
   PUBLIC BUSINESS: Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the City to carry out the
responsibilities of City business.
   TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the City or by wards or charges of the City involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services. (Ord. 21/2017, 5-15-2017)
1-22-2: AUTHORIZATION:
The City shall reimburse its employees and officers, pursuant to this chapter,
for travel, meal and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers
while conducting public business. Whenever travel for public business is
reasonably foreseeable, travel expense requests shall be submitted to the City
Administrator prior to the date of travel in order to determine whether such
travel will result in a professional or City benefit, and whether such travel
is financially feasible. Whenever travel for public business is not reasonably
foreseeable, travel expense requests shall be submitted to the City
Administrator within seven (7) working days of the completion of such travel.
(Ord. 21/2017, 5-15-2017)
1-22-3: REIMBURSABLE, NOT REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES:
   (A)   Reimbursable Expenses: The City shall reimburse its employees and
officers for the following travel expenses:
      1.   Transportation: City owned vehicles shall be used whenever possible
and is the preferred form of transportation. Use of a privately owned vehicle
shall be reimbursed at the IRS approved mileage rate in effect on the date of
travel, and based upon the trip originating and ending at City Hall, plus tolls
and parking. Prior to the date of travel by use of a privately owned vehicle,
the employee or officer must provide proof of a valid driver's license issued
by the State of Illinois and automobile insurance coverage in an amount not
less than that required by the Illinois Vehicle Code.
The actual cost for transportation by air or rail shall be reimbursable by the
City, including parking fees, provided that such transportation is obtained in
the most economical manner and at the most economical rate available at the
time the transportation reservations are made. Whenever possible, employees and
officers shall book reservations at least thirty (30) days in advance of the
date of travel.
The City shall reimburse its employees and officers for the actual cost of
transportation, plus tips, within the destination location, including but not
limited to taxi fare, bus fare, and transportation network company fare (i.e.,
Uber and Lyft).
      2.   Lodging: The cost of overnight lodging shall only be reimbursed if
it is ninety (90) miles or more from the employee or officer's home. A City
employee or officer shall only be reimbursed for a single occupancy room rate,
plus tips, unless a double occupancy room is of equal or lesser value, or more
than one employee or officer is authorized for such lodging.
      3.   Meals: The cost of such meals shall be reimbursed at the IRS
approved per diem rate(s) in effect on the date of travel, plus tips.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall reimburse its employees and
officers for the cost of meal/banquet tickets for conferences, seminars,
training events, or other similar events if such costs are separate from the
event's registration fees and are directly related to such event.
      4.   Registration Fees: Registration fees, dues, and other similar
expenses for conferences, seminars, meetings, and other similar events may be
prepaid by the City upon approval by the City Administrator. If such fees are
not prepaid, the City shall reimburse its employee or officer for the cost of
such registration fees. All such expenses, either prepaid or reimbursable,
shall be approved by submitting a Travel, Meal, and Lodging Expense
Reimbursement Request Form pursuant to section
1-22-4 of this chapter.
      5.   Travel Advances: Advances for travel expenses may be provided to an
employee or officer of the City upon approval by the City Administrator. Such
advances shall be approved by submitting a Travel, Meal, and Lodging Expense
Reimbursement Request Form pursuant to section
1-22-4 of this chapter.
   (B)   Not Reimbursable Expenses: The City shall not reimburse its employees
and officers for the following expenses:
      1.   The additional cost of first class seating or accommodations for air
or rail transportation.
      2.   The additional cost of lodging above the single occupancy room rate,
except as otherwise provided herein.
      3.   Lodging and meals eaten at the home of friends or relatives if
lodging with friends or relatives.
      4.   Expenses of a personal nature and incurred for the amusement of the
employee or officer, such as expenses for movie/theater tickets, magazines, bar
services, sightseeing fees/fares, hotel/motel pay per view television/movies,
telephone calls and other similar personal expenses.
      5.   Travel insurance premiums.
      6.   Meal expenses for anyone other than the employee or officer.
      7.   The cost of alcoholic beverages.
      8.   Entertainment expenses. (Ord. 21/2017, 5-15-2017)
1-22-4: TRAVEL, MEAL, AND LODGING EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST FORM:
No payment or reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by a
City employee or officer shall be made unless a Travel, Meal, and Lodging
Expense Reimbursement Request Form has been submitted and approved pursuant to
this chapter. All reimbursement request forms shall be accompanied by itemized
receipts or other documentation that sufficiently support the amount of the
claimed expense(s) and was generated at or near the time when the travel
expense was incurred, and submitted to the City Administrator. All documents
and information submitted with the form shall be subject to disclosure under
the Freedom of Information Act 1 . (Ord. 21/2017, 5-15-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
1-22-5: MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE REIMBURSEMENT:
Any reimbursement request form submitted to the City Administrator in
accordance with section
1-22-4 of this chapter for travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by its
employees and officers in an amount less than or equal to seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) may be approved by the City Administrator. The costs for
registration fees, dues, and other similar expenses for conferences, seminars,
or meetings are not to be allocated toward this maximum allowable reimbursement
amount, and shall be approved under City procedures separate from this section.
(Ord. 21/2017, 5-15-2017)
1-22-6: REQUESTS EXCEEDING MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE REIMBURSEMENT:
Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: a) any officer or employee of the
City which exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under section
1-22-5 of this chapter or b) any member of the City Council may only be
approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the Corporate Authorities of
the City of Aledo. However, in the event of an emergency or other extraordinary
circumstances, the City Council may approve more than the maximum allowable
expenses set forth above. (Ord. 21/2017, 5-15-2017)
1-22-7: ENTERTAINMENT EXPENSES:
The City shall not reimburse any of its members of the City Council, employees,
or officers for any activities which would be considered entertainment.
Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are
excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the
purpose of the program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 21/2017, 5-15-2017)
CHAPTER 23
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS PROGRAM
 
SECTION:
1-23-1: Creation And Purpose
1-23-2: Administrative Hearings - General City Ordinances
1-23-3: Administrative Hearings - Building Code Violations
1-23-4: Penalties
1-23-1: CREATION AND PURPOSE:
   (A)   There is hereby established an Administrative Hearings System which is
authorized to conduct administrative hearings on citations charging violations
of municipal ordinances and/or the building code of the City of Aledo,
Illinois.
   (B)   The City adopts and hereby incorporates by reference 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1 - 2.2.1 et seq., and 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., as each may be
amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict between said statutes and
this Chapter, the statute shall prevail.
   (C)   The Administrative Hearings System shall be conducted by the Code
Hearing Department for General City Ordinances as provided for in 5/1-2.2.1 et
seq., and Building Code Violations as provided for in 5/11 -31.1 -1 et seq.
(Ord. 25/05, 4-17-2006)
1-23-2: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS - GENERAL CITY ORDINANCES:
   (A)   Definitions (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-5). As used in this Chapter, unless the
context requires otherwise:
 
         Any municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations that must be
         adjudicated pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 and (ii) any offense under the
CODE:    Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing
         the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-
         204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
HEARING  A municipal employee or an officer or agent of a municipality, other than a law
OFFICER: enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
        1.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a
         code violation exists;
        2.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant to
         the existence of a code violation;
        3.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all
         exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
        4.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a code
         violation exists.
 
   (B)   Code Hearing Department (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-10).
      1.   The Aledo corporate authorities hereby establish a code hearing
department within the Aledo municipal government. The function of the hearing
department is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in
the manner set forth in this Division.
      2.   The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a
municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations that must be
adjudicated pursuant to Division 31.1 of Article 11 of this Act and (ii) any
offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar offense that is a traffic
regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable
offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (C)   Hearing Procedures Not Exclusive. ((65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-15). The adoption
and usage of the Code Hearing Department and the administrative hearings
provided for in this Chapter does not preclude the municipality from using
other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
   (D)   Instituting Code Hearings (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-20).
      1.   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code
violation finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation
on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates (i) the name
and address of the defendant, (ii) the type and nature of the violation, (iii)
the date and time the violation was observed, and (iv) the names of witnesses
to the violation.
      2.   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing
department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report
and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose
on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more than 40 days
after the violation is reported.
      3.   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the
files of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the municipality in the case so that he or she may prepare
evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date
indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail
to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the
hearing. If the violation report form requires the respondent to answer within
a certain amount of time, the municipality must reply to the answer within the
same amount of time afforded to the respondent.
   (E)   Subpoenas; Defaults (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-25). At any time prior to the
hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request
of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.
If on the date set for hearing the defendant or his or her attorney fails to
appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall proceed
with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code
violation.
   (F)   Continuances; Representation (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-30). No continuances
shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this Chapter
except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the
rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not he grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
Division shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the municipality may be
presented by an attorney designated by the municipality or by any other
municipal employee, except that the case for the municipality shall not be
presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The case for the
defendant may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other
agent or representative of the defendant.
   (G)   Hearing; Evidence. At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside,
shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence
or non-existence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this
Division.
   (H)   Qualifications Of Hearing Officers (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-40). Prior to
conducting proceedings under this Chapter, hearing officers shall successfully
complete a formal training program that includes the following:
      1.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they
will administer;
      3.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
      In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Illinois for at least 3 years.
   (I)   Findings, Decision And Order (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-45). At the conclusion
of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of
the evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation
exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as
findings, decision, and order. The findings, decision, and order shall include
(i) the hearing officer’s findings of fact; (ii) a decision of whether or not a
code violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and (iii) an order that
states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved. A
monetary sanction for a violation under this Division shall not exceed $750.00
for each violation, as provided the amount provided for by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, as
amended. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the
defendant within 5 days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner
that the report form and summons are served under this Chapter.
   (J)   Review Under Administrative Review Law (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-50). The
findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review
in the circuit court of the county in which the municipality is located. The
provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the
findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer under this Division.
   (K)   Judgment On Findings; Decision And Order (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55).
      1.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or
the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative
Review Law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
      2.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under
the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the
code violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court
of the county in which the municipality is located for purpose of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and
orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action,
the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in
accordance with this Division and the applicable municipal ordinance. Service
of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by
Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions,
and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed $2,500.
If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and. order was entered
in accordance with the requirements of this Division and the applicable
municipal ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing
under this Division and for judicial review as provided in this Division:
         a.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and
against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced
in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
         b.   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that
are requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer
to correct a code violation. (Ord. 25/05, 4-17-2006)
1-23-3: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS - BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Definitions (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1). As used in this Chapter, unless the
context requires otherwise:
BUILDING   A full-time state, county or municipal employee whose duties include the
INSPECTOR: inspection or examination of structures or property in a municipality to
           determine if zoning or other code violations exist.
           Any municipal ordinance, law, housing or building code or zoning ordinance that
           establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention,
CODE:      sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures
           in a municipality or any municipal ordinance that requires, after notice, the
           cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable
           motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property.
HEARING    A municipal employee or an officer or agent of a municipality, other than a
OFFICER:   building inspector or law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
          1.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a
           code violation exists;
          2.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, the building
           owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;
          3.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all
           exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
          4.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a code
           violation exists.
PROPERTY   The legal or beneficial owner of a structure;
OWNER:
 
   (B)   Code Hearing Department (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1 -2).
      1.   The Aledo corporate authorities hereby establish a code hearing
department within the Aledo municipal government. The function of the hearing
department is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in
the manner set forth in this Chapter.
      2.   The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a code,
as defined in 1-21-3-A of this Chapter.
   (C)   Hearing Procedures Not Exclusive. (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-3) The adoption
and usage of the Code Hearing Department and the administrative hearings
provided for in this Chapter does not preclude the municipality from using
other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
   (D)   Instituting Code Hearings (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-4).
      1.   When a building inspector finds a code violation while inspecting a
structure, he shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and
report form that indicates (i) the name and address of the structure owner,
(ii) the type and nature of the violation, (iii) the date and time the
violation was observed, (iv) the names of witnesses to the violation; and, (v)
the address of the structure where the violation is observed.
      2.   The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building
inspector to the code hearing department where a docket number shall be stamped
on all copies of the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank
spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be
less than 30 nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported by the
building inspector.
      3.   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the
files of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the building
inspector so that he may prepare evidence of the code violation for
presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report
form shall be served by first class mail to the owner of the structure, along
with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. If the City of
Aledo has an ordinance requiring property owners to register with the
municipality, service may be made on the owner by mailing the report and
summons to the owner’s address registered with the municipality. If the name of
the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service cannot be made
by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the
violation report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is
found, not less than 20 days before the hearing is scheduled.
   (E)   Subpoenas; Defaults (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-5). At any time prior to the
hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request
of the building inspector or the attorney for the municipality, or the owner or
his attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony
at the hearing. If on the date set for hearing the defendant or his or her
attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default
and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation.
   (F)   Continuances; Representation (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1). No continuances
shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this Chapter
except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the
rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this Chapter
shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the municipality may be presented by the
building inspector, by any other municipal employee or by an attorney
designated by the municipality. However, in no event shall the case for the
municipality be presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The
case for the property owner may be presented by the defendant, his or her
attorney, or any other agent or representative of the defendant.
   (G)   Hearing; Evidence (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-7). At the hearing a hearing
officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence
relevant to the existence or non-existence of a code violation in the structure
indicated. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply to hearings authorized by this Chapter.
   (H)   Eviction - Rights Of The Occupants (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-8). No action
for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other
similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a
dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code
violation hearing.
   (I)   Defenses To Code Violations (5/11-31.1-9). It shall be a defense to a
code violation charged under Section 1-21-3 if the owner, his attorney, or any
other agent or representative proves to the hearing officer’s satisfaction
that:
      1.   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or
at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
      2.   The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants
and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations;
      3.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the
owner or his agent to all or part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting
the code violation.
   (J)   Findings, Decision And Order (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-10). At the conclusion
of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of
the evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation
exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as
findings, decision, and order. The findings, decision, and order shall include
(i) the hearing officer’s findings of fact; (ii) a decision of whether or not a
code violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and (iii) an order,
ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case if a
violation is not proved. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be
served on the defendant within 5 days after it is issued. Service shall be in
the same manner that the report form and summons are served under this Chapter.
Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in
the same manner as set forth in the code, unless the corporate authorities
adopting this Chapter provide otherwise.
   (K)   Review Under Administrative Review Law (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11). The
findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review
in the circuit court of the county in which the municipality is located. The
provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the
findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer under this Chapter.
   (L)   Judgment On Findings; Decision And Order (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55).
      1.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction, or costs imposed, or portions thereof, remaining unpaid after
the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under
the Administrative Review Law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality
and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
      2.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under
the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the
code violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court
of the county in which the municipality is located for purpose of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and
orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action,
the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in
accordance with this Chapter and the applicable municipal ordinance. Service of
the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by
Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions,
and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed $2,500.
If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in
accordance with the requirements of this Division and the applicable municipal
ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this
Division and for judicial review as provided in this Chapter:
         a.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and
against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced
in the same manner as other;
         b.   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that
are requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer
to correct a code violation.
   (M)   Sanctions Applicable To Owner - Property (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-12). The
order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the City of
Aledo as the result of a finding of a code violation under this Section shall
attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a
finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or
transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner
of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing
officer under this Section.
   (N)   Federal Government Contracts - Maintenance Of Property - Penalties (65
ILCS 5/11-31.1-12.2)
      1.   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including without limitation, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct municipal health and
sanitary code violations.
      2.   A person who intentionally violates this Section is guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined not less than $501.00 and not more than
$1,000.00. (Ord. 25/05, 4-17-2006)
1-23-4: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise stated, penalties upon conviction of an offense brought
forward under the auspices of this Chapter shall be as follows. Each day that
the violation exists constitutes a separate violation for purposes of
prosecution and subsequent penalties,
   (A)   Each violation constituting a first offense by the defendant at the
property in question shall carry a fine of up to $750.00.
   (B)   Each subsequent violation by the defendant at the property in question
shall carry a fine of a minimum of $50.00 and a maximum of $750.00.
   (C)   Other sanctions may be applied as provided for by law.
   (D)   The Hearing Officer may, in addition to the imposition of a fine,
order the defendant to perform community service unless otherwise precluded by
law. (Ord. 25/05, 4-17-2006)
TITLE 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
CHAPTER 1
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1:   Purpose
2-1-2:   Membership
2-1-3:   Term Of Office
2-1-4:   Procedure
2-1-5:   Powers And Duties
2-1-6:   Land Subdivision
2-1-7:   Improvements
2-1-8:   Expenditures
2-1-9:   Meetings
2-1-10:   Executive Secretary And Staff
2-1-1: PURPOSE:
In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive city plan for the guidance, direction and control of the growth
and development of the city, a plan commission is hereby created under
authority of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-
2014)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The plan commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor
on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the plan commission,
and subject to the approval of the city council. Not less than six (6) members
so appointed shall reside within the municipality, and one may live within the
territory contiguous to the municipality not more than one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond the city limits. All members of the commission shall serve without
compensation.
Members of the plan commission may also comprise the membership of the zoning
board of appeals. (Ord. 20/2014, 12-2-2014)
2-1-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
All appointments shall be for a term of five (5) years, and members shall serve
until their successors have been appointed. Vacancies shall be filled by the
mayor for the unexpired terms only, subject to confirmation by the city
council. Any member of the plan commission may be removed for cause, by
majority vote of the city council and after a public hearing. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-
7-2014)
2-1-4: PROCEDURE:
The members of the plan commission shall elect such officers as they may deem
necessary, and adopt rules and regulations of organization and procedure
consistent with the provisions of this code and state laws. The plan commission
shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times
to public inspection, and shall also file an annual report with the mayor and
the council setting forth its transactions and recommendations. (Ord. 05/2014,
4-7-2014)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The plan commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the council a comprehensive plan for
public improvements looking to the present and future development and growth of
the city. Such a plan after its adoption by the council will be known as the
"official plan of Aledo".
   Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to streets,
alleys, and public grounds within the corporate limits and in contiguous
territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles
from such limits, and not included in any municipality, such requirements to be
effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such
plan.
   (B)   To prepare and recommend to the council from time to time, such
changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the
council or by the plan commission.
   (C)   To prepare and recommend to the council from time to time, plans and/
or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of such official
plan.
   (D)   To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, or parts thereof,
to further the making of such improvements and generally, to promote the
realization of the official plan.
   (E)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
   (F)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area subject to the approval of the
city council.
   (G)   To review, hear and make decisions upon applications for the
subdivision of land.
   (H)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an act of the general assembly of the state of Illinois, as may be
conferred by the council. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-1-6: LAND SUBDIVISION:
Following the adoption of an official plan in the manner prescribed in this
chapter, no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record, affecting land
within the corporate limits of the city, or in contiguous territory outside of
and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits and
not included in any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be
valid unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys and
public grounds in conformity with any requirements applicable thereto of such
official plan. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-1-7: IMPROVEMENTS:
The executive secretary shall furnish the plan commission for its
consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature. The plan commission may report in relation thereto,
if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the
council. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-1-8: EXPENDITURES:
Expenditures of the plan commission shall be at the discretion of the city
council and if the plan commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the council and
appropriations by the council therefor. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-1-9: MEETINGS:
The plan commission shall meet on the third Thursday of the month in the Aledo
City Hall for the purpose of transacting such business, as may properly come
before said commission. Special meetings of the plan commission may be called
by the chairman or any simple majority of members of the commission by written
notice given to each member of the commission at least five (5) days prior to
said special meeting. Said notice of special meeting shall also state the
purpose of the special meeting. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-1-10: EXECUTIVE SECRETARY AND STAFF:
The city administrator or his/her designee, shall provide administrative
services to the plan commission and serve as the executive secretary. (Ord. 05/
2014, 4-7-2014)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-2-1:   Purpose
2-2-2:   Membership
2-2-3:   Terms Of Office
2-2-4:   Procedures
2-2-5:   Powers And Duties
2-2-6:   Finality Of Decisions
2-2-7:   Executive Secretary And Staff
2-2-1: PURPOSE:
In order to provide for appropriate processes regarding land use and
development regulations, a zoning board of appeals is hereby created under
authority of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended. The zoning board of
appeals is hereafter referred to by the term zoning board. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-
2014)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The zoning board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor on
the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the zoning board, and
subject to the approval of the city council. Not less than six (6) members so
appointed shall reside within the municipality, and one may live within the
territory contiguous to the municipality not more than one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond the city limits. All members of the zoning board shall serve
without compensation.
Members of the zoning board may also comprise the membership of the plan
commission. (Ord. 20/2014, 12-2-2014)
2-2-3: TERMS OF OFFICE:
All appointments shall be for a term of five (5) years, and members shall serve
until their successors have been appointed. Vacancies shall be filled by the
mayor for the unexpired terms only, subject to confirmation by the city
council. Any member of the zoning board may be removed for cause, by majority
vote of the city council and after a public hearing. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-2-4: PROCEDURES:
Regular meetings of the zoning board shall be held at the call of the chairman
at such time and place within the city as the zoning board may determine.
Special meetings may be held at the call of the chairman, or as determined by
the board. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the zoning board
shall be open to the public.
The zoning board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
facts, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the zoning board and shall be a public
record. Four (4) members of the zoning board shall constitute a quorum and the
concurring vote of four (4) members of the zoning board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of the zoning
enforcing officer in any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
code, or to effect any variation in this code. In the performance of its duties
the zoning board may incur such expenditures as shall be authorized by the
council. The zoning board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in
conflict with the statute or this code. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-2-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The zoning board shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To hear and pass upon the applications for variances from the terms
provided in this title in the manner prescribed and subject to the standards
established herein;
   (B)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the zoning enforcing officer under this
title;
   (C)   To interpret the provisions of this title and the district map in the
manner provided herein;
   (D)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the city and the
recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation;
   (E)   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this title, as prescribed by the applicable provisions
of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-2-6: FINALITY OF DECISIONS:
All decisions and findings of the zoning board on appeals or applications for a
variance, after a hearing, shall, in all instances, be final administrative
decisions and shall be subject to judicial review as may be provided by law.
(Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-2-7: EXECUTIVE SECRETARY AND STAFF:
The city administrator or his/her designee, shall provide administrative
services to the zoning board and serve as the executive secretary. (Ord. 05/
2014, 4-7-2014)
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-3-1:   Appointment And Composition
2-3-2:   Powers And Duties
2-3-1: APPOINTMENT AND COMPOSITION:
There shall be a board of local improvements to be composed of the mayor and
two (2) members of the city council appointed by the mayor subject to approval
by the city council. (Ord. 1/98, 5-18-1998; amd. Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-3-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
In making local improvements by special assessments, the board of local
improvements and the mayor and members of the city council shall follow the
procedures set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2 with amendments
thereto adopted prior to the adoption of this chapter. Said 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/9-2 is hereby adopted by the city by reference, not less
than three (3) copies of such act having been on file in the office of the city
clerk for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the adoption of this chapter.
The board of local improvements and the mayor and members of the city council
shall have all the powers and duties set forth in said statute incorporated
herein by reference. (Ord. 1/98, 5-18-1998; amd. Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
CHAPTER 4
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1:   Purpose
2-4-2:   Composition Of Historic Preservation Commission
2-4-3:   Qualifications
2-4-4:   Terms
2-4-5:   Officers
2-4-6:   Meetings
2-4-7:   Powers And Duties
2-4-8:   Surveys And Research
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation, and use of improvements of special character or historical
interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, and
welfare of the people of the city of Aledo by:
   (A)   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic and
architectural characteristics of Aledo which represent elements of the city's
cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history;
   (B)   Promoting civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past as represented in Aledo's landmarks and historic districts;
   (C)   Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of Aledo's
landmarks and historic areas;
   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to have
buyers, visitors and shoppers and thereby supporting business, commerce,
industry, and providing economic benefit to the city; and
   (E)   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration of structures,
areas, and neighborhoods and thereby preventing future urban blight. (Ord. 05/
2014, 4-7-2014)
2-4-2: COMPOSITION OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
The Aledo historic preservation commission shall consist of seven (7) voting
members, with not less than five (5) voting members being residents of the city
of Aledo and the remaining members being residents of the 61231 U.S. post
office zip code, appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. (Ord.
05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-4-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
One of the members shall be a member of the main street design committee. The
remaining members shall be appointed on the basis of expertise, experience or
interest in the area of architectural history, building construction or
engineering, finance, historical and architectural preservation, neighborhood
organizing or real estate. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-4-4: TERMS:
Members of the commission shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Of
those members first taking office, two (2) shall be appointed for one year,
three (3) for two (2) years, and two (2) for three (3) years. No members shall
serve more than two (2) successive three (3) year terms. Alternate members
shall be appointed to serve in the absence of or disqualification of the
regular members. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members
shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-4-5: OFFICERS:
Officers shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, and a secretary elected by
the preservation commission who shall serve a term of one year and shall be
eligible for reelection, but no members shall serve as an officer for more than
two (2) consecutive years. The chairman shall preside over meetings. In the
absence of the chairman, the vice chairman shall perform the duties of the
chairman. If both are absent, a temporary chairman shall be elected by those
present. The secretary to the preservation commission shall have the following
duties:
   (A)   Take minutes of each preservation commission meeting;
   (B)   Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the
minutes, reports, and decisions of the preservation commission to the members
of the preservation commission;
   (C)   Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public hearings
conducted by the preservation commission;
   (D)   Advise the mayor of vacancies on the preservation commission and
expiring terms of members; and
   (E)   Prepare and submit to the city council a complete record of the
proceedings before the preservation commission on any matter requiring council
consideration. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-4-6: MEETINGS:
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All decisions or actions
of the historic preservation commission shall be made by a majority vote of
those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists. Meetings
shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by resolution of
the commission at the beginning of each calendar year or at any time upon the
call of the chairman. There shall be a minimum of four (4) meetings per year.
All meetings of the preservation commission shall be open to the public. The
preservation commission keeps minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records if its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
preservation commission and shall be a public record. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-4-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   To adopt its own procedural regulations;
   (B)   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant properties, structures and area;
   (C)   To investigate and recommend to the city council to adopt procedures
to protect properties or structures having special historic, community, or
architectural value;
   (D)   To determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations
for the design and implementation of specific markings of properties or
structures which have special historic community, or architectural value;
   (E)   To advise property owners on physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for
inclusion on the state or national register of historic places;
   (F)   To inform and educate the citizens of Aledo concerning the historic
and architectural heritage of the city by publishing appropriate maps,
newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by holding programs and seminars;
   (G)   To accept and administer on behalf of the city of Aledo, upon
designation by the city council, such gifts, grants and money as may be
appropriate for the purpose of this chapter;
   (H)   To call upon available city staff members as well as other experts for
technical advice;
   (I)   To testify before all boards and commissions, including the city plan
commission and the zoning board of appeals, on any matter affecting
historically and architecturally significant properties; and
   (J)   To periodically review the Aledo zoning ordinance and to recommend to
the city plan commission and the city council any amendments appropriate for
the protecting and continued use of historically or architecturally significant
properties. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-4-8: SURVEYS AND RESEARCH:
The historic preservation commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and
research effort in the city of Aledo to identify neighborhoods, areas, sites,
structures, and objects that have historic, community, architectural, or
aesthetic importance, interest, or value. As part of the survey, the historic
preservation commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies
by any unit of government or private organization and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts, and photographs. The historic preservation commission
shall identify significant structures based upon the following criteria:
   (A)   Architecturally or historically significant properties in one
identifiable neighborhood or district geographical area of the city of Aledo;
   (B)   Association with a particular person, event, or historical period;
   (C)   Representation of particular architectural style or school, or of a
particular architect, engineer, builder, designer or craftsman; and
   (D)   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the preservation commission
to assure systematic survey of all significant properties within the city of
Aledo. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
CHAPTER 5
ADVISORY COMMITTEES
SECTION:
2-5-1:   Purpose
2-5-2:   Membership
2-5-1: PURPOSE:
From time to time the city may determine that an advisory committee is needed
to facilitate greater public participation on a particular issue or program.
The advisory committee simply provides advice or information to the city
council and it is generally not intended the committee act on its behalf. (Ord.
05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-5-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The advisory committee members shall be appointed by the mayor on the basis of
their particular fitness for their duty and subject to the approval of the city
council. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
CHAPTER 6
AD HOC COMMITTEES
SECTION:
2-6-1:   Purpose
2-6-2:   Membership
2-6-1: PURPOSE:
From time to time the city may determine that a short term, nonrecurring
committee is needed to analyze a specific issue. The ad hoc committee simply
provides advice or information to the city council and it is generally not
intended the committee act on its behalf. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The ad hoc committee members shall be appointed by the mayor on the basis of
their particular fitness for their duty and subject to the approval of the city
council. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
(Rep. by Ord. 7/72, 12-18-1972)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-2-1:   Definitions
3-2-2:   License Required
3-2-3:   Application
3-2-4:   Bond
3-2-5:   Regulations For Licensed Premises
3-2-6:   Licensee Restrictions
3-2-7:   Term Of License; Fees Prorated
3-2-8:   Classification And Fees
3-2-9:   Hours Of Operation
3-2-10:   List Of Licenses; Notice Of Revocation
3-2-11:   Transfer Of License
3-2-12:   Change Of Location
3-2-13:   Local Restrictions
3-2-14:   [Reserved]
3-2-15:   Unlawful Sales; Minors
3-2-16:   View From Street
3-2-17:   Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-18:   Location
3-2-19:   Special Events
3-2-20:   Temporary Off Premises License
3-2-21:   Homebrewer Special Event License
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
definitions as set forth below unless the context clearly states otherwise:
   ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume, which is
fit for consumption as a beverage by a human being.
   BAR: A counter at which alcoholic liquor is served.
   BOWLING ALLEY: Every establishment or building, or part of an establishment
or building, as the case may be, wherein the game of bowling is played with
composition balls and ten (10) wooden pins.
   CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of the State of Illinois, not
for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors as defined by 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.24. Moreover, a club shall file a copy of its charter
with the City Clerk.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive, or attempted transfer of
possession of alcoholic liquor.
   HOMEBREW: Beer or any other beverage obtained by the process of alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion or concoction of grains, sugars, or both in water
and includes, but is not limited to, beer, mead, and cider made by a person
twenty one (21) years of age or older through their own efforts, fermented at
their place of residence, at another place of residence of a homemade brewed
beverage brewer, or at a premises of a commercial enterprise engaged primarily
in selling supplies and equipment for use by homebrewers and not for a
commercial purpose but for consumption by that person, their family, neighbors,
guests, and friends or for use at an exhibition, demonstration, judging,
tasting, or sampling with sampling sizes as authorized by section 6-31 of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act or as part of a contest or competition authorized
by section 6-36.
   HOMEBREWER: Any person twenty one (21) years of age or older: a) who makes
homebrew where the total quantity of homebrew made, in a calendar year, by the
person does not exceed one hundred (100) gallons if the household has only one
person twenty one (21) years of age or older or two hundred (200) gallons if
the household has two (2) or more persons twenty one (21) years of age or
older; b) who receives no compensation; and c) whose homebrew is not sold or
offered for sale.
   HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five
(25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings,
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.
   LICENSED PREMISES: The entire building or structure which contains any bar
or bars.
   LICENSEE: Any person or persons, partnership, firm, or corporation named on
the liquor license as issued by the City of Aledo.
   MINOR: A person who has not attained his or her twenty first birthday.
   NOT FOR PROFIT CORPORATION: A corporation, organized under the laws of the
State of Illinois, no part of the income of which is distributable to its
members, directors, or officers; provided, however, that the payment of
reasonable compensation for services rendered and the making of distributions
upon dissolution or final liquidation shall not be deemed a distribution of
income.
   OFFER FOR SALE: To hold out, keep or expose for sale; to possess with intent
to sell; to solicit or receive orders for sale.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead,
or other receptacle or container used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by
the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor.
   PERSON: Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, club, or any other
association of individuals.
   RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held
out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are
actually and regularly served, as the primary monetary function of the
business, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient
number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable foods for its
guests.
   RETAIL SALE: Sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
   RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use
or consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through transfer
or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and to include and mean
all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or
employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL OR SALE AT RETAIL: To effect, make, or contract a sale; to
keep or expose for sale; and to keep with intent to sell.
   SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   TO SELL: To solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale and
to keep with intent to sell. (Ord. 9/69, 12-1-1969, eff. 1-1-1970; amd. Ord. 9/
85, 10-7-1985; Ord. 07/2017, 4-17-2017)
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, transport, deliver or
offer for sale at retail, within the corporate limits of the City, any
alcoholic liquor without having a valid liquor license as required by this
chapter, or to make any such sale in violation of the terms and conditions of
such chapter; provided, however, that no license shall be required of a
drugstore or pharmacy for the purpose of dispensing alcoholic liquors which are
used solely in the concocting or formulating of medicine prescribed by duly
licensed physicians, nor shall any license be required for any church or
religious organization intending to use or using any alcoholic liquors for
sacramental purposes, nor shall any license be required for the making of,
possession, transportation, or storage of homebrew by a homebrewer, as defined
herein. (Ord. 07/2017, 4-17-2017)
3-2-3: APPLICATION:
An applicant for a license shall submit to the mayor an application in writing
under oath stating:
   (A)   The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or a club,
the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of
the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name
and address of such person.
   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
   (C)   The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   (D)   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
   (E)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   (F)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
   (G)   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of such application.
   (H)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this state, or the provisions of this code.
   (I)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by
the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
   (J)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state of Illinois or of the United States, or any provision of this code in the
conduct of his place of business.
   (K)   If said application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by
at least two (2) members of such partnership or the president and secretary of
such corporation. (Ord. 9/69, 12-1-1969, eff. 1-1-1970)
   (L)   The applicant acknowledges by signing this application that any city
police officer has the right of free and unrestricted access to the licensed
premises at all times for the investigation, or inspection of said premises for
the purpose of enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 11/85, 10-7-1985)
3-2-4: BOND:
Every applicant for a license hereunder shall file with his application a joint
and several bond executed by at least two (2) good and sufficient sureties
residing or licensed to do business within the state of Illinois, to the liquor
control commissioner, and to his successor in office, in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), conditioned upon true and faithful compliance by
said licensee with all the provisions of this chapter and of the laws of the
state pertaining to alcoholic liquors.
If a licensee shall be convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, or his license shall be revoked and no appeal is taken from said
order of revocation or any appeal taken therefrom is decided adversely to the
licensee, his bond shall thereupon be forfeited and the said liquor control
commissioner shall institute suit upon such bond in his name as such
commissioner for the entire amount of said bond and costs. In any action
brought on any such bond said commissioner shall be represented by the city
attorney. (Ord. 9/69, 12-1-1969, eff. 1-1-1970)
3-2-5: REGULATIONS FOR LICENSED PREMISES:
   (A)   General: No person shall receive a license to sell alcoholic liquor
upon any premises as a restaurant or as a club, unless it has the
qualifications, respectively, described in section
3-2-1 of this chapter regarding "restaurants" and "clubs". No restaurant
licensed as such shall sell alcoholic liquor except with meals. (Ord. 9/69, 12-
1-1969, eff. 1-1-1970; amd. Ord. 7/72, 12-18-1972)
   (B)   Outdoor Areas Of Restaurants: Any premises licensed under a class D
license may include an outdoor area provided that it meets the following
restrictions:
      1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
3-2-16 of this chapter, a class D licensee requesting an outdoor area to serve
alcoholic liquor shall construct a permanent fence no less than six feet (6')
tall which shall not obstruct viewing into and out of the outdoor premises and
shall not obstruct any public street or private accessway, and no licensee
shall be allowed to serve alcohol in the outdoor premises or construct any such
fence without first securing written approval of the design of any existing
fence or the plans for any proposed fence from the director of public works;
(Ord. 05/2012, 5-7-2012)
      2.   Serving and consumption of alcoholic liquor shall terminate at the
same time as the designated closing hours under this subsection (B) for a
licensee holding a class D liquor license;
      3.   No class D licensee shall operate an outdoor area hereunder during
the prohibited hours for such a class D licensee as designated in subsection
3-2-9(A) of this chapter; and
      4.   No access to the outdoor portion of the licensed premises shall be
permitted except through the permanent structure of the licensed premises.
Emergency exits, as required, shall be provided. (Ord. 3/01, 5-21-2001)
3-2-6: LICENSEE RESTRICTIONS:
No such license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the city.
   (B)   A person who is not of a good character and reputation in the
community in which he resides.
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
state of Illinois.
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   (F)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   (G)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   (H)   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license.
   (I)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or a
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision.
   (J)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   (K)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this chapter, or shall have forfeited his bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
   (L)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued.
   (M)   Any law enforcing public official, any mayor, alderman, or member of
the council or commission, or any president or member of a county board; and no
such official shall be interested in any way, either directly, or indirectly,
in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
   (N)   Any person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
(Ord. 9/69, 12-1-1969, eff. 1-1-1970; amd. Ord. 30, 2-18-1980; Ord. 5/2023, 2-
6-2023)
3-2-7: TERM OF LICENSE; FEES PRORATED:
The license required herein shall terminate on December 31 next following its
issuance. The fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full
calendar months which have expired in the year prior to the issuance of the
license. (Ord. 9/69, 12-1-1969, eff. 1-1-1970; amd. Ord. 30, 2-18-1980)
3-2-8: CLASSIFICATION AND FEES:
All liquor licenses are hereby divided into the following classes with their
respective numbers authorized and their respective annual fees payable pursuant
to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code.
   (A)   Class A licenses shall be issued to authorize a club to make retail
sales of all types of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises only,
the term "premises" also including any real estate owned or leased by the club
and not being restricted to "licensed premises" as defined herein.
   (B)   Class B licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of all types of
alcoholic liquor in original packages solely for consumption off the premises
only. The total number of Class B liquor licenses issued by the City shall not
exceed a total of two (2).
   (C)   Class C licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of all types of
alcoholic liquor for consumption either on or off the premises. That the total
number of Class C liquor licenses issued by the City shall not exceed a total
of seven (7).
      1.   There is hereby created a subclass C-1 license. A C-1 license is a
separate and supplemental license which shall be available only to those
licensees currently issued a valid Class C license.
      2.   A C-1 license authorizes the service and consumption of alcoholic
liquor in outdoor areas at the licensed premises subject to the following:
         a.   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
3-2-16 of this chapter, the outdoor area shall be enclosed by a permanent fence
no less than six feet (6') tall which shall not obstruct viewing into and out
of the outdoor premises and shall not obstruct any public street or private
accessway, and no licensee shall be allowed to serve alcohol in the outdoor
premises or construct any such fence without first securing written approval of
the fence design and plan from Liquor Commissioner or his designee.
            No access to the fenced, outdoor portion of the licensed premises
shall be permitted except through the permanent structure of the licensed
premises. Emergency exits, as required, shall be provided.
         b.   Notwithstanding the above, subsection (a.) above shall not be
applicable to establishments with a Class C license approved prior to May 1,
2024; provided however, that any new or replacement fencing by such
establishment shall be subject to such requirements.
         c.   Serving and consumption of alcoholic liquor shall terminate at
the same time as the designated closing hours for a licensee holding a Class C
liquor license.
         d.   No Class C licensee shall operate an outdoor area hereunder
during the prohibited hours for such a Class C licensee as designated in
subsection
3-2-9(A) of this chapter.
      3.   The total number of subclass C-1 licenses issued by the City shall
not exceed a total of three (3).
   (D)   Class D licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of all types of
alcoholic liquor by a restaurant or a bowling alley for consumption on the
premises only. That the total number of Class D liquor licenses issued by the
City shall not exceed a total of five (5).
   (E)   Class E licenses shall authorize the sale at retail of all types of
alcoholic liquor by a banquet or event hall that hosts short term events such
as wedding receptions or other similar events, provided that such sales of
alcohol shall be for consumption on the premises only. That the total number of
Class E liquor licenses issued by the City shall not exceed a total of zero
(0). (Ord. 12/2017, 6-5-2017; amd. Ord. 32/2017, 11-4-2017; Ord. 33/207, 11-4-
2017; Ord. 03/2019, 2-4-2019; Ord. 01/2020, 2-3-2020; Ord. 05/2020, 3-16-2020;
Ord. 03/2021, 3-15-2021; Ord. 04/2021, 3-15-2021; Ord. 05/2022, 2-22-2022; Ord.
1/2023, 1-17-2023; Ord. 16/2023, 6-5-2023; Ord.09/2024, 4-15-2024; Ord. 18/
2024, 10-21-2024)
3-2-9: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   (A)   Hours: No alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail or consumed on any
licensed premises between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on any Monday through Friday; no alcoholic liquor
shall be sold at retail or consumed on any licensed premises between the hours
of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on any Saturday; and
no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail or consumed on any licensed
premises between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:
00) noon on any Sunday. Any licensee shall have the right to open its licensed
premises for Sunday sales at retail or consumption of alcoholic liquor on the
premises if permitted by the license classification for such licensee from
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on each Sunday,
provided that any such licensee has first filed with the City's Chief of Police
a written statement as to the hours that such licensee will be open for Sunday
liquor sales, or in the case of special events or entertainment, a written
statement as to the hours that such licensee will be open for Sunday liquor
sales during any special events or entertainment. Failure to file a written
statement with the Chief of Police as required herein shall prohibit any
licensee from opening its premises for Sunday liquor sales and such failure to
file shall be deemed a violation of this section if the licensee opens its
licensed premises for Sunday liquor sales without first having filed the
requisite written statement with the City's Chief of Police. (Ord. 23/00, 12-
18-2000, eff. 12-31-2000)
   (B)   Closing Hours: The above hours shall also be deemed closing hours for
each licensee. Patrons shall not be allowed to loiter, or remain, for more than
fifteen (15) minutes after closing hours. All licensed premises shall remain
closed until authorized to open up except for Class A, B, and D holders who may
reopen their licensed premises for other authorized business activities only at
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Monday through Sunday, the prohibition against the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors on any licensed premises during
closing hours as defined above extending to all licensees. (Ord. 16/85, 10-7-
1985; amd. Ord. 5/86, 10-6-1986)
   (C)   New Year's Eve: Notwithstanding the above closing hours for the sale
or consumption of alcoholic liquor on licensed premises, in the case of New
Year's Eve, all licensees shall have the right to remain open that evening and
sell alcoholic liquor until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on New Year's Day. If New
Year's Eve (December 31) falls on a Sunday, those licensees who do not have a
license to operate on Sundays shall nevertheless have the right to open for
business at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on New Year's Eve with all other licensees
having a license to operate on Sundays at such time to open on that day at the
time as authorized under the respective type of liquor license issued to such
licensees. (Ord. 5/86, 10-6-1986)
3-2-10: LIST OF LICENSES; NOTICE OF REVOCATION:
The Mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses
issued by him; and shall furnish the Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of Police each
with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any license or the revocation of any
old license, the Mayor shall give written notice of such action to each of
these officers within forty eight (48) hours of such action. (Ord. 8/33, 3-20-
1934)
3-2-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed the
calendar year during which issued unless sooner revoked as in this chapter
provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee,
provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the
sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court,
and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt
licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy,
until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after
the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of
that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee
shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought are suitable for such purpose; provided, further, that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the Mayor from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within his jurisdiction. (Ord. 8/33, 3-20-1934)
3-2-12: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
   (A)   A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application and license.
   (B)   Such location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such
change issued by the Mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the
proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
under the law of this State and the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 8/33, 3-20-
1934)
3-2-13: LOCAL RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for
aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children, or any
military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to
hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to
restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquor is not
the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall
have been established for such purpose prior to the taking effect of this
chapter. No person shall hereafter engage in business as a retailer of any
alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any undertaking
establishment or mortuary. (Ord. 8/33, 3-20-1934)
3-2-14: [RESERVED]:
3-2-15: UNLAWFUL SALES; MINORS:
   (A)   Unlicensed Sale: No person shall sell, barter, transport, deliver, or
offer for sale at retail, or aid or abet in any manner the sale, barter,
transportation, delivery, or the offering for sale at retail, any alcoholic
liquor within the corporate limits of the city, without having a valid liquor
license as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Unlawful Sale To Minor: No person shall sell, give, offer, or deliver
any alcoholic liquor to a minor; provided however, that a parent or legal
guardian may sell, give, offer or deliver alcoholic liquor to a minor child of
such parent in, or upon, private premises when such alcoholic liquor is
consumed by such minor on said private premises in the presence of such minor
child's parent or legal guardian, and provided further that a legal guardian
may sell, give, offer, or deliver, alcoholic liquor to a minor legally in his
or her custody while in or upon private premises in the presence of such
guardian. Moreover, this section shall not prohibit any transfer or delivery of
alcoholic liquor to a minor when done by a church or religious organization for
sacramental purposes.
   (C)   Unlawful Sale To Minor By Licensee: No licensee or servant, agent or
employee of said licensee shall sell, offer, give or deliver any alcoholic
liquor to a minor; nor shall the licensee permit any alcoholic liquor to be
sold, given, offered, or delivered to a minor while on the licensed premises of
said licensee.
   (D)   Sale To Incompetent Persons By Licensee: No licensee, agent or
employee of said licensee shall sell, give, offer, or deliver any alcoholic
liquor to any intoxicated person, or any person known to be a habitual
drunkard, or an insane, feeble minded, or emotionally handicapped person.
   (E)   Unlawful Sale Off Premises By Licensee: No licensee, or any agent or
employee of such licensee shall sell, offer, give, or deliver any alcoholic
liquor outside of the licensed premises, or in any premises, street, alley or
place adjacent thereto. However, any licensee may sell or deliver alcoholic
liquor on adjacent premises owned or leased by the licensee provided that such
sale or delivery does not violate any other section of the city's liquor
control ordinance.
   (F)   Illegal Possession Or Consumption: No person shall transport, carry,
possess, or have any alcoholic liquor in or about a motor vehicle except in the
original package and with the seal unbroken.
   (G)   Unlawful Purchase Of Alcoholic Liquor By A Minor: No minor shall
purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor in or from any licensed
premises or other person.
   (H)   Minor Frequenting Bar: No minor shall frequent, loiter or remain at or
near a bar in any licensed premises.
   (I)   Allowing Minors To Frequent Bar: No licensee, agent, or employee of
such licensee shall permit or allow a minor to frequent, loiter, or remain at
or near a bar in any licensed premises.
   (J)   Prohibition On Employment Of A Minor: No licensee, agent or employee
of said licensee shall allow any minor to be employed in any manner related to
the tending of a bar, or the drawing, pouring, mixing, serving, or selling of
alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises. (Ord. 14/85, 10-17-1985)
The provisions of this subsection notwithstanding, employees of licensed liquor
establishments whose principal business is that of a "restaurant", as defined
within this chapter, may serve alcohol, provided, they are a minimum of
eighteen (18) years of age and under the on site supervision of an employee or
owner of said establishment who is twenty one (21) years of age or older. Such
servers may also be utilized under special events liquor licenses where food is
served and such event is for charitable purposes. Servers under twenty one (21)
years of age shall not tend bar, mix or pour alcoholic drinks or otherwise
prepare alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 05-05-08-1, 5-19-2008)
   (K)   Misrepresentation Of Age By Minor: No minor shall misrepresent his or
her age for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
in or from a licensed premises. For the purpose of preventing the violation of
this section, any licensee or his agent or employee may refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and for the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty
one (21) years.
   (L)   Unlawful To Provide Fraudulent Identification: No person shall sell,
give or furnish to any minor any false or fraudulent written, printed, or
photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person; nor shall any
person sell, give, or furnish to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years, evidence of age and identification of any other person.
   (M)   Alcoholic Liquor Consumption Prohibited On Class B Holder's Licensed
Premises: No class B licensee or any agent or employee of such licensee shall
knowingly permit any person or patron to either consume or have in his or her
possession any alcoholic liquor in the original package with the seal thereon
broken while on the licensed premises. Moreover, no patron shall consume or
have in his or her possession any alcoholic liquor in the original package with
the seal thereon broken while on the licensed premises of a class B liquor
license holder. (Ord. 14/85, 10-17-1985)
   (N)   Penalty: Any person violating any subsection of this section shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this
code. Moreover, unless the definition of a particular offense requires
knowledge, each offense defined herein is malum prohibitum and proof of
knowledge or intent shall not be required. (Ord. 18/2016, 1-3-2017)
3-2-16: VIEW FROM STREET:
In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the
premises is licensed, other than as a restaurant, hotel or club, no screen,
blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows
or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises, which
shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the
street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition, or
other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted
in or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a full view of
the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk, and
said premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire
interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where
liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted
during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all
parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the
view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing shall be
wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured or
in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in
the manner herein provided. (Ord. 8/33, 3-20-1934)
3-2-17: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   (A)   Authority: The mayor of the city shall be the liquor control
commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of all ordinances and
resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor. The mayor may appoint a person, or
persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and performance of the
duties herein provided for such liquor control commissioner.
   (B)   Powers Of The Liquor Control Commissioner: The local liquor control
commissioner shall have the powers granted to that position by this section and
by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-4 et seq., as amended, including the
power to grant or suspend for no more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause
all local licenses issued to persons for premises located within the corporate
limits of the city. All revocation or suspension hearings shall be held in
compliance with 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-5. The local liquor control
commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by him if he determines
that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Illinois liquor
control act of 1934, as amended from time to time, or of any section of the
city's liquor control ordinance, or any resolution adopted by the city relating
to alcoholic liquors, or any rule or regulation established by the local liquor
control commissioner or the state commission which is not inconsistent with
law. (Ord. 17, 10-7-1985)
3-2-18: LOCATION:
All premises to be licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages
shall be limited within the territory commonly known and described as the "fire
limits" or such other part of the city that would normally be included in said
district, except for special considerations, and located generally within the
confines of the central business district. (Ord. 7/64, 12-30-1964)
3-2-19: SPECIAL EVENTS:
   (A)   License: A special event license may be issued for a limited period of
time for the purpose of allowing the licensee to raise funds for charitable,
educational or civic purposes.
   (B)   Application: A special event license may be issued to not for profit
corporations organized and operating under the laws of the state for
charitable, educational or civic purposes. Application shall be made with the
liquor control commissioner at least thirty (30) days prior to the date for
when the special event license should be issued. Class A licensees shall be
eligible for a special event license if all requirements for such a license are
met.
   (C)   Information For Applicant: Any special event license applicant shall
submit the following information in writing:
      1.   An executed copy of the lease, rental agreement or other written
authority for the use of the premises if the applicant is not the owner of the
premises; if the owner, then a description of the premises shall be furnished;
      2.   The purpose for the issuance of the license;
      3.   A statement of the applicant's plans for crowd control;
      4.   A copy of the organization's corporate charter;
      5.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the State of Illinois, or the United States;
      6.   Certificate of insurance showing evidence of dramshop and liability
insurance coverage;
      7.   The specific times and dates for the term of the license; and
      8.   The names and addresses of each authorized officer of the applicant
who will be responsible for organizing and administering the special event for
which the special event license is sought.
   (D)   Types Of Sales, Hours: A special event license shall authorize a not
for profit corporation to make retail sales of all types of alcoholic liquor on
any day of the week from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. for one day for consumption only on the premises owned or leased by such
organization and occupied by it during a special event sponsored by said
organization, provided that no such nonprofit organization shall be entitled to
receive more than two (2) special event licenses in any calendar year. (Ord.
18/85, 10-17-1985)
   (E)   Fee: The daily fee for a special event license shall be paid in full
at the time the license is issued pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of
this Code. (Ord. 12/2017, 6-5-2017)
3-2-20: TEMPORARY OFF PREMISES LICENSE:
   (A)   License: A temporary off premises license may be issued for a period
no longer than two (2) consecutive calendar days for the purpose of allowing
the licensee to sell beer or wine for purchase and consumption at a location
other than the premises on which the licensee conducts their primary business
and in connection with any event, picnic, carnival, fundraising program, or
party at a public or semipublic facility or location.
   (B)   Application: A temporary off premises license may be issued upon an
application made with the Liquor Control Commissioner at least twenty one (21)
days prior to the date for when the temporary off premises license should be
issued. The Mayor may, at his discretion, issue licenses upon applications made
less than twenty one (21) days prior to the date for which a license is sought.
   (C)   Information From Applicant: Any temporary off premises license
applicant shall submit the following information in writing:
      1.   If the applicant is not currently licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages under this chapter, the applicant shall provide all information
required in an application submitted pursuant to section
3-2-3 of this chapter;
      2.   To the extent it is not provided pursuant to subsection (C)1 of this
section, the name of the applicant, a description of the applicant's principal
place of business and a description of the off premises location for which the
applicant seeks a license under this section;
      3.   If the application is for a license applicable to a premises not
located on public property or within the public right-of-way, an executed copy
of the lease, rental agreement or other written authority for the use of the
premises if the applicant is not the owner of the premises; if the owner, then
a description of the premises shall be furnished;
      4.   A statement of the applicant's plans for crowd control;
      5.   Proof that the applicant is licensed by the State of Illinois to
sell the type of alcohol in the manner requested;
      6.   Certificate of insurance showing evidence of dramshop and liability
insurance coverage;
      7.   The specific times and dates the applicant wishes the license to be
in effect; and
      8.   The names and addresses of each authorized officer or agent of the
applicant who will be responsible for organizing and administering the
temporary off premises operation for which the license is sought.
   (D)   Bond: An applicant under this section shall file a bond as required
under section
3-2-4 of this chapter.
   (E)   Types Of Sales, Hours: A temporary off premises license shall
authorize retail sales of wine and beer over a period no longer than two (2)
consecutive calendar days. Sales pursuant to a license issued pursuant to this
section may begin each day no earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Monday
through Saturday and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays and must conclude
at the earlier of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. or in compliance with the
operating hours of the event associated with the temporary off premises
license. All sales must be restricted to consumption on the premises owned,
leased or otherwise authorized for use by the licensee.
   (F)   Limitation On Sales: A single serving of wine shall not exceed eight
(8) ounces and a single serving of beer shall not exceed twenty four (24)
ounces. The licensee shall serve no more than one serving of beer or wine to a
person at a time. Sales authorized by this section shall not violate subsection
3-2-15(E) of this chapter. Unless otherwise specified by this section, all
sales and operations of the licensee shall be in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Limitation Of Licenses: The Liquor Commissioner shall restrict the
total number of temporary off premises licenses in effect on any given day to a
reasonable number. No more than two (2) temporary off premises licenses may be
issued to the same applicant in a twelve (12) month period. Such twelve (12)
month period shall be measured backward from the date of an application for a
license under this section. (Ord. 05/2016, 5-16-2016)
   (H)   Fee: The daily fee for a temporary off premises license shall be paid
in full at the time the license is issued pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of
Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 12/2017, 6-5-2017)
3-2-21: HOMEBREWER SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE:
   (A)   License: A homebrewer special event license may be issued for the
purpose of allowing the licensee to serve homebrew samples at a City of Aledo
approved special event for a period no longer than two (2) days.
   (B)   Application: A homebrewer special event license may be issued upon an
application made with the Liquor Control Commissioner at least thirty (30) days
prior to the date for when the homebrewer special event license should be
issued.
   (C)   Information For Applicant: Any homebrewer special event license
applicant shall submit the following information in writing:
      1.   If the applicant is not currently licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages under this chapter, the applicant shall provide all information
required in an application submitted pursuant to section
3-2-3 of this chapter;
      2.   To the extent it is not provided pursuant to subsection (C)1 of this
section, the name of the applicant, a description of the applicant's principal
place of business and a description of the event and location for which the
applicant seeks a license under this section;
      3.   If the application is for a license applicable to a premises that is
not owned by the applicant nor located on public property nor within the public
right-of-way, an executed copy of the lease, rental agreement or other written
authority for the use of the premises shall be furnished;
      4.   A statement of the applicant's plans for crowd control;
      5.   Certificate of insurance showing evidence of dramshop and liability
insurance coverage;
      6.   The specific times and dates the applicant wishes the license to be
in effect;
      7.   The names and addresses of each authorized officer or agent of the
applicant who will be responsible for organizing and administering the event
for which the license is sought; and
      8.   Copy of State of Illinois homebrewer special event license within
two (2) business days of event.
   (D)   Types Of Sales, Hours: A homebrewer special event license shall
authorize the licensee to offer samples of homebrew over a period of no longer
than two (2) calendar days at City of Aledo approved special events. Homebrew
samples may be served at a location that the licensee does not own nor hold a
lease, provided that such location is not a retailer licensed premises.
Homebrew samples served pursuant to a license issued pursuant to this section
may begin each day other than Sunday no earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.,
and no earlier than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday, and must conclude at
the earlier of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. or in compliance with the operating
hours of the event associated with the homebrew special event license. All
samples served must be restricted to consumption on the premises authorized for
use by the licensee.
   (E)   Limitation On Sales: Samples of homebrew shall not exceed two (2)
ounces. The licensee shall serve no more than three (3) samples to a consumer
in one day. Unless otherwise specified by this section, all operations of the
licensee shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   No Charge: Samples of homebrew served in accordance with this section
shall be served free of charge. Homebrew may not be sold or offered for sale.
   (G)   Homebrewers: Homebrew served at an event associated with the homebrew
special event license shall be made by a homebrewer as defined in this chapter.
   (H)   Fee: The fee for a homebrewer special event license shall be the sum
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code for each calendar day,
or part thereof, for which the license is issued. The fee for a homebrewer
special event license shall be paid in full at the time the license is issued.
(Ord. 07/2017, 4-17-2017)
CHAPTER 3
(Rep. by Ord. 7/72, 12-18-1972)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS, HAWKERS, AND PEDDLERS
SECTION:
3-4-1:   Definitions
3-4-2:   Certificate Of Registration
3-4-2-1:   Certificate Of Registration Required
3-4-2-2:   Application For Certificate Of Registration
3-4-2-3:   Revocation Of Certificate
3-4-2-4:   Registration Fee
3-4-3:   Soliciting
3-4-3-1:   Occupant Notice Regarding Soliciting
3-4-3-2:   Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
3-4-3-3:   Duty Of Solicitor To Observe Occupant Notice
3-4-3-4:   Hours When Soliciting Permissible
3-4-4:   Restriction On Peddling In Public
3-4-5:   Creating Hazard Prohibited
3-4-6:   Food Service Carts And Food Trucks
3-4-7:   Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   HAWKER: A solicitor who seeks to sell or obtain orders for property, as set
forth in this section, who conducts his or her business from one or more
specified locations specifically advertised or held out for the purpose of the
business.
   ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property for
retail sale within the city who does not maintain in this city an established
office, distribution house, in-sales house, warehouse, service center, or
residence from which the business is conducted. However, this chapter does not
apply to any person who delivers tangible personal property within this city
who is fulfilling an order for the property which was solicited or placed by
mail or other means.
   PEDDLER: A solicitor who seeks to sell or obtain orders for property, as set
forth in this section, who travels to the location of the prospective customer
in order to conduct his or her business.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in the possession of
the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
   RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons contained within any type of building or structure.
   SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities:
   (A)   Seeking to sell or obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character, or description
whatever for any kind of consideration whatever;
   (B)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication; or
   (C)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing, or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation, or project.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail
sales of goods, wares, or merchandise in the city and who, for the purpose of
conducting the business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any
kind, or vacant lot. However, this does not apply to any person selling goods,
wares, or merchandise which are raised, produced, or manufactured by him or
her, to any person selling vegetables, fruits, or perishable farm products at
any established city market, or to any person operating a stand or booth on or
adjacent to property owned by him or her or upon which he or she resides. (Ord.
07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-4-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
3-4-2-1: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   (A)   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of
age or older, any firm, or any corporation to engage in soliciting or to engage
as a hawker or peddler or itinerant vendor or transient merchant of any
merchandise, article, thing, or amusement without first having secured
certificates of registration therefor.
   (B)   Special Events: Any peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor, solicitor or
transient merchant participating in any special event for which the sponsor has
sought and obtained approval from the city of Aledo may sell and offer for sale
any produce, goods, wares or merchandise without first obtaining a certificate
of registration as required by this section, provided that each such
participant complies with the following requirements:
      1.   All displays, sales and related activities shall be limited to the
boundaries of the special event for which the city granted approval to the
sponsor;
      2.   All displays, sales and related activities shall be conducted in the
areas designated by the sponsor;
      3.   Participating peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor, solicitor or
transient merchant shall indemnify and hold the city and its employees harmless
from and against all claims of any kind whatsoever related to such
participants' conduct occurring at the special event and shall submit proof of
liability insurance to the city and sponsor demonstrating adequate liability
coverage;
      4.   Participating peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor, solicitor or
transient merchant shall comply with all rules, regulations and requirements
set out by the city and by the sponsor; and
      5.   Participating peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor, solicitor or
transient merchant shall pay any participation fees to the sponsor.
   (C)   Exemption: A school, religious or not for profit organization
operating within Mercer County, shall be exempt from registration. (Ord. 07/
2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-4-2-2: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   (A)   Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a
form provided by the municipality. The applicant shall truthfully state in full
the information requested on the application:
      1.   Name and address of present place of residence, length of residence
at the address, business address if other than present address, and address of
the place of residence during the past three (3) years, if other than the
present residence;
      2.   Age of applicant;
      3.   Physical description of the applicant;
      4.   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation, or association by
whom the applicant is employed or represents, and the length of time of the
employment or representation;
      5.   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage, and the location or areas in
which the solicitation will take place;
      6.   Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
      7.   The date or approximate date of the latest previous application for
certificate under this chapter, if any;
      8.   Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this
chapter ever been revoked;
      9.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of a felony or
of any crime that involves theft, embezzlement, fraud, or dishonesty under the
laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States;
      10.   Sales tax identification number;
      11.   Tax exemption number (if any); and
      12.   Number and kind of vehicles to be used.
   (B)   Each applicant must submit with the application required certificates
and approvals from all County, State and Federal regulatory agencies for the
products the applicant is seeking to sell or obtain orders for.
   (C)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall cause to be kept in its office an accurate record
of every application received and acted upon, together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto, all certificates of registration
issued under the provisions of this chapter, and all denials of applications.
Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order, as filed,
and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with
the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. The Chief of
Police shall require every applicant to submit photo identification in
connection with the application for a certificate to perform a background
check.
   (E)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony or of any crime that involves
theft, embezzlement, fraud, or dishonesty under the laws of the State or any
other State or Federal law of the United States within five (5) years of the
date of application, nor to any person who is a registered sex offender in this
or any other State, nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter, nor to any person whose certificate of
registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided.
   (F)   Application for a certificate under this chapter shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk at least three (3) business days prior to the time
that the applicant desires to commence such business.
   (G)   The application under this section shall be accompanied by a bond in
the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the City, such bond to be
executed by good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the City Clerk, and
to be conditioned that all goods, wares and merchandise will be as represented,
and that the purchase price will be refunded on any article sold which is not
as represented and that final delivery of goods ordered will be made in
accordance with the terms of such order, and, failing therein, the advance
payment on such order will be refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action of
any such peddler or itinerant merchant shall have the right of action on the
bond for the money paid or damages, or both. (Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-
2016; amd. Ord. 17/2024, 10-21-2024)
 
3-4-2-3: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
   (A)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked if
the Chief of Police finds that the holder has violated any of the provisions of
this chapter, has made a false material statement in the application, or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of
registration under the terms of this chapter, or if the holder of the
certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Written notice shall be provided via mail to the certificate holder of
the city’s intent to conduct a hearing to revoke the license in question. Such
notice shall be mailed not less than three (3) business days before the date of
the hearing at the address set forth in the application. Said hearing may be
conducted by the city manager or designee and shall be conducted as a hearing
with a civil burden or proof and informal rules of evidence. In the event that
the city manager or designee determine that, by a preponderance of evidence,
that it is more probably true than not that the holder committed the offense in
question, the city manager or designee shall revoke the certificate.
   (C)   Any person who is denied a certificate of registration or who receives
a certificate and said certificate is subsequently revoked, may appeal such
decision to the city manager. A written notice of appeal must be filed in
writing with the city manager within thirty (30) days of the date of the denial
or revocation and said written appeal must include all grounds and bases for
the appeal that the appellant wishes to have considered. The decision of the
city manager shall be issued within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of
the appeal and shall be final. (Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd.
Ord. 17/2024, 10-21-2024)
3-4-2-4: REGISTRATION FEE:
   (A)   Hawker And Peddler:
      1.   Fee: Each hawker and peddler shall pay to the City Clerk a daily
registration fee pursuant to title 13, “Schedule Of Fees”, of this Code. The
charge for the daily fee may be extended for a set period of days and paid at
the time of registration but in no event may a certificate of registration be
issued for a period of greater than thirty (30) days without renewal.
      2.   Exemption: A hawker and peddler who represents an agency or business
which maintains a physical location (e.g., office, store or service center)
within the corporate limits of the City for a term of at least twelve (12)
months, shall be exempt from the additional fee for each day’s sales.
   (B)   Itinerant Vendors And Transient Merchants: Each itinerant vendor and
transient merchant shall pay the City Clerk an annual registration fee pursuant
to title 13, “Schedule Of Fees”, of this Code.
   (C)   Food Service Cart: A license, issued on a calendar year or per day
basis, for prepared food service carts may be issued upon submission of an
application as provided by the City, provided that the applicant: (i) is in
compliance with all food service inspections that may be required by Mercer
County or the City of Aledo and, (ii) has paid an application fee pursuant to
title 13, “Schedule Of Fees”, of this Code. Such license shall be on a per cart
basis. Payments made for daily licenses during a calendar year may be credited
toward the cost of an annual license for that same calendar year.
(Ord. 12/2017, 6-5-2017; amd. Ord. 13/2025, 5-19-2025)
3-4-3: SOLICITING:
3-4-3-1: OCCUPANT NOTICE REGARDING SOLICITING:
   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following directions.
   (B)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors or the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence shall be
given in the manner following:
      1.   A weatherproof card approximately three inches by four inches (3" x
4") in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:
         (a)   Only Solicitors Registered with the City of Aledo Invited; or
         (b)   No Solicitors Invited.
      2.   The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. For
the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police
to persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon. (Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-4-3-2: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and shall constitute a nuisance, for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound or motion in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of the residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined
in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the
provisions of section
3-4-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-4-3-3: DUTY OF SOLICITOR TO OBSERVE OCCUPANT NOTICE:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the Municipality upon which a "residence" as herein defined is located to
first examine the notice provided for in this chapter, if any is attached, and
be governed by the statement contained on any notice. If the notice states
"Only Solicitors Registered with the City of Aledo Invited", then the solicitor
not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein provided shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises and if the notice states
"No Solicitors Invited", then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence or entered upon
the premises upon which a residence is located, whether invited or not, shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by
the occupant. (Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016; amd. Ord. 17/2024, 10-21-
2024)
3-4-3-4: HOURS WHEN SOLICITING PERMISSIBLE:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound or motion in
any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of a
residence located thereon and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined prior to
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any weekday or a
Saturday. And at no time on a Sunday, or on a State or national holiday. (Ord.
07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-4-4: RESTRICTION ON PEDDLING IN PUBLIC:
No hawker or peddler shall ply his or her vocation on any street, sidewalk,
park, parkway, or in any other public place or any public right-of-way unless
his or her certificate of registration specifies that solicitation in public
places is permitted thereunder. (Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-4-5: CREATING HAZARD PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No hawker or peddler shall be allowed to ply his or her vocation at
any location, whether public or private property, if in so doing he or she
causes, or contributes to the causing of, any hazard to the general public
including, but not limited to, creation of traffic congestion or the
distracting of the operators of motor vehicles from the hazards of the roadway.
   (B)   1.   Further, no solicitor, hawker, or peddler shall sell, or cause to
be sold, any firework of any kind, regardless of whether the firework is
permitted by the statutes of the state. This includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Sparklers;
         (b)   Smoke bombs;
         (c)   Snake or glowworm pellets;
         (d)   Party poppers;
         (e)   Booby traps;
         (f)   Snappers;
         (g)   Trick matches; or
         (h)   Cigarette loads.
      2.   This shall not include toy pistols, canes, toy guns or other devices
in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grain or less
of explosive compound are used. (Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
3-4-6: FOOD SERVICE CARTS AND FOOD TRUCKS:
   (A)   No person shall engage in the operation of a food service cart or food
truck within the city limits without first having obtained a certificate of
registration.
   (B)   No food service cart or food truck shall operate on the public
streets, medians, rights of way or in residentially zoned districts or in
neighborhoods whose character is primarily residential.
   (C)   No food service cart or food truck shall operate in such a manner that
presents a hazard, pedestrian or vehicular traffic impediment or hazard, and/or
a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public.
   (D)   No food service cart or food truck shall operate inside an enclosed
building or structure unless such building or structure is approved for the
specific use and occupancy by the city building official and complies with
attendant codes, including, but not limited to, a certificate of occupancy.
Food service cart or food truck purveyors are not precluded from selling their
prepared wares through lawfully occupied and operating restaurants; provided,
such activities comply with all state and county food safety regulations.
   (E)   The certificate of registration for a food service cart or food truck
shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Proof that the applicant has registered or licensed with the state
of Illinois department of revenue;
      2.   Proof that the license applicant has liability insurance in force
for a minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence/
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) aggregate;
      3.   Proof of food safety inspection approval from the Mercer County
health department;
      4.   A copy of any required food safety license.
   (F)   No food service cart or food truck shall operate within the boundaries
of a city sanctioned special event unless otherwise given written approval by
the event licensee to operate within said boundaries. (Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015,
eff. 1-1-2016)
3-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to
title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. (Ord. 18/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 5
SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
SECTION:
3-5-1:   License Required
3-5-2:   License Fees
3-5-3:   Contents Of License
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, conduct or manage for gain, within
the corporate limits of the City, any theater, circus, caravan, menagerie,
exhibition or show of any kind, or exhibit any natural or artificial
curiosities, panoramic show or device of any kind, or give any concert or other
musical entertainment without first having obtained a license therefor;
provided, that for musical parties or concerts, and exhibitions of paintings,
statuary, or needlework, given or made by residents of the City, no license
shall be required. (8-5-1879)
3-5-2: LICENSE FEES:
Licenses shall be granted by the Mayor and Council upon the payment to the
Clerk of such sum of money pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this
Code. If a meeting of the Council is not convened between the time of
application for a license and the time of performance or exhibition, in such
case the Mayor shall cause the license to be issued by the Clerk. Not-for-
profit corporations organized and operated under the laws of the State for
charitable, educational or civic purpose may request a waiver of the license
fee at the time of application for a license. (Ord. 12/2017, 6-5-2017)
3-5-3: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under the foregoing provisions shall specify the object for
which they were issued, the date of issuing the same, and the length of time
for which they are issued. It shall be the duty of the person so licensed to
keep good order about his place of exhibition, and if necessary to that end
shall keep a police force for that purpose at his own expense. (8-5-1879)
CHAPTER 6
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES TAX
SECTION:
3-6-1:   Tax Required
3-6-2:   Account Required
3-6-3:   Failure To Report, Pay
3-6-1: TAX REQUIRED:
Hereafter all corporations, companies and associations which are not
incorporated under the laws of this state and which are engaged in effecting
fire insurance in the city shall pay to the treasurer a tax or license fee for
the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire department thereof, the sum of two
percent (2%) of the gross receipts received by their agency in the city for any
fire insurance effected or agreed to be effected in the city by any such
company, or companies, corporation or association. (Ord. 9/18, 12-2-1918)
3-6-2: ACCOUNT REQUIRED:
Every person who shall act as agent or otherwise in the city for or on behalf
of any such corporation, company or association shall on or before July 15 of
each and every year, render to the clerk a full, true and just account,
verified by his oath, of all premiums which, during the year ending on every
July 1 preceding such report, shall have been received by him or any person for
him, in behalf of any such corporation, company or association, and shall
specify in said report the amount received for fire insurance, such agents
shall pay to the treasurer at the time of rendering the aforesaid report the
amount so fixed in section
3-6-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 9/18, 12-2-1918)
3-6-3: FAILURE TO REPORT, PAY:
If any such account be not rendered on or before the day herein designated in
section
3-6-2 of this chapter, or if said tax or license fee shall remain unpaid after
that day, it shall be unlawful for any such corporation, company or association
so in default to transact any business or insurance in the city until the
requirements of this chapter shall have been fully complied with. (Ord. 9/18,
12-2-1918)
CHAPTER 7
ITINERANT MERCHANTS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 07/2015, 9-8-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title.
CHAPTER 8
(Rep. by Ord. 7/72, 12-18-1972)
CHAPTER 9
AMUSEMENT MACHINES
(Rep. by Ord. 12/2017, 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 10
MUSICAL MACHINES
(Rep. by Ord. 12/2017, 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 11
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-11-1:   Tax Imposed
3-11-2:   File Report
3-11-3:   Payment
3-11-4:   No Exemption
3-11-5:   Clerk To Provide Copy
3-11-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in this city at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this chapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 12/78, 12-18-1978)
3-11-2: FILE REPORT:
Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by section three of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons
engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to purchasers for
use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended. (Ord. 12/78, 12-18-
1978)
3-11-3: PAYMENT:
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (Ord. 4/69, 8-
18-1969)
3-11-4: NO EXEMPTION:
The exclusion contained in section 2(d) of the "retailers' occupation tax act",
approved June 28, 1933, as amended, shall not apply to property within the city
of Aledo, county of Mercer, state of Illinois. (Ord. 12/78, 12-18-1978)
3-11-5: CLERK TO PROVIDE COPY:
The city clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the Illinois department of
revenue a certified copy of this ordinance not later than five (5) days after
its effective date. (Ord. 12/78, 12-18-1978)
CHAPTER 12
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-12-1:   Tax Imposed
3-12-2:   File Report
3-12-3:   Payment
3-12-4:   No Exemption
3-12-5:   Clerk To Provide Copy
3-12-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this city in the business
of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of
all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the
form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 5/69, 8-18-1969)
3-12-2: FILE REPORT:
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this city shall file, on or before the last
day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue
required by section nine of the service occupation tax act, approved July 10,
1961, as amended. (Ord. 5/69, 8-18-1969)
3-12-3: PAYMENT:
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 5/69, 8-18-1969)
3-12-4: NO EXEMPTION:
The exclusion contained in section 2(e) of the service occupation tax act,
approved July 10, 1961, as amended, shall not apply to property within the city
of Aledo, county of Mercer, state of Illinois. (Ord. 12/78, 12-18-1978)
3-12-5: CLERK TO PROVIDE COPY:
The city clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the Illinois department of
revenue a certified copy of this ordinance not later than five (5) days after
its effective date. (Ord. 12/78, 12-18-1978)
CHAPTER 13
MUNICIPAL USE TAX
SECTION:
3-13-1:   Tax Imposed
3-13-2:   Collection Of Tax
3-13-3:   Clerk To Provide Copy
3-13-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of using in the
municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an
agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%)
of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the
meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955. (Ord. 16/74, 2-
17-1974)
3-13-2: COLLECTION OF TAX:
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (Ord. 16/74,
2-17-1974)
3-13-3: CLERK TO PROVIDE COPY:
The city clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the Illinois department of
revenue a certified copy of this ordinance not later than five (5) days after
its effective date. (Ord. 16/74, 2-17-1974)
CHAPTER 14
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-14-1:   Definitions
3-14-2:   Tax Imposed
3-14-3:   Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-14-4:   Returns To Department
3-14-5:   Resellers
3-14-6:   Severability
3-14-7:   Effective Date
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage between each
channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the
interstate interoffice channel provided within Illinois. However, "gross
charge" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
municipality;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and community
affairs;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices; or
   (I)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state,
who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state.
The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees,
or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this chapter.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this section,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 7/02, 9-16-2002)
3-14-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of two
percent (2%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer.
   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of two
percent (2%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be
allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such
other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in this state.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality. (Ord. 7/02, 9-16-2002)
3-14-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   (A)   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
department in the manner provided by the department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 7/02, 9-16-2002)
3-14-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before the last day of February 2003, and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication
retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required
by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the
act. (Ord. 7/02, 9-16-2002)
3-14-5: RESELLERS:
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax
free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active
resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 7/02, 9-16-2002)
3-14-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 7/02,
9-16-2002)
3-14-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval and publication as required by law, provided, however, that the tax
provided for herein shall take effect for all bills issued on or after January
1, 2003. Copies of this chapter shall be certified and sent to the Illinois
department of revenue prior to October 1, 2002. (Ord. 7/02, 9-16-2002)
CHAPTER 15
ADULT BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-15-1:   Definitions
3-15-2:   Location
3-15-3:   Requirements
3-15-4:   Liquor Licensing
3-15-5:   Exterior Display
3-15-6:   Existing Adult Uses
3-15-7:   Operation Standards
3-15-8:   Live Sex Act Businesses
3-15-9:   Exemptions
3-15-10:   Enforcement
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
   ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having twenty five percent (25%) or more
of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for rent, sale or for
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means,
and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or
"specified anatomical areas", or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin
operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any
other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which: a)
features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators; b) not
infrequently features entertainers who display "specified anatomical areas"; or
c) features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform
in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of
the patron or entertainers who engage in or are engaged in explicit simulation
of "specified sexual activities".
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" for observations by patrons therein.
   ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having twenty five percent (25%) or
more of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
"novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for "specialized sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of
such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors
showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
   ADULT USE: Adult book stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult novelty stores and other similar uses.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means:
   (A)   Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, pubic
region, 2) buttock, 3) female breasts below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and
   (B)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means: a) human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; b) acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and c) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-2: LOCATION:
Adult uses may be allowed, upon obtaining a special use permit, in that portion
of the D industrial district located within the land area containing: Lots 24,
23, 22, 6, 30, 31, 32, 5, 7 and the south 1/2 of Lot 19, Progress Park First
Addition Subdivision and Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15,
Progress Park 2nd Addition Subdivision, as depicted in exhibit A of the
ordinance codified herein, or their successor subdivisions as properly
subdivided in accordance with city ordinance and state statute, provided that
no adult use shall be located on a parcel, a lot line of which is within five
hundred feet (500') of any property used as another adult use. The
establishment of an adjacent use after the lawful use of an adult use has been
approved and in operation shall not require the existing adult use to cease
operations. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-3: REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Special Use Permit: No adult use shall operate even at those locations
where they may be allowed pursuant to this code without first having obtained a
special use permit in the manner set forth in this code. However, the standards
for special uses set forth in this code shall not apply with regard to the
application for a special use permit for an adult use. In their place, the
following standards shall apply.
   (B)   Standards: No adult special use permit shall be granted by the city
council unless the council finds:
      1.   The design and operation of the facility will not adversely affect
the public health and safety;
      2.   It will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property
in the neighborhood in which it is located;
      3.   It will not unduly increase traffic congestion in the public streets
and highways in the area in which it is located;
      4.   It will not cause additional public expense for fire or police
protection;
      5.   It will not substantially increase the possibility of criminal acts
against persons and properties within five hundred feet (500') of such proposed
special use or against persons who regularly use such properties.
   (C)   Registration: The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the
purposes of managing, controlling or collecting rents, or any other person
managing or controlling a building or premises any part of which contains an
adult use, shall register the following information with the city clerk:
      1.   The address of the premises;
      2.   The name of the owner of the premises and names of the beneficial
owners if the property is in a land trust;
      3.   The address of the owner and the beneficial owners;
      4.   The name of the business or establishment;
      5.   The name(s) and address(es) of the owner, beneficial owner or the
major stockholders of the business or establishment;
      6.   The date of initiation of the adult use;
      7.   The nature of the adult use;
      8.   If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said lease must be
attached. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-4: LIQUOR LICENSING:
No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or consumed on
the premises of any adult use. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-5: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of
any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not
registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-6: EXISTING ADULT USES:
Any adult use which existed lawfully, but which became nonconforming upon the
adoption of this chapter, may be continued as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   Upon written notice from the city of Aledo to the owners or interests
therein that any building, structure, lot or regulated use is nonconforming
under the provisions of the zoning ordinance as amended, the owners or
interests therein shall, within two (2) months from the date of such notice,
apply to the city clerk for a certificate of nonconformance.
   (B)   Failure to apply for a certificate of nonconformance within two (2)
months of the notice provided in subsection (A) of this section will require
the amortization of the nonconformance within six (6) months of the notice
provided for in subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   Nonconformances that have applied for a certificate of nonconformance
from the city clerk shall be discontinued within one year of the notice
provided in subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-7: OPERATION STANDARDS:
The operation of an "adult use", as defined herein, is subject to the following
standards of operation:
   (A)   No portion of the adult use area shall be operated in an enclosed or
partitioned area. All adult uses shall be conducted in a lawfully constructed
and city code compliant building. No adult use shall be conducted in the open,
in a temporary structure, trailer, motor home, tent or similar means of
shelter.
   (B)   Private movie, video or other projection booths are prohibited.
   (C)   Adult stock, including movies, tapes, product covers containing
specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas shall not be
disposed of in a manner that would allow access to these materials outside of
the subject building by the general public.
   (D)   The hours of adult uses shall be no earlier than nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., unless otherwise modified by
the city council.
   (E)   Adult uses shall be in compliance with the adopted building, plumbing,
mechanical and electrical codes of the city of Aledo, as well as the state of
Illinois plumbing and life safety codes.
   (F)   As a condition of a special use permit, the adult use premises shall
be open and available to city inspectors during the hours of operation and at
any other reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection for fire safety and
code compliance. Such inspections shall not be generated as a means to harass
or unduly interfere with the operations of the use and shall have a verifiable
public purpose.
   (G)   Live sex acts, as defined herein, are prohibited.
   (H)   No owner or operator of an adult use shall have been or shall be
convicted of a crime involving kidnapping, prostitution, accosting or
soliciting, pornography, child pornography, federal or state RICO or other
organized crime laws, or other similar offenses.
   (I)   A violation of the standards of operations shall be prima facie
evidence for the closure of such business for a period of time as provided for
by the city council. No adult use shall be closed without a public hearing
first being held by the city council, who shall consider evidence provided by
law enforcement, code and other city officials, the general public and owners,
operators and patrons of the subject use. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-8: LIVE SEX ACT BUSINESSES:
   (A)   Definitions: In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
      CONSIDERATION: The direct or indirect payment of money or the exchange of
any item of value for:
         1.   The right to enter the business premises, or any portion thereof;
or
         2.   The right to remain on the business premises, or any portion
thereof; or
         3.   The right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter, or
remain on, the business premises, or any portion thereof; or
         4.   The right to a membership permitting the right to enter, or
remain on, the business premises, or any portion thereof.
      LIVE SEX ACT: Any act whereby one or more persons engage in a live
performance or live conduct which contains oral sexual contact or sexual
intercourse.
      LIVE SEX ACT BUSINESS: Any business in which one or more persons may
view, or may participate in, a live sex act for a consideration.
      OPERATE AND MAINTAIN: To organize, design, perpetuate or control. Operate
and maintain includes providing financial support by paying utilities, rent,
maintenance costs or advertising costs, supervising activities or work
schedules, and directing or furthering the aims of the enterprise.
      ORAL SEXUAL CONTACT: Oral contact with the penis, vulva or anus.
      SEXUAL INTERCOURSE: Penetration into the penis, vulva or anus by any part
of the body or by any object or manual masturbatory contact with the penis or
vulva.
   (B)   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and
maintain a live sex act business.
   (C)   Nuisance Per Se: Operation of a live sex act business is a public
nuisance. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-9: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to the nonobscene
presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any
theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher
education, or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or
communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or
exploitation of sex, for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a
commercial or business enterprise. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
3-15-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Violation: The city of Aledo police department and its code officials
are authorized to investigate and enforce the regulations of this chapter. In
the event that such officials determine that a violation exists, such matter
shall be brought before the city council for a hearing to determine: 1) the
existence of a violation; 2) a determination that a "nuisance per se" exists,
as defined herein; 3) if a violation or nuisance per se is declared by the
council, an order of abatement shall immediately be issued. Abatement may
include the closure of the building or premises that houses or accommodates the
live sex act business.
   (B)   Order To Abate: The city attorney, in the name of the city of Aledo,
upon direction by the city administrator or city council, may apply to a court
of competent jurisdiction for an order permitting the city of Aledo to abate
violations of this chapter. Abatement may include the closure of such building
or premises housing or accommodating the live sex act business.
   (C)   Hearing: After notice to the operator of a live sex act business, the
judge shall conduct a hearing and take evidence as to whether a live sex act
business is being operated in violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Abatement: If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the judge determines
that a live sex act business is being operated in the city of Aledo in
violation of this chapter, an order shall be entered authorizing the city to
abate the violation by closing the business. A copy of the order shall be
delivered to the operator of the business and mailed to the owner of the
property upon which the business is located.
   (E)   Remedies Not Exclusive: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent,
restrain or otherwise preclude the city of Aledo from taking compliance
measures other than those remedies as provided for above. The city may take
other lawful measures, including, but not limited to, the issuance of ordinance
citations and the arrest of parties found committing criminal offenses in
conjunction with the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 11-06-06-3, 12-4-2006)
CHAPTER 16
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
3-16-1: Definitions
3-16-2: License Required
3-16-3: Application
3-16-4: License Fee
3-16-5: Display
3-16-6: Revocation
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
ACT: The Video Gaming Act found at 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as from time to time
amended.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any business licensed by the State to have or operate a video
gaming terminal in the City, including any licensed fraternal establishment,
licensed truck stop establishment, and licensed large truck stop establishment,
as these terms are defined under the Video Gaming Act.
TERMINAL OPERATOR: An individual, partnership, corporation or limited liability
company that is licensed under the Act and that owns, services, and maintains
video gaming terminals located within the corporate limits of the City.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Shall have the meaning ascribed to such term by the Act.
(Ord. 21/2022, 11-7-2022)
3-16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   Every establishment that has or operates any video gaming terminal
within the corporate limits of the City or every terminal operator that owns,
services, or maintains any video gaming terminal within the corporate limits of
the City shall register the video gaming terminal with the City Clerk by
providing to the City Clerk an application as set forth in section 3-16-
3 herein. The establishment or terminal operator shall register the video
gaming terminal with the City before such video gaming terminal is operated
within the City.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, keep, maintain, use or
permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his premises of any
video gaming terminal unless a valid license issued under this chapter for the
video gaming terminal is in effect.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver video gaming terminals
within the City for use by any other person for gain or profit from the
operation thereof unless a license therefor has been issued by the City and the
license fee has been paid for the current year. (Ord. 19/2012, 9-4-2012; amd.
Ord. 21/2022, 11-7-2022)
3-16-3: APPLICATION:
Applications for the license required by this chapter shall be filed with the
City Clerk and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, age and date of birth of the owner of the video
gaming terminal and of the owner of the establishment where the video gaming
terminal shall be located.
   (B)   Prior convictions of the owner of the video gaming terminal and the
owner of the establishment, if any.
   (C)   The place where the video gaming terminal is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that place.
   (D)   A description of the video gaming terminal to be covered by the
license.
   (E)   Evidence that licenses have been issued by the Illinois Gaming Board
to the owner of the video gaming terminal and the owner of the establishment.
(Ord. 19/2012, 9-4-2012)
3-16-4: LICENSE FEE:
   (A)   Fee: The annual fee for the license required by this chapter shall be
paid pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. The fee shall be
nonrefundable.
   (B)   Expiration: Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate
on December 31 next following its issuance. The fee to be paid shall be reduced
in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the year prior
to the issuance of the license.
   (C)   Payment Of Fee: The cost of this fee shall be shared equally between
the terminal operator and the establishment. (Ord. 12/2017, 6-5-2017; amd. Ord.
21/2022, 11-7-2022)
3-16-5: DISPLAY:
The license required by this chapter shall be prominently displayed next to the
video gaming terminal. (Ord. 19/2012, 9-4-2012)
3-16-6: REVOCATION:
   (A)   Violations: The Mayor, at any time, may notify any licensee under this
chapter of any charge of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
in connection with the operation of any video gaming terminal. Notice of the
hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place
of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the licensee or permittee at the last known address at least five
(5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
   (B)   Hearing On Revocation: At the hearing, the city attorney shall present
the complaint and shall represent the city. The licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The mayor shall preside and shall render the decision.
   (C)   Appeals:
      1.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city in regard to the
denial of an application for a license or permit as provided in this chapter,
or in connection with the revocation of a license or permit as provided in this
chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the city clerk, within ten (10) days after notice of a
denial of an application or a revocation of a license or permit, a written
statement under oath, setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal.
      2.   The city council shall thereupon set the time and place for a
hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant or licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided in subsection
(A) of this section. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be
by vote of a majority of all the members then holding office and shall be
final. (Ord. 19/2012, 9-4-2012)
CHAPTER 17
HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM RENTING TAX
SECTION:
3-17-1: Definitions
3-17-2: Tax
3-17-3: Books And Records
3-17-4: Transmittal Of Tax Revenue
3-17-5: Collection
3-17-6: Proceeds Of Tax And Fines
3-17-7: Suspension Of Licenses
3-17-8: Penalties
3-17-9: Purpose Of Penalties
3-17-10: Use Of Receipts
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms, or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the following meanings:
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Any house, building or structure located within the city of
Aledo that contains a hotel room or motel room.
HOTEL ROOM OR MOTEL ROOM: A room within a structure kept, used, or maintained
as or advertised or held out to the public to be in an inn, motel, hotel,
apartment, lodging house, dormitory, or place where sleeping, rooming, office,
conference, or exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or rent,
whether with or without meals, including but not limited to short-term rentals
and such houses, buildings or structures, or portions thereof, booked through
online travel companies or other forms of advertising. Accommodations within
said houses, buildings or structures which are leased to the same occupant for
a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days regardless of the initial
lease commitment shall be exempt from the tax provisions of this chapter.
OPERATOR: Any person who is the proprietor of the hotel or motel, whether in
the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or
any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a
managing agent of any type of character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and
shall have the same duties and liabilities as his/her principal. Compliance
with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing
agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
OWNER: Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in a
hotel or motel, in conducting the operation of a hotel or motel room, or
receiving the consideration for the rental of such hotel or motel room so as to
entitle such person or persons to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court-appointed representative, syndicate,
association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust,
institution, agent, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or
other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator,
user, or owner, or any officers, agents, employees, or other representative
acting either for themselves or for any other person in any capacity, or any
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The
masculine, feminine, singular, or plural is included in any circumstances.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: For purposes of this chapter, houses, buildings or
structures, or portions thereof, which are held out to the public to be a place
where sleeping, rooming, office, conference, or exhibition accommodations are
furnished for lease or rent and which are booked through online short-term
rental platforms, including but not limited to VRBO, HomeAway, or AirBnB.
Short-term rentals when rented individually, or the entire short-term rental
when the entire property or structure is rented as a whole, shall be considered
a "hotel or motel room." (Ord. 22/2024,1-6-2025)
3-17-2: TAX:
   (A)   There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of
renting a hotel or motel room within the city a tax of five percent (5%) of the
rental or leasing charge for each such hotel and motel room rented for each
twenty-four (24) hour period or any portion thereof; provided, however, that
the tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any person who rents a hotel or
motel room as his or her permanent residence.
   (B)   The ultimate incident of and liability for payment of said tax shall
be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying any such hotel or
motel room, said person hereinafter referred to as "renter."
   (C)   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager, or operator of
every hotel or motel to act as trustee for and on account of the city, and to
secure said tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room and pay over to the
City Administrator said tax under the procedures as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this chapter shall
secure said tax from the renter at the time they collect the rental payment for
the hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or
memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of payment, the amount
due under the tax provided in this chapter shall be stated separately on said
documents. (Ord. 22/2024,1-6-2025)
3-17-3: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The City Administrator, or any person certified as the administrator's deputy
or representative, may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection
and examination of books and records in order to effectuate the proper
administration of this chapter and to assure the enforcement of the collection
of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or
interfere with the City Administrator or his duly authorized deputy or
representative in the discharge of his duties and the performance of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of every owner or operator to keep accurate and
complete books and records to which the City Administrator or his deputy or
authorized representative shall at all times have access, which records shall
include a daily sheet showing:
   (A)   The number of hotel motel rooms rented during the twenty-four (24)
hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel rooms where such
shall occur, and
   (B)   The actual hotel, motel, short-term rental tax receipts collected for
the date in question. (Ord. 22/2024,1-6-2025)
3-17-4: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUE:
   (A)   The owner or owners or operator of each hotel or motel within the city
shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel
and motel room during each month period commencing on April 1, 2025, and
continuing on the first day of every month thereafter on forms prescribed by
the City Administrator. The return shall be due on or before the thirtieth day
of the calendar month succeeding the end of the month filing period.
   (B)   The first taxing period for the purpose of this chapter shall commence
May 1, 2023, and the tax return and payment for such period shall be due on or
before June 30, 2023. Thereafter reporting periods and tax payments shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. At the time of filing said tax
returns, the owner or operator shall pay to the City Administrator all taxes
due for the period to which the tax return applies.
   (C)   In case any person who is required under this chapter to file a tax
return to the city fails to file a return when and as required under this
chapter, said person shall pay to the city, in addition to the amount of tax
required to be transmitted, a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax that said
person is required to transmit to the city; provided, however, that a twenty
percent (20%) penalty shall be imposed for any fraudulent return. In case any
person who is required under this chapter to file a tax return to the city
files a return at the time required but fails to transmit the tax proceeds, or
any portion thereof, to the city when due, a penalty of five percent (5%) of
the amount of tax not transmitted to the city shall be added thereto; provided,
however, that the fraudulent failure to pay such tax shall result in a twenty
percent (20%) penalty.
   (D)   In addition to any penalty for which provision is made in this
chapter, any amount of tax not transmitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of two percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until fully
transmitted.
   (E)   Any officer or employee of any corporation, which is an owner or
operator subject to the provisions of this chapter, who has control,
supervision, or responsibility of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns, and
transmitting collected tax proceeds of the tax imposed by this chapter and who
willfully fails to file such return or to transmit any tax proceeds so
collected to the city shall be personally liable for any such amounts
collected, including interest and penalties thereon, in the event that after
proper proceedings for the collection of such amount, such corporation is
unable to pay such amounts to the city; and the personal liability of such
officer or employees, as provided herein, shall survive dissolution of the
corporation. For purposes of this subsection, a person willfully fails to act
if they take any conscious and voluntary action intending not to perform any of
his obligations hereunder, including, but not limited to, the utilizing of tax
proceeds collected for the city to pay any other corporate obligations.
   (F)   If any operator or owner shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and
to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of
said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the administrator
shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on
which to base the estimate of the tax due. As soon as the administrator shall
procure such facts and information as is obtainable upon which to base the
assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable to any operator or
owner who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and
remittance, the administrator shall proceed to determine and assess against
such operator or owner the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this
chapter. In case such determination is made, the administrator shall give a
notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it
in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator or owner
so assessed at operator or owner's last known address. Such operator or owner
may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make
application in writing to the City Administrator for a hearing on the amount
assessed. If application by the operator or owner for a hearing is not made
within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any,
determined by the administrator shall become final and conclusive and
immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the administrator
shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the manner prescribed
herein to the operator or owner to show cause at a hearing at a time and place
fixed in said notice why said amount specified there should not be fixed for
such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing, the operator or owner may
appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties
should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the administrator shall determine
the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the
person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of
such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be
payable after fifteen (15) days, unless an appeal is taken as provided in
paragraph G.
   (G)   Any operator or owner aggrieved by any decision of the administrator
with respect to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may
appeal to the Mayor by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due.
The Mayor shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City
Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator or owner at the last known
address. The findings of the Mayor shall be final and conclusive and shall be
served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice
of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable
upon the service of notice.
   (H)   It shall be the duty of every owner liable for the collection and
payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine
the amount of such tax as the owner or operator may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the city, which records the administrator shall
have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 22/2024,1-6-2025)
3-17-5: COLLECTION:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the
corporation counsel shall, upon the request of the City Administrator, bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 22/2024,1-6-2025)
3-17-6: PROCEEDS OF TAX AND FINES:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter,
including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be
credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of the city. (Ord. 22/2024,1-6-
2025)
3-17-7: SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
If the Mayor, after hearing held by the Mayor and City Council, shall find that
any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, he
may suspend or revoke all city licenses held by such tax evader or may suspend
any or all services provided by the city. The owner, manager, or operator of
the hotel or motel shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be
held not less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the
hearing to be held, addressed to the last known place of business. For purposes
of this section, a person willfully avoids payment of the tax if they take any
conscious and voluntary action intending not to perform any of the obligations
hereunder, including, but not limited to, the utilizing of tax proceeds
collected for the city to pay any other obligations. (Ord. 22/2024,1-6-2025)
3-17-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the
first offense and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second and each subsequent
offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day period. Repeated offenses in excess
of three (3) within any one hundred eighty (180) day period may also be
punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in the county jail for a term not
to exceed six (6) months. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as
committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such violation, or
permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof. (Ord. 22/2024,1-
6-2025)
3-17-9: PURPOSE OF PENALTIES:
The purpose of imposing the above penalties is to ensure the integrity of the
collection process established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 22/2024,1-6-
2025)
3-17-10: USE OF RECEIPTS:
The amounts collected by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be expended by
the city solely to promote tourism and conventions within the city or otherwise
to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the city.
(Ord. 22/2024,1-6-2025)
CHAPTER 18
MUNICIPAL GROCERY OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-18-1: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
3-18-2: Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax Imposed
3-18-3: Administration
3-18-4: Effective Date
3-18-1: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in the City at the rate of 1.0% of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this section of the City
of Aledo Code is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24), as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 10/2025, 5-19-2025)
3-18-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the City in the business
of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales of
service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be in the same rate identified in Section 3-18-1. The imposition
of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-
11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24), as amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 10/2025, 5-19-2025)
3-18-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section of the City of
Aledo Municipal Code.
(Ord. 10/2025, 5-19-2025)
3-18-4: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2026.
(Ord. 10/2025, 5-29-2025)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
4-1-1:   Adoption
4-1-2:   Amendments
4-1-3:   Permit, Plan And Survey Requirements
4-1-4:   Fences
4-1-5:   Swimming Pools
4-1-6:   Parking Lots
4-1-7:   Contractor Licensing
4-1-8:   Permit Fees
4-1-9:   Property Maintenance Code Enforcement
4-1-10:   New Occupancy Requirements
4-1-11:   Existing Businesses
4-1-12:   Awnings
4-1-13:   Driveways; Walks; Culverts
4-1-14:   Penalties
4-1-15:   Demolitions
4-1-1: ADOPTION:
   (A)   The ICC International Residential Code, edition 2021, is hereby
adopted, as amended by the City of Aledo. The Code shall be the sole standard
for the construction, alteration, addition and rehabilitation of all one and
two-family dwellings. Compliance with the Code shall be required for all items
regulated by the Code and where compliance is specifically required by the
Code.
   (B)   The International Code Council (ICC) International Building Code
(IBC), edition 2021, is hereby adopted as the Building Code for the City of
Aledo, as amended by the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code shall be
required for all items regulated by said Code and where compliance is
specifically required by the Code.
   (C)   The ICC International Existing Building Code, edition 2021, is hereby
adopted, as amended by the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code may be
employed as an alternative to the International Building Code for those items
regulated by the Code as applies to existing buildings, as defined. If using
the Code as an alternative, compliance with the Code shall be required for all
items regulated by the Code and where compliance is specifically required by
the Code.
   (D)   The ICC International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2021 edition,
is hereby adopted, as amended by the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code
shall be required for all items regulated by same and where specifically
mandated within the Code.
   (E)   The ICC International Fire Code, edition 2021, is hereby adopted, as
amended by the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code shall be required for
all items regulated by the Code and where compliance is specifically required
by the Code.
   (F)   The ICC International Fuel Gas Code, edition 2021, is hereby adopted,
as amended by the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code shall be required for
all items regulated by the Code and where compliance is specifically required
by the Code.
   (G)   The ICC International Mechanical Code, edition 2021, is hereby
adopted, as amended by the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code shall be
required for all items regulated by the Code and where compliance is
specifically required by the Code.
   (H)   The ICC International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, edition 2021, is
hereby adopted, as amended by the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code shall
be required for all items regulated by the Code and where compliance is
specifically required by the Code.
   (I)   The NFPA National Electrical Code, edition 2020, is hereby adopted, as
amended by the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code shall be required for
all items regulated by the Code and where compliance is specifically required
by the Code.
   (J)   The Illinois Accessibility Code, edition 2018, is hereby adopted.
Compliance with the Code shall be required for all items regulated by the Code
and where compliance is specifically required by the Code.
   (K)   The State of Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby adopted, as amended by
the City of Aledo. Compliance with the Code shall be required for all items
regulated by same and where specifically mandated within the Code
   (L)   All of the above Codes are adopted by reference and shall be
enforceable as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein.
   (M)   Wherever a requirement of the Code conflicts with a written practice,
policy or procedure adopted by the City Council, the adopted practice, policy
or procedure shall prevail.
(Ord. 04/2025, 2-18-2025)
4-1-2: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   General Provisions:
      1.   All Adopted Codes:
         (a)   Throughout all adopted codes, wherever the words [name of
jurisdiction] appear, insert “the city of Aledo”.
         (b)   Throughout all adopted codes, wherever fee refunds are
mentioned, the value “80%” shall be inserted in the appropriate place.
      2.   International Residential Code: All references to “international
residential code” shall be interpreted to mean the 2021 international
residential code, as amended herein.
      3.   International Building Code: All references to “international
building code” or “IBC” shall be interpreted to mean the 2021 international
building code, as amended herein.
      4.   International Property Maintenance Code: All references to
“international property maintenance code” or “IPMC” shall be interpreted to
mean the 2021 international property maintenance code, as amended herein.
      5.   International Fuel Gas Code: All references to “international fuel
gas code” shall be interpreted to mean the 2021 international fuel gas code, as
amended herein.
      6.   International Mechanical Code: All references to “international
mechanical code” shall be interpreted to mean the 2021 international mechanical
code, as amended herein.
      7.   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code: All references to
“international swimming pool and spa code” shall be interpreted to mean the
2021 international swimming pool and spa code, as amended herein.
      8.   International Electrical Code: All references to “international
electrical code” shall be interpreted to mean the 2020 NFPA 70 national
electrical code as amended herein.
      9.   International Plumbing Code: All references to “international
plumbing code” shall be interpreted to mean the Illinois plumbing code as
amended and adopted by the city of Aledo. Throughout, replace all references to
specific plumbing matters with the applicable portions of the amended Illinois
plumbing code unless explicitly stated otherwise by this or other ordinances of
this jurisdiction.
      10.   Accessibility: All accessibility requirements are to include the
provisions of the Illinois accessibility code. In the event of conflicting
requirements, provisions of the Illinois accessibility code shall prevail.
   (B)   Residential Code. The International Residential Code, 2021 Edition,
and all appendices, unless deleted, published therewith, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the “Aledo
Residential Code.” Three copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the city
clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such
purposes. The following sections of the International Residential Code, 2021
edition, are hereby revised as follows:
   Section R101.1 Title.
   Insert “the City of Aledo” for [NAME OF JURISDICTION]
   Section R102.5 Appendices.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section R102.5 Appendices.
      The following appendices are hereby adopted: AB, AC, AD, AE, AF, AG,
AH,AI, AJ, AM, AT, AQ, AW. Appendices not named herein do not apply.”
   Section R103 Department of Building Safety.
   Change “Department of Building Safety” to “code administration department”
   Section R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “R103.1 Enforcement agency. The building division is responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this code. The official in charge of the building
division shall be known as the building official. Throughout this and all
referenced codes and ordinances, the executive official in charge, variously
referred to as the chief building inspector, code official, and similar items,
shall be interpreted to mean the building official.”
   Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit.
   Amend Exemption 1 under “Building” by changing “200 square feet” to “120
square feet.”
   Section R112 Board of Appeals.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section R112 Board of Appeals. “The Aledo code committee shall be
charged with the responsibilities of a building board of appeals. The
committee’s duties in this regard shall be limited to hearing and ruling upon
whether the code official has correctly interpreted and applied a particular
code or city ordinance having to do with the building codes. The committee
shall have no authority to waive or amend the code, change or set policy or
provide variances.’
   Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
   Delete table and replace with:
“Table R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA (new table)
 
            Wind Design                   Seismic   Subject to Damage From
Ground Snow Speedd  Topographic Windborne Design                Frost
Load        (mph)   Effectsk    Debris    Categoryf Weatheringa line   Termitee
                                Zonem                           depthb
ps = 30
psf, except
that
calculation
s for                                                                  Modera
additional  107     YES         NO        A         SEVERE      42"    te to
drift loads                                                            heavy
shall use a
ground snow
load pg =
25 psf
 
 
Winter Design Ice Barrier                     Air Freezing
Tempe         Underlayment Flood Hazardg      Indexi       Mean Annual Tempj
              Requiredh
                           Initial NFIP
-4 F          YES          Community# Current 2000         50.5 F
                           FIRM
 
(NFIP - National Flood Insurance Program) (FIRM - Flood Insurance Rate Maps)
   Section R302.13 Fire Protection of floors.
   Delete entire section.
Section R305.1.1 Basements. (Ceiling Height)
   Delete the Exception in its entirety and replace with:
      “Exceptions:
      1.   Beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions may project to within 6
feet 4 inches (1931 mm) of the finished floor.
      2.   Conversions of attics and basements of a group R-3 occupancy
utilized as a single-family dwelling unit shall have a ceiling height of not
less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm). Ductwork projections may be lower than
this if located against partition walls. Doorway heights must be at least 6
feet 4 inches (1931 mm).”
Section R309.5 Fire sprinklers.
   Delete entire “Section R309.5 Fire sprinklers” and all references thereto
and replace with one new Section R309.5:
      “R309.5 Opening Protection. Openings from a private garage directly into
a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings
between the garage and residence shall be equipped with self-closing, tight
fitting solid wood doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35mm) in thickness, solid
or honeycomb steel doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, or
20-minute fire rated doors.”
   Section R310.1 Emergency Escape and Rescue Opening.
   Add: Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms, emergency egress
and rescue openings shall be located in each sleeping room, but shall not be
required in adjoining areas of the basement when so provided.
   Section R311.7 Stairways.
   Delete: All Exceptions
   Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
   Delete entire section.
   Section R314 Smoke Alarms
   Add one new subsection:
      “R314.2.2 Alterations, repairs and additions. When interior alterations,
repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping
rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the individual dwelling unit
shall be provided with smoke alarms located as required for new dwellings.
      Exceptions:
      3.   Smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required to be
interconnected and hard wired where the alterations or repairs do not result in
the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure.
      4.   Repairs to the exterior surfaces of dwellings are exempt from the
requirements of this section.”
   Sections R403 Footings and R404 Foundation and Retaining Walls.  
   Delete Tables R403.1(1)-R403.1(3), R403.4, R404.1.1(1), R404.1.1(2),
R404.1.1(3), R404.1.1(4), R404.1.2(2), R404.1.2(3), R404.1.2(4), R404.1.2(5),
R404.1.1.2(6), R404.1.2(7), R404.1.2(8) and R404.1.2(9) and all references
thereto and replace with the following Table R403.1 and notes:
   “Table 403.1
 
           Minimum Thickness of
           Foundation Wall                            Footings    Footings not
Number of                       Minimum  Minimum      subject to  subject to
Floors                          Width of Thickness of frost Min.  frost Min.
Supported  Concrete  Unit       Footing  Footing      Depth below Depth below
by the     (inches)  Masonry    (inches) (inches)     undisturbed undisturbed
Foundation           (inches)                         ground      ground
                                                      (inches)    (inches)

1          8         8          16       8            42          12
2          8         8          16       8            42          18
3          10        12         18       12           42          24
 
   Notes:
      (1)   Foundations may support a roof in addition to the stipulated number
of floors. Foundations’ supporting roofs only shall be as required for
supporting one floor. Footings shall contain a minimum of two number 4
reinforcement bars, and have a minimum compressive strength of 2,500 pounds per
square inch at 28 days.
      (2)   A one-story detached wood frame building used for a private garage
and accessory to a single-family residential use and not exceeding 720 square
feet in floor area, with no side dimension longer than 30 feet, and no wall
height taller than 10 feet, and no more than 3 courses of masonry block,
located on undisturbed soil, may be constructed with a floating slab. This slab
shall be a minimum of 4 inches thick, air-entrained concrete having a minimum
compressive strength at 28 days of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch,
reinforced with a 21-pound wire mesh, and having a 12-inch thick by 12-inch
wide perimeter reinforced with no less than two number 4 reinforcement bars
shall be installed within the perimeter beam. This slab shall be continuously
poured with no cold joints.
      (3)   Buildings and portions of buildings containing mechanical
installations and connected to underground utilities shall be supported on a
continuous, frost-free foundation capable of resisting the movement of the
slab-on-grade.
      (4)   Cast-in-place concrete foundation walls shall be air-entrained
concrete having a minimum compressive strength at 28 days of not less than
3,000 pounds per square inch.
      (5)   Foundation walls shall be a minimum of 7½ inches thick with no less
than three number 4 reinforcement bars placed horizontally at the center of the
wall, with one bar located near the top, one bar located near the mid-height,
and one bar located near the bottom.”
   New Section R403.1.1.1 Footing requirements for uncovered decks.
   All decks shall have a minimum footing size of 12 inches in diameter with 42
inches in depth.
   New Section R403.1.1.2 Footing requirements for covered decks and room
additions.
   All elevated and covered decks, screened rooms, three and four-season rooms,
and room additions shall comply with one of the following footing types:
      1.   Pier footings were designed by a licensed design professional and
submitted with stamped and signed plans or 24-inch diameter or 42-inches deep
pier footing as approved by Building Official.
      2.   12-inch wide by 42-inch deep trench footing with 2 number 4 rebar
horizontally, one top and one bottom with minimum 3 inches of concrete
coverage.
      3.   Spread footing sized with reinforcement per Table R403.1 with a
minimum 8-inch masonry or concrete foundation wall.
    Section R403.1.4.1 Frost protection.
   Exception 1. Detached garages - remove 600 square feet and change to 720
square feet.
   Section R403.1.6 Foundation anchorage.
   Add: “Wood sill plates and wood walls supported directly on continuous
foundations shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with this
section. Wood sole plates shall not be encased or embedded in concrete.”
   Section R404.1.3 Concrete foundation walls.
   Change: “Concreted foundation walls that support light-frame walls shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
ACI318, ACI 332, or PCA 100, or a method that meets standard practice for the
jurisdiction pre- approved by the current Building Official.”
   Section R407.1 Wood column protection.
   Change: “Wood columns shall be protected against decay as set forth in
Section R317, and shall not be encased or embedded in concrete.”
   Table R503.2.1.1(1).
   Delete the first three rows in the table and remove all references for the
use of 3/8"sheathing for floor or roof construction.
   Section R507.1 Decks.
   Add: “or a method that meets standard practice for the jurisdiction pre-
approved by the current Building Official.”
   Section R507.3.1 Minimum Footing Size.
   Add at the end of the sentence: “But not less than 12 inches in diameter.”
   Section R507.3.2 Minimum Depth.
   Change: Deck footing shall be placed not less than 42 inches and 12 inches
in diameter (1067 305mm) below the undisturbed ground surface.
   Delete Table 507.4 and replace with:
 
Deck Wood Post Height
Deck Post Size 4 X 4 4 X 6 6 X 6 8 X 8
Maximum height 6'    8'    12'   14'
 
   1.   Measured from the underside of the beam to the top of the footing or
pier.
   2.   No. 2 grade, wet service factor included.
   3.   All other alternatives are to be designed by an Illinois-licensed
design professional.
   Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency.
   At the beginning of the chapter, after “ENERGY EFFICIENCY” and before
“SECTION N1101", add:
   “For Information only. Compliance with provisions of this chapter is not
required by the City of Aledo.
   Compliance with the current edition of the International Energy Conservation
Code (IECC) adopted by the State of Illinois is required.”
   Part VII Plumbing.
   Delete all contents of Part VII “Plumbing” (Chapters 25-33) and replace
with: “Refer to the Illinois Plumbing Code with City of Aledo amendments”
   Section P2904 Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems.
   Delete entire section.
   Part VIII Electrical
   Delete all contents of Part VIII “Electrical” (Chapters 34-43) and replace
with: “Refer to the NFPA 70 National Electric Code, as adopted with City of
Aledo amendments.
   (C)   Building Code. The International Building Code, 2021 Edition, and all
appendices, unless deleted, published therewith, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the “Aledo
Building Code.” Three copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the city
clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such
purposes. The following sections of the International Building Code, 2021
edition, are hereby revised as follows:
   Section 101.1 Title.
   Insert “the City of Aledo” for [name of jurisdiction].
   Section 101.2 Scope:
   Under the exceptions:
      Add “1.   “ to the existing exception and add a new exception 2:
      “2.   Existing buildings undergoing repair, alterations, additions, or
change of occupancy shall be permitted to comply with the 2021 International
Existing Building Code.”
    Section 101.2.1 Appendices.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
       “Section 101.2.1 Appendices.
      The following appendices are hereby adopted; appendices not named herein
do not apply:
      C - Agricultural Buildings; E - Supplementary Accessibility Requirements;
F - Rodent Proofing; G - Flood Resistant Construction; H - Signs; I - Patio
Covers; J - Grading; and one new Appendix P - Climatic and Geographic Design
Criteria, which shall read as follows:
   Appendix P- Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria
   Unless otherwise approved by the building official, the following minimum
basic design criteria shall be used.
 
                                                                          Wind  Seismic  Subject to damage from
Roof Snow Load (ps) pounds per square foot                                Speed Design              Frost                 Winter Flood
                                                                          (mph) Category Weathering Line  Termite  Decay  Design Hazards
                                                                                                    Depth                 Temp
(ps) = 30 psf, except that calculations for add’l drift loads shall use a                         42    Moderate Slight
ground snow load pg = 25 psf                                              107   0(A)     Severe     in.   to Heavy to     -4° F FIRM
                                                                                                                   Heavy
 
   Section 101.4.3 Plumbing.
   Delete Entire Section and replace with:
      “The 2014 Illinois plumbing code shall apply.”
   Section 101.4.5 Fire Prevention.
   Add the sentence: “All references to the international fire code in this and
all adopted supporting codes are to be interpreted as meaning the fire code
adopted by reference in the Aledo code of ordinances unless explicitly stated
otherwise by this jurisdiction.”
   Section R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “R103.1 Enforcement agency. The building division is responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this code. The official in charge of the building
division shall be known as the building official. Throughout this and all
referenced codes and ordinances, the executive official in charge, variously
referred to as the chief building inspector, code official, and similar items,
shall be interpreted to mean the building official.”
   Section 108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees.
   Add: “108.2.1 Building Permit Fees. Building permit fees shall be as set by
resolution of the Aledo city council.”
   Section 113 Means of Appeal.
   Delete all subsections and replace with:
      The Aledo code committee shall be charged with the responsibilities of a
building board of appeals. The committee’s duties in this regard shall be
limited to hearing and ruling upon whether the code official has correctly
interpreted and applied a particular code or city ordinance having to do with
the building codes. The committee shall have no authority to waive or amend the
code, change or set policy or provide variances.
   Section 202 Definitions.
   Amend as follows:
      “PERSON. An individual or such individual’s heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns; and includes and extends to associations, clubs,
societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate or its or
their successors or assigns; or the agent of any of the aforesaid.”
   Section 1011.11 Handrails.
   Add Exception:
      6.   Handrails within a dwelling or serving an individual dwelling unit
may have one (1) offset or interruption per flight of stairs, not both, of a
maximum of six (6) inches in total length and shall be considered for the
purpose of this code to be continuous.
   Section 1101.2 Design.
   Change “Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with this code and ICC A117.1.”
   To read: “Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with this code, the latest version of Illinois
accessibility code, and ICC/ANSI A117.1.”
   Section 1208.2 Minimum ceiling heights.
   Add one new Exception 5:
      “5.   Conversions of attics and basements of a group R-3 occupancy
utilized as a single family dwelling unit shall have a ceiling height of not
less than 6 feet and 8 inches. Ductwork projections may be lower than this if
located against partition walls. Doorway heights must be at least 6 feet 4
inches.”
   Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency.
   Delete entire chapter and replace with:
      “Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency. Designers and builders are required to
design and construct buildings in accordance with the current International
Energy Conservation Code” adopted by the State of Illinois.”
   Section 1608.1 General.  
   Add:
      “Note: All snow loads shall be based on a minimum roof snow load (ps) of
30 pounds per square foot, except that calculations for additional snowdrift
loads shall be based on a ground snow load pg = 25 pounds per square foot.”
   Section 1809.5 Frost protection.
   Change: “1. Extending below the frost line of the locality” to “1. Extending
below the 42-inch frost line”
      “1809.5.2 Floating slabs. For group U occupancies 720 square feet or
less, with no side dimension longer than 30 feet, and no wall height taller
than 10 feet, and no more than 3 courses of masonry block, located on
undisturbed soil, may be constructed with a floating slab. This slab shall be a
minimum of 4 inches thick, air-entrained concrete having a minimum compressive
strength at 28 days of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch, reinforced
with a 21-pound wire mesh, and having a 12-inch thick by 12-inch wide perimeter
reinforced with no less than two number 4 reinforcement bars. This slab shall
be continuously poured with no cold joints.”
   Table 1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light frame construction.  
   Delete entire Table 1809.7 and replace with:
 
TABLE 1809.7
FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION
           Minimum Thickness Of
           Foundation Wall                             Footings    Footings Not
Number Of                        Minimum  Minimum      Subject To  Subject To
Floors                           Width Of Thickness Of Frost Min.  Frost Min.
Supported  Concrete Unit Masonry Footing  Footing      Depth Below Depth Below
By The     (Inches) (Inches)     (Inches) (Inches)     Undisturbed Undisturbe d
Foundation                                             Ground      Ground
                                                       (Inches)    (Inches)

1          8        8            16       8            42          12
2          8        8            16       8            42          18
3          10       12           18       12           42          24
 
(Application note: Only the table proper replaced. Existing title and notes
remain.)
   Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems.
   Delete entire chapter and replace with:
   “The 2014 Illinois plumbing code shall apply.”
   (D)   Property Maintenance Code. The International Property Maintenance
Code, 2021 Edition, and all appendices, unless deleted, published therewith, as
published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as
the “Aledo Property Maintenance Code.” Three copies of such Code shall be kept
on file in the city clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file
therein for such purpose. The following sections of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2021 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
   101.1 Title.
   Insert “the City of Aledo, IL” for [NAME OF JURISDICTION].
   102.3 Application of other codes.
   Delete International Zoning Code and replace with “Aledo, IL Code of
Ordinances.”
   102.7 Referenced codes and standards.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
   102.7 Referenced codes and standards.
   “The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are
listed in the Aledo, IL Code of Ordinances. Where differences occur between
provisions of this code and the referenced code or standards, the most
restrictive provisions shall apply.”
   103.1 Creation of agency.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “103.1 Enforcement agency. The building division is responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this code. The official in charge of the building
division shall be known as the code official”
   202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   Add the following definitions:
      “BUILDING CODE. The International Building Code and International
Residential Code as adopted by the City of Aledo.
      DANGEROUS. An unfit building where conditions or defects exist within the
structure to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public
or its occupants are imminently endangered and immediate corrective action is
necessary.
      HOT WATER. Water supplied to plumbing fixtures at 115°F (45°C).
      SUBSTANDARD. A structure that fails in any respect to comply with the
Aledo, IL Code of Ordinances. Failure to correct such non-compliance may result
in such building becoming an unfit building.
      UNFIT. A substandard building where conditions or defects exist to the
extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants
may be endangered and action within a certain time period is required. Failure
to correct such conditions or defects within the time period may cause an unfit
building to become a dangerous building.”
      IMMINENT DANGER. Add the following sentence to the end of the definition:
      “A severe condition(s) that could endanger the life, limb, health,
property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants.”
   302.1 Sanitation.
   Add “In addition to the fines provided for a violation of this section, the
city may, after the responsible party has failed to comply with the notice of
violation, perform such work so as to restore the property to a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. Such work shall be at cost to the owner. In performing such
nuisance abatement, the city shall follow all legal requirements.”
   302.4 Weeds.
   Insert “8 inches” in space indicated.
   302.7 Accessory Structures.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      302.7 Accessory Structures.
      “All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences, walls and
temporary structures, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
      302.7.1 Minor Temporary Accessory Structures. Temporary canopies,
carports and similar portable and premanufactured structures made of a support
structure and enclosed or covered by fabric, canvas, nylon, vinyl, plastic, or
other non-rigid material and equal to or less than 120 square feet may be
placed, maintained, and installed in the City as long as said structure is
securely anchored, free of tears, rips and other defects, and meets all setback
requirements of an accessory structure.
      302.7.2 Major Temporary Accessory Structures. Temporary canopies,
carports and similar portable and premanufactured structures made of a support
structure and enclosed or covered by fabric, canvas, nylon, vinyl, plastic, or
other non-rigid material and greater than 120 square feet may be placed,
maintained, and installed in the City as long as said structure complies with
all building and zoning codes that would apply as if it were a permanent
accessory structure.”
   302.8 Motor Vehicles.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      No inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or
stored on any premises and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray
booth.
      Exception: Vehicles belonging to the lawful occupant of the property may
be kept in an accessory building properly and lawfully constructed and zoned
for such use, provided such storage is safe and sanitary, regardless of its
operative or license status. A motor vehicle may undergo major overhaul
provided such work is permitted by the zoning ordinance and performed inside a
structure that is designed and approved for such purpose.
      In addition to the fines provided for a violation of this section, the
city may, after the responsible party has failed to comply with the notice of
violation, remove the offending vehicle from the property at cost to the owner.
In performing such nuisance abatement, the city shall follow all legal
requirements.”
   302.10 Furniture.
   Add one new section to read as follows:
      “302.10 Furniture. Only furniture and equipment designed and intended for
outdoor use and able to withstand outdoor elements and weather conditions shall
be permitted to be kept in exterior property areas, including unenclosed
porches, patios and decks.”
   304.14 Insect Screens.
   Insert : “During the period from April 15 to November 15"
   307.1 Handrails and Guardrails.
   Delete the “Exception” and replace with:
      “Exception: Every interior and exterior handrail and guardrail shall be
firmly fastened and capable of resisting an imposed load of fifty (50) pounds
in any one direction. Replacement of either shall be in compliance with the
current adopted building code. The code official shall have the authority to
allow non-compliance replacement based upon historical or other integral
considerations.”
   503.4 Floor surface.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “503.4 Floor surface. Every bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be impervious to water. All floor surfaces
shall be easily cleanable.”
   505.4 Water Heating Facilities.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and
capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility at temperatures specified
in the Illinois plumbing code. Storage-type water heaters shall have the
following minimum capacities:
         1.   Single unit - 30 gallons.
         2.   Duplex unit with shared water heater - 40 gallons.
         3.   Triplex unit with shared water heater - 50 gallons.
      Other means of supplying hot water, such as demand-type water heaters,
must supply at least the equivalent amount of heated water in wintertime
conditions.
      A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet
room, bedroom, or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate
combustion air is provided.”
   602.3 Heat supply.
   Insert “October 1 to May 15"
   602.4 Occupiable work spaces.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a
minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
         Exceptions:  Processing, storage and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions. Areas in which persons are primarily
engaged in vigorous physical activities.”
   605.2 Receptacles.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling unit shall
contain at least two (2) separate and remote receptacles. Every laundry area
shall contain at least one (1) grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a
ground fault circuit interrupter. At least one (1) ground fault circuit
interrupter (GFCI) shall be installed in every bathroom adjacent to the basin
location. All residential bathroom receptacles are to be GFCI protected.”
   SECTION 606. ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “SECTION 606. ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS. Refer to applicable
State of Illinois laws.”
   703.4 Opening protectives.
   Amend by adding a second paragraph:
      “All apartments, rooming houses or rooming units exiting into a common
hallway shall have a minimum 1-3/8" solid core or equivalent self-closing doors
equipped with latches and having a minimum fire resistance rating of twenty
(20) minutes.”
   Section 705 CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM DETECTORS.
      (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them:
         (1)   Approved Carbon Monoxide Alarm or Alarm means a carbon monoxide
alarm that complies with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of
the Illinois State Fire Marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized
testing laboratory, and complies with the most recent standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories or the Canadian Standard Association.
         (2)   Dwelling Unit means a room or suite of rooms used for human
habitation, and includes a single-family residence as well as each living unit
of a multi-family residence and each living unit in a mixed-use building.
      (b)   Carbon Monoxide Detector.
         (1)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved
carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within fifteen (15) feet of
every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be
combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit complies
with the respective provisions of state rules and regulations relating to both
smoke detecting devices and carbon monoxide alarms and provided that the
combined unit emits an alarm in a manner that clearly differentiates the
hazard.
         (2)   Every structure that contains more than one (1) dwelling unit
shall contain at least one (1) approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating
condition within fifteen (15) feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.
         (3)   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply
and install all required alarms. It is the responsibility of a tenant to test
and to provide general maintenance for the alarms within the tenant’s dwelling
unit or rooming unit, and to notify the owner or the authorized agent of the
owner in writing of any deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The owner
is responsible for providing one (1) tenant per dwelling unit with written
information regarding alarm testing and maintenance.
         The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries in
the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant’s dwelling unit, except that the owner
shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time the
tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to
correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
         (4)   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this Act may be either
battery powered, plug-in with battery back-up, or wired into the structure’s AC
power line with secondary battery back-up.
      (c)   Violation.
         (1)   Willful failure to install or maintain in operating condition
any carbon monoxide alarm required by this section is considered a violation.
         (2)   Tampering with, removing, destroying, disconnecting, or removing
the batteries from any installed carbon monoxide alarm, except in the course of
inspection, maintenance, or replacement of the alarm, is considered a
violation.
         (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the
Aledo Code of Ordinances.
      (d)   Exemptions. The following residential units shall not require
carbon monoxide detectors:
         (1)   A residential unit in a building that: (i) does not rely on
combustion of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; (ii) is not
connected in any way to a garage; and (iii) is not sufficiently close to any
ventilated source of carbon monoxide, as determined by the City’s building
official, to receive carbon monoxide from that source.
         (2)   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source
of carbon monoxide from that source, as determined by the City’s building
official.
   (E)   Mechanical Code. The International Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition, and
all appendices, unless deleted, published therewith, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the “Aledo
Mechanical Code.” Three copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the city
clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such
purposes. The following sections of the International Mechanical Code, 2021
edition, are hereby revised as follows:
   Section 101.1 Title.
   Insert “the City of Aledo, IL” for [NAME OF JURISDICTION].
   Section 101.2.1 Appendices.
   The following appendix is hereby adopted: “Appendix A - Combustion Air
Openings and Chimney Connector Pass- throughs.” Appendices not named herein do
not apply.”
   Section 103.1 Creation of agency.
   Replace entire section with: “The building division is responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this code. The official in charge of the building
division shall be known as the building official. References to ‘code official’
throughout this code shall be construed to mean ‘building official or building
official’s designee.”
   (F)   Fuel Gas Code. The International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 Edition, and all
appendices, unless deleted, published therewith, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as the “Aledo Fuel
Gas Code.” Three copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the city clerk’s
office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such purposes. The
following sections of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition, are hereby
revised as follows:
   Section 101.1 Title.
   Insert “the City of Aledo, IL” for [NAME OF JURISDICTION].
   Section 101.3 Appendices.
   The following appendices are hereby adopted: A, B, C and D. Appendices not
named herein do not apply.”
   Section 103 (IFGC) Department of Inspection.
   Change “Department of Inspection” to “building division”
   Section 103.1 General.
   Replace entire section with:
      “103.1 General. The building division is responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this code. The official in charge of the building division shall
be known as the building official. References to ‘code official’ throughout
this code shall be construed to mean ‘building official or building official’s
designee’.
   Section 301 (IFGC) General.
   Add one new section:
      “301.1.1.2 L-P Gas Systems. Liquefied Petroleum Gas systems shall not be
used unless jointly approved by the fire marshal and the building official.”
   Section 403.3.3 Copper and copper alloy.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section 403.3.3 Copper and copper alloy. Copper and copper alloy pipe
shall not be used.”
   Section 403.4.3 Copper tubing.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section 403.4.3 Copper and copper alloy tubing. Copper and copper alloy
tubing shall not be used.”
   Section 403.10 Metallic piping joints and fittings.
   Insert:
      5.   The type of piping joint used shall be suitable for the pressure-
temperature conditions and shall be selected giving consideration to joint
tightness and mechanical strength under the service conditions. The joint shall
be able to sustain the maximum end force caused by the internal pressure and
any additional forces caused by temperature expansion or contraction,
vibration, fatigue or the weight of the pipe and its contents.
   Section 406 (IFGS) Inspection, Testing and Purging.
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section 406.4.1 Test Pressure. All tests are to be witnessed by the
building official or his designee. A pressure gauge and bleeder valve must be
on the system during this test in a location readily available to the person
conducting the inspection.”
   (G)   Electrical Code. The NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, 2020 Edition,
as published by the National Fire Protection Association is hereby adopted by
reference as the “Aledo Electrical Code.” Three copies of such Code shall be
kept on file in the city clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file
therein for such purposes. The following sections of the International
Electrical Code, 2021 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
      Article 210
      Section 210.8 (A) Dwelling Units.
      Delete wording “through 250-volt”
   Section 210.8(A)(5) 
   Add two additional exceptions:
      All 125-volt receptacles in a finished basement shall not be required to
have Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel.
      Sump pumps shall not be required to have Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter
protection installed for the receptacle as long as this receptacle in a Simplex
Style (Single) receptacle
   Section 210.8(B) Other Than Dwelling Units.
   Delete entire Section 210.8(B) 2020 NEC and replace with:
      “Section 210.8(B) Other than Dwelling Units with 2011 NEC.”
      Add one additional exception before the current exceptions:
         “Exception No. 1 to (2): Commercial (non-residential) refrigerators
and freezers will not be required to have ground-fault-circuit-interrupter
protection if the receptacle is a Simplex Style (Single) receptacle.”
   Delete Section 210.8(F).
   Section 210.52(C)(2) Island and Peninsular Countertops and Work Surface. 
   Delete Section 210.52(C)(2) of the 2020 NEC.
   Article 230 Services.
   Add one new section:
      “Section 230.45 Service-Entrance Conductors Inside Structures. When
located inside a structure, non-fused service entrance conductors shall not
extend more than ten (10) feet inside the structure unless the code official
permits the ten (10) feet to be increased.”
   Section 230.67 Surge Protection. 
   Delete Section 230.67.
   Article 310 Conductors for General Wiring.
   Section 310.3(A) 
      Change 14 AWG copper to 12 AWG copper. Change 12 AWG aluminum to 10 AWG
aluminum.
   Article 334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Type NM and NMC.
   Section 334.10 Delete 334.10(3), (4), and (5).
   Section 334.10(3) Add - Type NM and NMC Cable can be used for the wiring of
motels, hotels and assisted care facilities of type III, IV and V construction
where the cable is concealed within walls, floors, and ceilings that provide a
thermal barrier of material that has at least a 15-minute finish rating as
identified in listings of fire-rated assemblies.
   (H)   Swimming Pool & Spa Code. The International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code, 2021 Edition, and all appendices, unless deleted, published therewith, as
published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as
the “Aledo Property Maintenance Code.” Three copies of such Code shall be kept
on file in the city clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file
therein for such purpose. The following sections of the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code, 2021 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
   101.1 Title.
   Insert “the City of Aledo, IL” for [NAME OF JURISDICTION].
   103.1 Creation of agency
   Delete entire section and replace with:
      “103.1 Enforcement agency. The building division is responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this code. The official in charge of the building
division shall be known as the code official.
(Ord. 04/2025, 2-18-2025)
4-1-3: PERMIT, PLAN AND SURVEY REQUIREMENTS:
A permit shall be required as herein stated and where required by the adopted
Codes. In cases where the permit requirements for an adopted Code conflict with
the following schedule, the schedule shall take precedence. The plans,
specifications and surveys requirements are also hereby adopted and shall take
precedence over any of the adopted Code requirements in these areas.
Item Permit Plans And Specifications Surveys
Item                Permit              Plans And           Surveys
                                        Specifications
                                        Construction
                                        drawings are
New 1- and 2-family Required - permit   required (do not    Plat of survey by
dwellings           is to be all        have to be sealed   registered surveyor
                    inclusive           unless significant  is required
                                        structural issues
                                        are evident)
                                        Construction        Only as determined
New 1- and 2-family Required - all      drawings are        necessary by field
additions           inclusive           required (do not    inspection
                                        have to be sealed)
New multi-family,                       Signed/sealed plans
commercial and      Required - all      are required - Code
industrial          inclusive           allows Code         Survey required
buildings and                           official to waive
additions                               for minor projects
                                                            Waived if neighbor
                                                            affidavit is
                    Required - all                          provided. May be
Residential garages inclusive           City form           required if
                                                            determined
                                                            necessary by field
                                                            inspection
                    Required for new
                    buildings and
1- and 2-family     additions (all      City form           No
electric            inclusive), change
                    in service and new
                    electrical systems
                    Required for new
                    buildings and
1- and 2-family     additions (all      City form           No
plumbing            inclusive); RPZ
                    valves and new
                    plumbing systems
                    No, except as part
                    of all inclusive
Residential         permit for new 1-   City form           No
mechanical          and 2-family
                    dwellings and
                    additions
                    Change in service,
Multi-family,       electrical work
commercial and      regulated by Code,  As needed           No
industrial electric new occupancies and
                    changes in use
                    Plumbing and
                    plumbing systems as
                    defined by State
Commercial plumbing Code, all work      As needed           No
                    associated with new
                    occupancies and
                    changes in use
                    Mechanical work
                    regulated by the
Commercial          Code; all work      As needed           No
mechanical          associated with new
                    occupancies and
                    changes in use
                                                            Only if neighbor
Fences              Required            City form           affidavit is not
                                                            provided
                                        City form and       Only if determined
Decks               Required            building supply     necessary by field
                                        drawings            inspection
Swimming pools                                              Inground only
                                                            Only if determined
Driveways           Required            City form           necessary by field
                                                            inspection
                                                            Required for new
                                        As needed for       parking areas (not
Parking lots        Required            larger parking lots for resurfacing of
                                                            existing parking
                                                            area)
                                        Generally, only in
                                        conjunction with    Topographical
                                        new subdivisions    survey required
                                        and new non 1 and 2 where code official
Grading and         No                  family              believes there is
drainage                                construction. Code  reasonable question
                                        official may        of drainage problem
                                        require for obvious being created
                                        and significant
                                        drainage issues
Accessory           Required if         City form and       Only if determined
structures (applies structure is        material company    necessary by field
to sheds, gazebos,  permanent or fixed  drawings            inspection
etc.)               in place
Demolitions         Required            No                  No
                                                            Only if determined
Sewers              Required            City form           necessary by field
                                                            inspection
Change in use group Required (all       Yes                 No
                    inclusive)
 
   (A)   Definitions:
      PLAT SURVEY: A staked lot/plat showing all improvements and proposed
improvements within property lines and placing stakes at lot corners in
accordance with Illinois minimum standards. Such survey shall include
centerline stationing, curb offsets, proposed buildings and setbacks, lot area
and lot dimensions. Surveys prepared for submission to the city of Aledo shall
be stamped/sealed by a state of Illinois licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer.
      TOPOGRAPHICAL SURVEYS (May Be Required For New Subdivisions, Commercial
And Industrial Buildings): A survey showing contours and elevations of a tract
of land in relation to an established landmark. Topographical surveys prepared
for submission to the city of Aledo shall be stamped/sealed by a state of
Illinois licensed professional engineer. (Ord. 06-19-06-1, 8-21-2006)
4-1-4: FENCES:
The following regulations shall govern the construction, alteration,
modification and maintenance of fences, as defined, within the city of Aledo.
Every fence constructed, erected, altered, replaced or enlarged after the
effective date hereof shall comply with the provisions of this section.
Existing fences, constructed or having a permit issued prior to the adoption of
this section, shall be allowed to continue as lawful, nonconforming fences so
long as they are maintained.
   (A)   Permit: A permit shall be required for all fences, as defined. A
permit is not required for nonpermanent landscaping, construction or snow
fencing (fencing that is easy to remove, not embedded in ground).
   (B)   Definitions:
      FENCE: A tangible barrier constructed or installed of any material,
including plant materials, erected for the purpose of providing a boundary or
as a means of protection, or to prevent uncontrolled access, or for decorative
purposes (such as ornamental gate(s)), or to screen from view in or on
adjoining properties and streets, materials stored and operations conducted
behind it. Brushes, hedges and other organic configurations shall be regulated
as a fence if used as an enclosing structure or barrier, but shall not be
restricted in height unless such height creates a hazard or a nuisance.
   (C)   Height: The maximum height of a fence in a front yard shall be forty
eight inches (48"). The maximum height of a fence in a rear yard shall be six
feet (6') in residential and commercial zones; maximum eight feet (8') in
industrial zones.
   (D)   Location: Only open view fences shall be permitted in front yard
setback. Such fences may be located up to the property line in the front yard
setback including street/avenue side yard corner lots. (Ord. 13/2010, 5-3-2010)
   (E)   Double Fences: (Rep. by Ord. 13/2010, 5-3-2010)
   (F)   Design Standards:
      1.   All fences shall be of an architectural design that is common to the
community.
      2.   All fences shall be designed and constructed so as to be compatible
with its environment and surrounding properties from an architectural and
aesthetic standpoint.
      3.   No fence shall be of such architectural design or construction that
the same is manifestly inferior or is so radically different as to impair
marketability or property values of the existing property in the immediate
vicinity.
      4.   All fences shall be constructed with the finished, smooth or
decorative side facing toward adjoining properties.
      5.   All fences shall be constructed with the posts and supporting beams
facing the fence owner's property.
      6.   Uniform design and type shall be maintained along the entire fence
span.
      7.   All fences shall be structurally sound and be capable of carrying
the loads imposed upon them.
      8.   All fences shall be designed and constructed to resist a horizontal
wind load of not less than thirty five (35) pounds per square foot (psf) in
addition to any other forces to which it may be subjected.
      9.   Postholes for fences shall be in accordance with subsection (F)8 of
this section or per manufacturer's instructions. (Ord. 13/2010, 5-3-2010)
      10.   (Rep. by Ord. 13, 2010, 5-3-2010)
      11.   No fence shall have spikes, barbs or other pointed or sharp
assemblies. Top links shall be bent downward and uprights shall be of a design
so as to preclude accidental impalement on same.
      12.   Barbed or razor wire, or similar devices, shall only be allowed in
industrial districts upon receipt of special use approval as outlined in the
zoning ordinance.
      13.   Electrified fences are prohibited.
      14.   No fence, wall or shrubbery may be erected or maintained so as to
impede natural stormwater runoff, interfere with drainage of contiguous
properties or cause nuisance ponding, flooding or retention.
      15.   No fence shall cause a nuisance, hazard or otherwise adversely
affect the public health, safety and welfare. The building official shall
determine whether a particular set of circumstances, design or element
constitutes such condition. (Ord. 13/2010, 5-3-2010)
4-1-5: SWIMMING POOLS:
   (A)   A permit shall be required for all inground and semipermanent pools. A
permit is not required for a "temporary" pool.
   (B)   A "semipermanent pool" shall be defined as a swimming pool with a
steel wall or other substantial material that, once assembled, is designed to
remain in place over a period of two (2) or more swimming seasons.
   (C)   A "temporary" pool is defined as one that is inflated or otherwise
designed to be installed on a temporary basis and one that can be easily
drained and relocated. A "temporary" pool cannot be more than forty two inches
(42") in depth or it will be considered a "semipermanent" pool. (Ord. 06-19-06-
1, 8-21-2006)
4-1-6: PARKING LOTS:
   (A)   A permit shall be required for any new parking area, addition to
existing parking area or substantial renovation of existing parking area.
   (B)   "New parking area" is defined as any land area to be utilized for the
outdoor parking or storage of motor vehicles that has not, immediately prior to
the enactment of the regulation, been continuously utilized for such purpose.
(Exception: Accessory parking for one- and two-family dwellings.)
   (C)   Resurfacing of existing parking lots does not require permit or
compliance with construction standards. Standards for new parking lots for
religious and nonprofit organizations may be modified by the building official.
   (D)   Wheel stops are required where vehicles could strike buildings or
pedestrians, as determined by the building official.
   (E)   Lighting is required to provide adequate safety, but shall not create
nuisance to adjacent properties or surrounding neighborhood.
   (F)   Striping shall be required so as to identify spaces.
   (G)   Lot shall be graded so as to provide positive drainage. Lot drainage
shall not cause a hazard or a nuisance.
   (H)   Construction standards for new lots or additions to existing lots:
 
Use                   Subbase/ Aggregate     Surface
Multi-family          8 inch compacted stone Two 1.5-inch courses of hot mix
commercial or         CA6 or Grade 8         bituminous
industrial (asphalt)
Multi-family                                 6" ± concrete w 6 x 6 WI.4 x WI4
commercial or         6 inch compacted stone WWF
industrial (concrete)
 
Note: Alternative construction methods may be considered and approved by the
building official, provided such methods have the same effect and stability as
the above methods.
   (I)   Required parking lot space dimensions:
 
                                                   Total Width  Total Width Of
Parking    Maneuvering Parking Space Parking Space Of 1 Tier Of 2 Tiers Of
Pattern    Lane Width  Width         Length        Spaces Plus  Spaces Plus
                                                   Maneuvering  Maneuvering
                                                   Lane         Lane
0 degree   12 feet     8 feet        23 feet       20 feet      28 feet
(parallel)
30 to 53   12 feet     9 feet        20 feet       32 feet      52 feet
degree
54 to 74   15 feet     9 feet        20 feet       36.5 feet    58 feet
degree
75 to 90   20 feet     9 feet        20 feet       40 feet      60 feet
degree
 
(Ord. 06-19-06-1, 8-21-2006)
4-1-7: CONTRACTOR LICENSING:
   (A)   Application: Any contractor performing plumbing, electrical,
mechanical, subdivision, drain laying, sidewalk or road construction, roofing
and/or carpentry work in the City of Aledo shall obtain a City of Aledo
contractor license for such discipline(s). Applications for registration shall
be submitted to the Department of Public Works on forms provided by the
department along with the following:
      1.   A continuous surety bond made payable to the City of Aledo on a form
provided by the City in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with
sureties approved by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee,
conditioned that the applicant shall well and faithfully observe all the
provisions of the Building Code, Zoning Code and all other codes or regulations
of the City relating to the activities engaged in, under or by virtue of the
authority given in the building permit issued for each job, and that he will
pay all costs involved to complete said work and correct any and all work
improperly done to bring it into compliance with all City codes and
regulations. A minimum of thirty (30) days' notification must be provided to
the Department of Public Works before this bond may be canceled.
      2.   Proof of public liability and property damage insurance in the
minimum amount as hereby specified: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
for each occurrence of property damage and three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for each occurrence of personal injury or bodily harm. Such proof
shall be submitted in the form of an insurance certificate naming the City of
Aledo as an additional insured. A minimum of thirty (30) days' notification
must be provided to the Department of Public Works before this insurance may be
canceled.
      3.   Proof of workers' compensation insurance in the form of either a
certificate of insurance or certificate of approval as a self- insurer issued
by the Illinois Industrial Commission. Except: Applicants who operate his or
her business as a sole proprietor and have no employees are exempt from this
requirement. The applicant shall sign the registration application affirming
themselves as sole proprietor.
   (B)   Term Of License; Work Performed By: The license shall be in effect
from the time of issuance through December 31 of each calendar year and is
nontransferable. All work performed under permits issued by the City of Aledo
must be conducted by employees of the licensee covered under the insurance
listed above or by contractors registered in the City of Aledo. Subcontractors
operating under the permit obtained by the general contractor must also be
registered with the City of Aledo. Subcontractors must meet all the above
requirements. Work performed by these subcontractors may be subject to bonding
of the general contractor if specifically stated on the bond form, otherwise,
said subcontractor shall also supply a surety bond pursuant to the provisions
of this section. Any violations of the requirements of this registration or
failure to promptly repair work in violation of this or other adopted codes may
result in suspension or revocation of this registration at the discretion of
the building official. The registered contractor will be informed in writing by
the building official of any violations of this Code or other adopted codes and
he or she will be given a time frame to make the required corrections. This
notice is to be sent via certified mail, return receipt requested. The
contractor has the right to appeal the decision of the building official to the
Aledo Code Commission. The decision of the Code Commission may be appealed de
novo to the Chief Executive Officer of the City. All appeals shall be in
writing and presented to the building official not more than ten (10) days
after the notice was mailed.
      Exception: Owners who occupy their own single- or two-family dwelling who
perform their own work on such structures. Such owners shall assume all
liability for performance by himself or herself or their volunteers or
employees.
   State of Illinois Statutes do not allow any owner to hire any person or
persons to perform roofing work unless said person or persons has a current
Illinois roofing license nor to hire any person or persons to perform plumbing
work unless said person or persons possesses a current Illinois plumbing
license and is currently registered as an Illinois plumbing contractor.
   Owners of multi-family and all nonresidential buildings are required to
obtain a contractor license. Owners of such buildings shall also be required to
obtain the necessary State license to do their own roofing or plumbing work.
   (C)   General Maintenance: Persons doing general maintenance or cosmetic
work not requiring a permit shall not be required to be licensed.
   (D)   Additional Requirements:
      Plumbing: Shall also provide current State of Illinois plumber's license.
      Roofing: Shall also provide current State of Illinois roofing contractor
license. (Ord. 13/2017, 6-5-2017)
4-1-8: PERMIT FEES:
All permit fees are established and shall be payable to the City pursuant to
title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 13/2017, 6-5-2017)
4-1-9: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT:
For purpose of enforcing the ICC Property Maintenance Code, the following
policy shall be employed by the City of Aledo:
   (A)   The enforcement priority is on easily verifiable exterior yard
conditions, such as weeds in excess of eight inches (8") high, inoperable cars,
accumulations of junk, etc. Such enforcement shall be on a complaint basis, but
proactive enforcement may occur for significant nuisance violations and other
areas identified by the City Council (e.g., junk cars).
   (B)   Enforcement of exterior building conditions may occur if the violation
presents a significant blighting influence, nuisance, hazard or threat to life
safety. Such matters shall be primarily complaint driven, but may be proactive
if significant violation. The Enforcement Officer shall clear such enforcement
action with his or her Supervisor. If, for some reason, the enforcement action
is undertaken by the City Administrator, he shall discuss the matter with the
Mayor prior to undertaking such enforcement.
   (C)   Enforcement of interior violations may be conducted if the owner or
occupant of the building requests an inspection and subsequent enforcement.
Interior enforcement may also be attempted if there is reasonable and
sufficient cause to believe that a significant nuisance, hazard of threat to
life safety is occurring. Reasonable cause must exist to go forward with an
interior enforcement action. An example of a reasonable cause would be a foul
odor and rats coming from a building. The Enforcement Officer shall clear
interior enforcement action with his or her Supervisor. If, for some reason,
the enforcement action is undertaken by the City Administrator, he shall
discuss the matter with the Mayor prior to undertaking such enforcement.
   (D)   The Code Officer and all inspectors shall follow the regulation
provided in the Code about entrance on private property. The Code states that
permission shall be obtained before entering private property (other than
knocking at the door or entering a public area) and before conducting an
inspection. If permission is refused, the inspector shall leave the property
and obtain instruction from his Supervisor. Under no condition shall an
inspector violate a property owner's or occupant's Fourth Amendment right
against warrantless searches or seizures.
   (E)   The emphasis on Property Maintenance Code enforcement shall be
voluntary compliance. Courtesy notices shall be issued, reasonable extensions
granted where appropriate and all reasonable effort shall be made to work with
property owners rather than against them.
   (F)   No random inspection of properties shall occur unless they are
approved under the policies enumerated above. There shall be no program of
inspections, such as commercial occupancies or rental units, unless such are
specifically authorized by the City Council and regulated by written policies
and procedures.
   (G)   The City administration may cut weeds and remove accumulations of
garbage, refuse and salvageable or unsalvageable material after proper warning
period and all voluntary compliance measures have elapsed. Work shall be billed
to the property owner and thereafter placed as a lien. All State laws and
provisions of Code shall be complied with.
   (H)   The City administration may remove inoperable vehicles from private
property as provided for by State law and local policy. (Ord. 06-19-06-1, 8-21-
2006)
4-1-10: NEW OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS:
All new business occupancies and changes in use groups shall obtain a
certificate of occupancy from the building official prior to occupying property
for the new business or occupancy use. Such uses and occupancies shall comply
with the following process:
   (A)   Apply for certificate of occupancy (CO);
   (B)   Obtain an occupancy inspection from the Code Administration
Department;
   (C)   Correct all violations noted on inspection report, if any;
   (D)   Obtain reinspection approval from the Code Administration Department;
   (E)   Obtain and comply with certificate of occupancy;
   (F)   New businesses shall not occupy a building or premises until issued a
CO. A conditional CO may be issued at the building official's discretion,
depending on the severity of the violation and for other cause, such as
weather;
   (G)   This process shall not apply to home occupations. (Ord. 06-19-06-1, 8-
21-2006)
4-1-11: EXISTING BUSINESSES:
All businesses in operation as of the adoption date hereof shall be considered
to be existing businesses and not subject to the provisions of section
4-1-9 of this chapter. The City of Aledo shall establish a voluntary program
inviting existing businesses to:
   (A)   Submit annual application and obtain City license (no fee);
   (B)   Obtain annual fire safety and "housekeeping" inspection.
The City Council shall review the existing business licensing program after two
(2) years. (Ord. 06-19-06-1, 8-21-2006)
4-1-12: AWNINGS:
   (A)   Wooden Awnings Prohibited: Hereafter no wooden awning shall be erected
to any building within the fire limits of the City; nor shall any wooden awning
heretofore erected be repaired unless the same be covered or roofed with iron,
tin or other fireproof material and properly supported with iron posts. If not
constructed of wood, then it should be covered with cloth, leather or other
pliable substance or corrugated iron, securely attached to the building by iron
or other metallic fastenings or supports, and any and all awnings shall be
elevated at least seven feet (7') at the lowest part thereof above the
sidewalk. (Ord. 9/07, 3-16-1908; amd. Ord. 2/58, 5-5-1958; Ord. 06-19-06-1, 8-
21-2006)
   (B)   Posts Prohibited: All awnings hereafter erected or constructed in the
City extending over any street or public sidewalk shall be of canvas or of
metal and shall be so constructed or erected as not to be supported from the
ground surface or sidewalk level by posts, either wooden or metal or of any
other character. (Ord. 15/13, 4-6-1914; amd. Ord. 06-19-06-1, 8-21-2006)
   (C)   Duty Of Officers: It shall be the duty of the building official or his
designee to superintend or oversee the erection and repair of all awnings
within the fire limits of the City and if the same are not erected or repaired
in accordance with the provisions of this section, to serve notice upon the
person so erecting or repairing the same or upon the owner of the building to
which the respective awning is attached to erect or repair the same in
accordance with the provisions of this section or to remove the same for a
failure to comply with the same. (Ord. 6/91, 3-21-1992; amd. Ord. 06-19-06-1,
8-21-2006)
4-1-13: DRIVEWAYS; WALKS; CULVERTS:
   (A)   Specific Concrete Construction: Hereafter each and every concrete
driveway, sidewalk or other concrete construction, as to such part thereof
which may be laid or constructed upon any part of any public street or alley in
the City, which shall abut upon or adjoin to the concrete curbing of the street
pavement, or any part thereof, within the corporate limits of the City, as the
said curb is now or may hereafter be laid or constructed, shall be so laid or
constructed according to specifications to be provided by the building
official, after consultation with the City Engineer.
   (B)   Culverts: Upon request of a lot owner(s), the City shall pay for the
cost of installation for one culvert on each lot located within the City. Such
culvert shall not exceed twelve inches (12") in diameter and twenty feet (20')
in length. For all culverts in excess of twelve inches (12") in diameter and/or
twenty feet (20') in length, the City shall charge the requesting lot owner(s)
with the cost which exceeds the regular material and installation cost. The
City shall also charge a requesting lot owner(s) with the actual cost to
replace any such culvert on a lot located within the City unless otherwise
agreed to in writing between the City and the lot owner(s) as part of the
City's Culvert Replacement Program.
   (C)   Culvert Replacement Program: Lot owners may voluntarily participate in
the City's Culvert Replacement Program whereby the City will pay for fifty
percent (50%) of the actual cost to replace the lot owner(s)' culvert. The
annual program shall be from January 1 through December 31 each year, and shall
be administered on a first come, first serve basis and until such time that the
available program funds are exhausted each year. (Ord. 13/2017, 6-5-2017)
4-1-14: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise stated, penalties upon conviction of an offense under this
chapter shall be as follows:
   (A)   Each violation at the property in question shall carry a fine pursuant
to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code.
   (B)   Other sanctions may be applied as provided for by law.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer may, in addition to the imposition of a fine,
order the defendant to perform community service unless otherwise precluded by
law.
   (D)   The imposition of fines shall not restrict the City from taking other
measures as provided by law to enforce this chapter and otherwise obtain
compliance or the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 19/2016, 1-3-2017)
4-1-15: DEMOLITIONS:
   (A)   Permit: A permit shall be required for all demolitions, as defined.
   (B)   Definitions:
      DEMOLITION: The removal, in whole or part, of any structure or building,
the removal of demolition debris, or the installation of fill material and
final grading in connection with such removal.
      DEMOLITION CONTRACTOR: Any person or firm engaged in the business of
demolition of buildings or structures by contract.
      DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works for the City or his authorized
agent.
   (C)   Demolition Standards:
      1.   All demolition work shall be carried out in safe and workman- like
manner to minimize hazard to adjacent property and the public.
      2.   All subterranean walls, floors and footings shall be removed.
      3.   All depressions, cavities, cisterns or wells shall be filled with
approved granular material or compacted structural clay to within six inches
(6") of final grade.
      4.   The final grading shall be such that no depressions or cavities
exist and stormwater cannot stand on the demolition site. Six inches (6") of
earth shall be installed over any depression, cavity, cistern or well filled
with fill material.
      5.   All debris resulting from demolition shall be removed from the site
where demolition occurs in a timely manner. In no event shall debris be used
for fill material.
      6.   Where necessary to protect public health and safety, the Director
may require the erection of fencing, barricades or protective canopies around
the perimeter of the demolition site.
      7.   No demolition work shall be conducted between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless previously approved by
the Director.
      8.   Streets, roadways and alleys adjacent to a demolition site may be
closed only after approval by the Director. The Director shall, prior to
approval of such closing, consult with the Fire Chief, Police Chief and
Director of City Services.
      9.   It is the responsibility of the owner or his agent to arrange the
disconnection of all utilities to a demolition site prior to demolition. All
water, sewer and gas lines shall be properly capped and sealed. Sewer lines
shall be disconnected in accordance with the requirements established in title
8, chapter 6 of this Code.
      10.   In the event the structure to be demolished has one or more party
walls, the applicant shall provide drawings sealed by a registered architect or
structural engineer indicating the measures to be taken to support the adjacent
structures after demolition. In the event adjacent structures do not require
additional support, the architect or engineer shall provide a written statement
stating such conclusion. The written consent of owners of adjacent buildings to
install necessary shoring or bracing shall be provided. (Ord. 13/2017, 6-5-
2017)
TITLE 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE LIMITS
SECTION:
5-1-1:   Limits Established
5-1-2:   Building Regulations
5-1-1: LIMITS ESTABLISHED:
Hereafter all that portion of the city within and bounded as follows:
Commencing at the southwest corner of Block Eighty-six (86) in the Original
Town, now City of Aledo, running thence north to the south line of Lot Three
(3) in said Block Eighty-six (86), thence East along the south line of said Lot
Three in Block Eighty Six, Sixty Feet, thence north to the north line of said
Lot Three, thence West to the Northwest corner of said Lot Three, thence North
to the southwest corner of Block Seventy-five, thence west along the north line
of Sixth (6th) Street to the southwest corner of Block Seventy-six (76), thence
north along the east line of Locust Street to the northwest corner of Lot Six
(6) in Block Sixty-five (65), thence east to the southwest corner of Lot Three
(3) in Block Sixty-six (66), thence north along the east side of Walnut Street
to the northwest corner of Block Sixty-six (66), thence along the south side of
Eighth (8th) Street to the northwest corner of Lot One (1) of Block Sixty-seven
(67), thence south to the southwest corner of Lot One (1) in Block Sixty-seven
(67), thence east to the southeast corner of Lot One (1) in Block Sixty-eight
(68), thence south along the west line of Spruce Street to the southeast corner
of Fractional Block Three (3) in the Original Town of Aledo, thence west along
the north line of Fifth (5th) Street to the place of beginning, is hereby
established and declared to be the Fire Limits of the City, and to embrace and
include the south half of Block Sixty-five (65), all of Block Sixty-six (66),
seven-eights of Block Sixty-seven, Seventy-five (75), Seventy-six (76), Eighty-
six (86), Fractional Blocks Three (3) and Four (4), and the south three-fourths
(3/4) of Block Sixty-eight (68), in the original plat of the City of Aledo, and
Blocks Three (3) and Four (4) in Thompson's Railroad Addition to the City.
(Ord. 7/11, 10-2-1911)
5-1-2: BUILDING REGULATIONS:
All buildings shall not be erected, enlarged or added to within the fire limits
unless the same conform to the requirements and specifications and provisions
of the building code as provided in section
4-1-1 of this code. (Ord. 15/1900, 4-17-1901)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1:   Open Burning
5-2-2:   Gasoline
5-2-3:   Fire Escapes
5-2-4:   Lumber In Fire Limits
5-2-1: OPEN BURNING:
No person shall cause or permit, except as herein stipulated, any open air,
open fire burning of any item within the fire or corporate limits. It shall
also be unlawful to burn any wastepaper or other inflammable waste matter,
within the fire limits of the city, except the same be burned in some suitable
iron or steel, or other substantial metal receptacle, or furnace, which shall
be provided with grating under the entire surface of the bottom thereof, and
with a substantial metal screen or covering over the top so constructed as to
not allow the escape from such receptacle of any partially burned particles of
such paper or other inflammable waste matter, or any cinders or sparks of
sufficient size to constitute a fire menace to property. Such receptacle or
furnace shall be compliant with the application regulations of the Illinois
environmental protection agency.
   (A)   Definitions:
      COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE: Any combustible waste material.
      HAZARD: Smoke, heat, flames or other condition generated by an open air,
open fire that presents a clear, significant threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the general public.
      NUISANCE: Smoke, heat, flames or other condition caused by open air, open
fires that unreasonably interferes with a right that is common to the general
public.
      OPEN AIR: All spaces outside buildings, stacks or exterior ducts.
      OPEN FIRE: Any fire from which the products of combustion are emitted
directly into the open air without passing through a stack or chimney. (Ord.
10-20-08-1, 11-3-2008)
   (B)   Exceptions:
      1.   This provision shall not be construed to prohibit fires of charcoal
or nontreated or otherwise nonnuisance or nonhazard producing wood or wood
product when utilized on private property or in public recreation areas
relative to the consumption of food.
      2.   Nothing in this section shall be held to prohibit private
individuals from setting a wood burning campfire for the purpose of the
preparation of food or other accessory recreational use incidental to the
primary, lawful use of the property in question; provided, such campfire is set
in an adequate container assembled or premanufactured for such use and, if
premanufactured, set according to manufacturer's specifications, or, a fire
bowl of earth or other noncombustible of adequate assembly and construction,
and, a minimum distance of ten feet (10') from weeds, grass or other
combustible materials so as to present no hazard. Such fires shall also be
placed a minimum of twenty feet (20') from adjacent residences and attended at
all times by a person of eighteen (18) years of age or older.
      3.   It shall be lawful to burn leaves, grass or other vegetation so long
as such materials are dry and do not produce a nuisance or a hazard; provided,
however, that burning of such yard waste shall be permitted on Monday,
Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday only. It is unlawful for any person to burn
any leaves or other vegetation upon any city street, city sidewalk or in that
portion of the right of way three feet (3') from the edge of the street
pavement. All such fires shall be attended at all times by a person of eighteen
(18) years of age or older. Such fires shall be permitted during daylight hours
only and shall not be placed within twenty feet (20') of adjacent residences.
      4.   Bonfires for the purpose of public or private school activities
shall be permitted on school grounds and as further regulated by the Aledo fire
protection district. (Ord. 03/2012, 4-2-2012)
   (C)   Penalties: Any person who violates this section shall be fined
pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. (Ord. 20/2016, 1-3-
2017)
5-2-2: GASOLINE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any store or shop keeper or other person or
persons doing business to keep on hand at any time for sale or use any amount
or quantity exceeding two (2) barrels of gasoline in any house, building or
storeroom or in any shed or other place connected with, or attached to any such
house, building or storeroom within the corporate limits of the city. It shall
further be unlawful for any store or shop keeper or other person as aforesaid
keeping gasoline to draw or permit to be drawn or changed from one vessel to
another, any quantity of gasoline by the aid of any lighted lamp, candle, or
other burning substance used for illuminating purposes, held or being in the
vicinity of the vessels from and to which gasoline is being drawn or filled,
and when so drawn into other vessels for sale in the line of trade or for any
other purpose, it shall be unlawful for such shop or store keeper to leave or
permit any such vessel to be left standing over two (2) hours in, upon or about
the premises, room or place wherein such sale is made, except in the room or
house wherein such gasoline was drawn.
It shall be unlawful for any person or family residing or rooming within the
fire limits of the city, using gasoline stoves for cooking, or other purposes,
to keep the vessel containing the supply of gasoline inside any room or
apartment of the building in which such person or family reside or use. (Ord.
7/87, 8-1-1887)
   (B)   No public filling station or other place or edifice wherein oils and
gasoline, or either of them, are kept and retailed to the public shall be
established, maintained or operated without the consent of the council so to do
being first obtained. The council shall in no case consent to the
establishment, maintenance or operation of a filling station as above defined
outside of the fire limits of the city unless application for such permission
shall be accompanied by a petition of consent signed by a majority of the
property owners within a radius of two hundred feet (200') of a point located
in the center of the space actually used as a filling station. Said petition of
consent shall request that permission be granted by the council to the
applicant therein mentioned. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply
to filling stations or garages already established, or to wholesale or retail
groceries maintained and operated as such, or to persons or places where oil
and gasoline are sold by wholesale only. (Ord. 9/29, 10-7-1929)
5-2-3: FIRE ESCAPES:
All buildings within the city limits which are more than two (2) stories in
height used for manufacturing purposes, hotels, dormitories, schools,
seminaries, hospitals, churches, theaters, public halls and lodge halls shall
be provided with at least one metallic ladder or stair fire escape, attached to
the outer walls thereof and extending from or suitably near the ground, to the
uppermost story and provided with platforms of such form and dimensions and of
such proximity to one or more windows of each story above the first or ground
floor, as to render access to such ladder or stairs from each such story easy
and safe, the material, location and construction of such escapes shall be
subject to the approval of the fire and water committee of the city; provided,
however, that all buildings within the limits of the city used for any of the
above named purposes with a seating or working capacity above the second floor
shall be provided with one such ladder or stairs above mentioned for each one
hundred (100) persons or fraction thereof for which working or seating
accommodations are provided and be subject to the approval of said committee.
Any building used for any of the above named purposes with a seating or working
capacity on the first or ground floor only shall have at least two (2) doors
and on opposite sides of the building, and no door shall be less than two feet
ten inches (2'10") in width and shall have at least one aisle for every twenty
five feet (25') in width of seating capacity. No aisle in any building used for
the above named purposes shall be less than two feet (2') in width and no
corridor less than two feet (2') wide. All aisles, passageways and corridors
shall be kept free from obstructions, and no person shall be allowed to stand
in or occupy any of said aisles, passageways or corridors during any
performance or public gathering. (Ord. 6/03, 2-2-1904)
5-2-4: LUMBER IN FIRE LIMITS:
   (A)   No lumberyard or other place where lumber is stored for sale, shall be
permitted within the fire limits of the city. (Ord. 7/10, 8-8-1910)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or pile for the purpose
of storage, sale, retail or use, any timbers, boards, joists, scantlings,
shingles, fencing, laths, pickets, posts, poles, coal, slack, firewood, or any
other combustible material, or any sand, gravel or other building material,
upon any lot, block or other grounds, either public or private, situated within
the fire limits of the city; provided, however, that lumbermen, architects,
contractors and builders or other persons receiving shipments of lumber,
building material, wood or wooden material in any form, or coal, coke or slack
or other combustible materials, or any sand, gravel or other building
materials, contemplated in this section, may upon receiving any such materials
from any common carrier, pile or store the same temporarily within said fire
limits, for such time only as may reasonably be necessary to promptly remove
the same for use, where the same may be unloaded, as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   Lumbermen, architects, builders, or other persons so receiving any
such combustible materials as in this section defined, shall be required to
remove the same to some point outside of the fire limits within five (5) days
after each carload shall have been discharged. (Ord. 2/14, 7-6-1914)
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
5-3-1:   Definitions
5-3-2:   Prohibition
5-3-3:   Abatement
5-3-4:   Destruction By Fire
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS: As used in this chapter is hereby defined to mean and
include:
   (A)   Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which may cause or
aid in the spread of disease, or injury to the health of the occupants of it or
neighboring structures.
   (B)   Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes a fire hazard.
   (C)   Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which by reason
of faulty construction or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage
by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such structure.
   (D)   Any building, shed, fence, or other manmade structure which because of
its condition or because of lack of doors or windows is available to and
frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of
such structure, or by reason of its condition and lack of doors and windows
constitutes an attractive nuisance.
Any dangerous building in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord.
8/54, 7-19-1954)
5-3-2: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the city, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a
dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition. (Ord. 8/54, 7-19-1954)
5-3-3: ABATEMENT:
Whenever the zoning enforcing officer or the fire chief shall be of the opinion
that any building or structure in the city is a dangerous building, he shall
file a written statement to this effect with the clerk. The clerk shall
thereupon cause written notice to be served on the owner thereof, and upon the
occupant thereof, if any, by registered mail or by personal service. Such
notices shall state that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous
condition, and that such dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by
repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it; and that the condition
must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in the following terms: (Ord. 8/
54, 7-19-1954; amd. Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
To                      (owner-occupant of premises) of the premises known as:
                    : You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the
premises above mentioned has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous
building after inspection by                   .
 
The causes for this decision are:                           (here insert the
facts as to the dangerous condition).
 
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the
City will proceed to do so.
If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith or taken an
appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a
dangerous building exists, within ten (10) days from the time when such notice
is served upon such person by personal service or registered mail, the council
may proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building. (Ord.
8/54, 7-19-1954)
5-3-4: DESTRUCTION BY FIRE:
Any building or structure within the fire limits which has or may be damaged by
fire, wind, decay or other causes to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its
value, shall be torn down and removed, or rebuilt under the regulations of the
zoning title and the requirements within the fire limits of the city.
Upon written notice by the zoning enforcing officer or the fire chief to the
effect that any such building has been so damaged, filed with the clerk, the
said clerk shall notify the council of the receipt of such notice.
The council shall then appoint three (3) persons to determine whether or not
such building or structure has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) of its value.
A copy of the notice of the appointment of this board of three (3) persons to
determine the damage shall be served upon the owner of the premises by personal
service or by registered mail addressed to his last known address. Such notice
shall be in substantially the following form: (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
To                                 You are hereby notified that
                         has determined that the building owned by you within
the corporate limits of the City of Aledo has been damaged by fire, decay or
otherwise to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value and that a board of
three persons, has been appointed to verify this finding which board will hold
its first meeting in the council room of the City Hall in the City of Aledo,
Illinois, on the                 day of                  , 19    , at the hour
of             o'clock,     , at which time it will determine whether or not
this finding is correct.
 
If the finding is verified by the Board, you must tear down and remove the said
building, or rebuild it in accordance with the Zoning regulations and the
requirements within the fire limits of said City of Aledo.
 
If this finding is verified by the board of three (3) members and it determines
that the building in question has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) of its value, it shall be the duty of the owner to tear down and remove
the said building within twenty (20) days after the finding of such board, or
to remodel it to comply with the requirements for new buildings in accordance
with the zoning regulations and the requirements within said fire limits of the
city; and it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of such
building after such finding until it is so remodeled. (Ord. 8/54, 7-19-1954)
CHAPTER 4
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
5-4-1:   Adoption Of Fire Prevention Code
5-4-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of fire protection, acceptable
construction, and building service features needed to minimize danger from fire
and smoke in new and existing structures in all types of occupancies in the
city of Aledo the NFPA 101 life safety code being the 2000 edition. (Ord. 15/
2004, 12-6-2004)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE
SECTION:
6-1-1:   Department Established
6-1-2:   Appointment
6-1-3:   Powers
6-1-4:   Duty To Arrest
6-1-5:   Preserve Peace
6-1-6:   Members' Duties
6-1-7:   Neglect Of Duty
6-1-8:   Regulations Of Department
6-1-9:   Part Time Police Officers
6-1-10:   Auxiliary Police Officers
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department of the City to be known as the Police
Department and which shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other
officers and members as recommended by the Police Committee of the Council and
approved by the Council. (1969 Code)
6-1-2: APPOINTMENT:
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Council upon the recommendation
of the Police Committee and shall hold his office from and after his
appointment until discharged by order of the Council. He shall, before entering
upon the duties of his office, take and sign the oath prescribed by law for
City officials. All other police officers shall be appointed in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 24, article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (1969
Code)
6-1-3: POWERS:
The Chief of Police shall superintend and direct the police generally and see
that the various police officers are prompt in the discharge of their duties,
and from time to time adopt such measures as they may deem expedient for the
preservation of the peace and good order of the City and the prompt execution
of the laws and ordinances thereof. The Chief of Police and Police Committee
with the concurrence of the Council, may, and they are hereby authorized and
required to make and establish such rules and regulations, not inconsistent
with the laws of the State or the City, as may by them be hereafter deemed
expedient and necessary for the management and control of the Police
Department, and with a view to the vigilance, efficiency and usefulness of the
Police Department and the orderly conduct of its members. (7-28-1879)
6-1-4: DUTY TO ARREST:
The Chief of Police and Council and all police officers shall have power to
arrest, or cause to be arrested and taken before the proper court or Magistrate
with or without process, all persons in said City who shall be found in the act
of committing, or who may reasonably be suspected of having committed any crime
or misdemeanor, or violated any provision hereof, and all persons who shall
threaten to break the peace; and shall have power to detain, or order the
detention of such person or persons overnight, and until such person or persons
can be duly examined or tried before the proper court or Magistrate. (7-28-
1879; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-1-5: PRESERVE PEACE:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and Police Committee to cause the
public peace to be preserved, and to see that all the laws and ordinances of
the City are enforced; and whenever any violation thereof shall come to their
knowledge they shall cause the requisite complaint to be made, and see that the
evidence is procured for the prosecution of such offender. They shall obey, and
cause all the police officers subordinate to them to obey all laws and
ordinances regulating the police, and the police regulations which may
hereafter at any time be established by the Chief of Police and the Council and
the Police Committee, and see that the police respectively perform their duties
faithfully and promptly. (7-28-1879)
6-1-6: MEMBERS' DUTIES:
All members of the department acting as police officers are required to be
prompt and vigilant in the discharge of their duties in their respective
stations, according to the laws and ordinances of the City, and provisions of
such police regulations as may be hereafter established, and shall, to the best
of their ability, preserve order, peace and quiet, and enforce the provisions
of this Code, and shall not absent themselves from the City or from the duties
assigned them respectively, unless by the permission of the Chief of Police, or
the Police Committee (in his absence) had in writing. (7-28-1879; amd. Ord. 22/
2017, 6-19-2017)
6-1-7: NEGLECT OF DUTY:
Any police officer who shall neglect or refuse to perform any duty assigned to,
or required of him by law or any provision of this Code, or who shall in the
discharge of his official duties, be guilty of any fraud, extortion, partially
or wilful wrong or injustice, shall, on conviction of such offense, forfeit and
pay for the use of said City, a penalty; and if a watchman, shall be dismissed
from his office. (7-28-1879; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-1-8: REGULATIONS OF DEPARTMENT:
All such police regulations as may hereafter be established shall be in
writing, signed by the Chief of Police; and he shall cause the same to be filed
in the Clerk's Office, and a written or printed copy thereof to be delivered to
each member of the Police Department, and by which rules and regulations they
shall respectively be governed in the performance of their duties, when not
conflicting with the provisions of this Code. (7-28-1879; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-
19-2017)
6-1-9: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
   (A)   The City of Aledo Police Department is hereby authorized to employ
part time police officers, subject to the requirements set forth in this
section.
   (B)   No individual shall be hired as a part time police officer for the
City of Aledo Police Department unless such individual satisfies each of the
requirements enumerated herein. In order to qualify for part time employment as
a police officer with the City of Aledo Police Department, an applicant must:
      1.   Be a citizen of the United States;
      2.   Be twenty one (21) years of age;
      3.   Be a high school graduate or equivalent;
      4.   Possess a valid Illinois driver's license;
      5.   Possess or obtain at time of hire a current Illinois firearms owner
identification card;
      6.   Have no felony criminal record, and if a misdemeanor criminal
record, a copy of the record shall be submitted with the written application
required in subsection (B)11 of this section and an explanation if required by
the Chief of Police to explain all circumstances;
      7.   Submit fingerprints for examination by the Illinois State Police
Bureau of Identification and Federal Bureau of Investigation;
      8.   Submit to a physical examination, at the expense of the City of
Aledo, and be found drug free;
      9.   Submit to a psychological examination, at the expense of the City of
Aledo;
      10.   Submit to an oral interview before the Chief of Police;
      11.   Submit a written application and/or resume to the Chief of Police;
      12.   Be qualified to enter and successfully complete any training
mandated by the Illinois Law Enforcement Standards and Training Board, or have
sufficient prior experience and training to qualify for a waiver from the
Illinois Law Enforcement Standards and Training Board. (Ord. 09/2011, 7-5-2011;
amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
   (C)   Part time police officers shall be allowed to work no more than a
maximum of one thousand five hundred sixty (1,560) hours per calendar year.
(Ord. 19/2011, 10-17-2011; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-1-10: AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS:
   (A)   Authorization: The City of Aledo Police Department is hereby
authorized to appoint auxiliary police officers, subject to the requirements
set forth in this section.
   (B)   Appointment: The Chief of Police may appoint auxiliary police officers
in such number as the department may from time to time deem necessary.
   (C)   Status: Auxiliary police officers shall not be "conservators of the
peace" unless they have completed the basic police officer academy training 1 ,
and shall only carry firearms while on duty with the permission of the Chief of
Police, and only after completing the State certified 40-hour mandatory
firearms training course as provided under 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 710/2.
Auxiliary police officers shall not be considered to be members of the regular
Police Department, and shall not supplement members of the regular Police
Department of the City in the performance of their assigned and normal duties
except as otherwise provided herein.
   (D)   Identification Symbol: Identification symbols worn by the auxiliary
police officers shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular
Police Department.
   (E)   Supervision: Auxiliary police officers shall, at all times during the
performance of their duties, be subject to the direction and control of the
Chief of Police of the City of Aledo.
   (F)   Powers And Duties: Auxiliary police officers shall only be assigned to
perform the following duties in the City:
      1.   To receive training from regular members of the department,
      2.   To aid or direct traffic within the Municipality,
      3.   To aid in control of natural or man-made disasters,
      4.   To aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the Chief of Police,
      5.   To assist regular members of the department under the direct
supervision of those regular members,
      6.   To aid in crowd control, parking control and event control during
events and periods leading up to events sponsored by the City of Aledo or held
within the City of Aledo, and,
      7.   When it is impractical for members of the regular Police Department
to perform normal and regular police duties, the Chief of Police may assign
auxiliary police officers to perform those normal and regular police duties
under the direct supervision of a regular member of the Police Department.
   (G)   Hiring Standards: No person shall be hired as an auxiliary police
officer who has not been fingerprinted, subject to a background check, and
found to have never been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral
turpitude.
   (H)   Training: All officers hired as auxiliary police officers shall
successfully complete the Auxiliary Officer Field Training Program. (Ord. 06/
2019, 3-4-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/8.2.
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-2-1:   Purpose
6-2-2:   Definitions
6-2-3:   Exclusions; Exceptions
6-2-3-1:   Exclusions
6-2-3-2:   Exceptions
6-2-4:   Interference
6-2-5:   Noise Disturbance
6-2-6:   Maintenance
6-2-7:   Animals Other Than Dogs And Cats
6-2-7-1:   Livestock
6-2-7-2:   Fowl
6-2-7-3:   Rabbits
6-2-7-4:   Exotic Animals
6-2-7-5:   Riding Of Horses On City Streets
6-2-8:   Dogs And Cats Generally
6-2-8-1:   Keeping Of Dogs And Cats
6-2-8-2:   Rabies Inoculation
6-2-8-3:   Dogs Or Cats In Heat
6-2-8-4:   Yard Requirements
6-2-8-5:   Procedure When Animal Bites Any Person
6-2-9:   Dangerous And Vicious Dogs
6-2-9-1:   Procedure For Declaring A Dog Dangerous
6-2-9-2:   Vicious Dog
6-2-9-3:   Procedure For Declaring A Dog Vicious
6-2-10:   Impoundment
6-2-10-1:   Redemption Of Animal By Owner
6-2-11:   Prohibited Actions; Care Of Animals
6-2-11-1:   Animals At Large Prohibited
6-2-11-2:   Cruelty To Animals
6-2-11-3:   Nuisance Feeding Prohibited
6-2-11-4:   Police Dogs
6-2-11-5:   Trapping Animals; Exception
6-2-11-6:   Burning Of Animal Matter Prohibited
6-2-11-7:   Disposal Of Dead Animals
6-2-11-8:   Dogs Prohibited In Public Areas On Certain Days
6-2-12:   Dog Park Regulations
6-2-13:   Penalty
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public health, safety
and general welfare of the city by establishing requirements for the effective
control of animals. This chapter is in addition to, and does not preempt, the
state of Illinois animal control act, humane care of animals, animal welfare
act, and the state and federal wildlife codes. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff.
1-1-2016)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ADULT DOG OR CAT: A dog or cat four (4) months of age or older.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person designated by the city to enforce the
rules and regulations established under this chapter. This authority also
extends to Aledo police officers to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   CAT: All members of the genus Felis.
   DANGEROUS DOG:
   (A)   Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the owner
or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner or
custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses
a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death
to a person or a companion animal, or
   (B)   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause
serious physical injury.
   DOG: All members of the family Canidae.
   ENCLOSURE: A building or other structure strong enough to keep the confined
animal away from other animals and the public.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any monkey, primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous snake,
python snake, boa constrictor snake, piranha fish, leopard, panther, tiger,
lion, lynx, bears or any other warm blooded animal which can normally be found
in the wild state.
   HAS BEEN BITTEN: Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person
or animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
   LEASH: A cord, rope, strap or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog and of sufficient strength to keep such dog under
control, and no more than eight feet (8') in length.
   OWNER: Any person having a right or property in a dog or other animal, or
who keeps or harbors a dog or other animal, or who has it in his or her care,
or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or other domestic
animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him or her.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or legal
entity, any public or private institution, or any other business unit.
   POLICE DOG: A dog owned or used by a law enforcement department or agency in
the course of the department's or agency's work. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff.
1-1-2016)
6-2-3: EXCLUSIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
6-2-3-1: EXCLUSIONS:
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to: veterinary hospitals,
properly licensed boarding kennels, pet shops, animal shelters, properly
maintained and licensed zoological park, circus, scientific education institute
or research laboratory.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to police dogs.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter do not affect the extermination of
rats, mice, moles or voles. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-3-2: EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   Upon a proper showing therefor, and upon due and convincing proof
being made to the City Council of unique and unusual circumstances under which
the strict enforcement of this chapter would result in extreme and peculiar
hardship for the person involved, the Council may grant special permission to
the person to do some act contrary to section
6-2-7, 6-2-8-1 or 6-2-8-4 of this chapter. The Council shall presume that such
a hardship exists for any person who: 1) makes application for special
permission under this subsection within ninety (90) days following passage of
this chapter, and 2) provides proof that on the date of adoption hereof, and
for a period of at least ninety (90) days prior thereto, such person either: a)
maintained animals in apparent violation of section
6-2-7 of this chapter, b) owned more than six (6) cats or dogs in violation of
section
6-2-8-1 of this chapter, or c) maintained a doghouse, shelter, kennel, dog run
or other structure in violation of section
6-2-8-4 of this chapter.
   (B)   The granting of any special permission may be approved by the City
Council only after a public hearing has been held by the Council.
   (C)   A legal notice shall be published at least one time in a newspaper of
general circulation within the corporate limits of the City. The notice shall
set forth the nature of the public hearing, the property involved and the date,
time and place of the scheduled hearing, and shall be published at least five
(5) calendar days prior to the hearing date. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-
1-2016)
   (D)   Any request for special permission shall be accompanied by a fee
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 14/2017, 6-5-
2017)
   (E)   In addition to the legal notice, the Aledo Police Department shall
post a sign on the property for which special permission is being requested not
less than five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing date. The sign shall give
notice of the special permission being requested and the date, time and place
of the scheduled hearing. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-4: INTERFERENCE:
It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with the animal control
officer in the performance of his or her duties. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff.
1-1-2016)
6-2-5: NOISE DISTURBANCE:
No person shall own, keep or harbor any animal which howls, barks, or emits
audible sounds that are unreasonably loud or disturbing and which are of such
character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood or such resident or business neighbors as may be in close
proximity to such animal. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-6: MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Removal Of Waste Material: It shall be unlawful for any person having
control of any dog or other animal which deposits any solid excrement or feces
upon any public way, sidewalk, street or right-of-way, or upon the property of
another, without the consent of the property owner, to leave said excrement or
feces without causing its immediate and complete removal.
   (B)   Premises To Be Clean: The owner of any animal or fowl shall maintain
the premises wherein the animals or fowl are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from rodents, vermin and waste and any odors that can be
detected beyond the limits of the owner's premises.
   (C)   Food And Water: The owner of any animal or fowl shall provide food and
water of adequate quality and quantity for animals or fowl in accordance with
the needs of the animals or fowl.
   (D)   Shelter: The owner of any animal or fowl shall provide adequate
shelter from the elements for the animal or fowl. For those animals or fowl
which are kept out of doors, adequate shelter shall be a structure with a top
and enclosed sides, except for an opening large enough for the passage of the
animal or fowl.
   (E)   Veterinary Care: The owner of any animal or fowl shall, when necessary
to prevent suffering of the animal or fowl, provide veterinary care for the
animal or fowl.
   (F)   Impoundment Authorized: The animal control officer is hereby
authorized to remove from any premises and impound any animal or fowl, the
owner of which has not complied with any or all of the requirements under this
section. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-7: ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS:
6-2-7-1: LIVESTOCK:
No person shall keep or maintain any horse, mule, pony, donkey, burro, cow,
goat, sheep or pig within the corporate limits of the City unless the animal is
situated on a tract of ground at least two (2) acres in area, and the pen,
shed, barn, stable or other structure designed to confine or shelter the animal
is so located on the tract that the nearest portion thereof is not less than
one hundred fifty feet (150') from the line of adjoining property. (Ord. 8/
2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-7-2: FOWL:
A person may keep or maintain any mature chicken, turkey, duck, goose, guinea,
pigeon or other poultry or fowl within the corporate limits of the City in
accordance with the following provisions:
   (A)   A maximum of fifteen (15) fowl shall be permitted on any property.
Roosters shall be prohibited.
   (B)   No pen, coop, building or other enclosure used for the purpose of
housing fowl shall be erected or maintained within ten feet (10') of a property
line or within twenty feet (20') of any occupied residence other than that of
the owner.
   (C)   Every person maintaining a pen, coop, building, yard or enclosure for
fowl shall keep such area clean and sanitary at all times. Any dirt or refuse
resulting from the fowl shall be disposed of in a clean and sanitary fashion.
   (D)   All feed for fowl or livestock shall be kept in containers that are
rodentproof until put out for consumption by fowl. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015,
eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-7-3: RABBITS:
No person shall keep or maintain more than eight (8) mature rabbits six (6)
months of age or more within the corporate limits of the City; and no pen,
hutch or other structure designed to confine or shelter a rabbit or rabbits
shall be so located that any portion of the pen, hutch or other structure is
closer than ten feet (10') from the line of adjoining property. (Ord. 8/2015,
10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-7-4: EXOTIC ANIMALS:
No person shall keep or maintain any exotic animal as a pet within the
corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-7-5: RIDING OF HORSES ON CITY STREETS:
   (A)   A person may ride a horse on the streets of the City provided the
horse is ridden at less than a gallop, and the horse does not obstruct the flow
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No more than one person shall ride the
horse at any time. The horse shall be controlled by a bridle and reins. The
horse shall be under the control of the rider at all times.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any horse to allow the horse to
defecate on any public sidewalk, thoroughfare, public place, or private
property other than the premises owned or occupied by the owner of the horse.
(Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-8: DOGS AND CATS GENERALLY:
6-2-8-1: KEEPING OF DOGS AND CATS:
It is unlawful to maintain or keep more than six (6) adult dogs or cats, or any
combination thereof, in or about any dwelling unit, whether indoors or outside.
(Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-2-8-2: RABIES INOCULATION:
No person shall permit any adult dog or cat owned by him or her or in his or
her custody or control to be on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other
public place, or upon the private property of any person other than the owner,
unless the dog or cat shall have a collar firmly attached around its neck with
a tag evidencing a current rabies inoculation attached thereto. Any person
owning or having in his or her custody or control a dog or cat which does not
have a collar firmly attached around its neck with a tag evidencing a current
rabies inoculation shall keep the dog or cat confined in an enclosure in or on
his or her premises at all times. This does not eliminate the requirements for
rabies inoculation. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-8-3: DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT:
The owner of any female dog or cat shall, during the period when the female is
in heat, keep the female confined in an enclosure in such a manner so that the
female cannot come into contact with male dogs or cats, except for the purpose
of planned breeding. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-8-4: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
No doghouse, shelter, kennel, dog run or other structure used to house dogs
shall be so located so that any portion of the doghouse, shelter, kennel, dog
run or other structure that houses dogs is closer than ten feet (10') from the
line of the adjoining property. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-8-5: PROCEDURE WHEN ANIMAL BITES ANY PERSON:
   (A)   The owner of any dog, cat or other animal which bites any human being
shall notify the animal control officer within twenty four (24) hours; the
owner shall provide proof of rabies inoculation and registration to the animal
control officer; shall keep the dog, cat or other animal locked up in an
enclosure for a period of ten (10) days following the time the dog, cat or
other animal has bitten a person; and shall have the dog, cat or other animal
examined by a licensed veterinarian at the beginning and end of the ten (10)
day period. The owner of the biting animal shall provide a written release
signed and dated by a licensed veterinarian to the animal control officer
within twenty four (24) hours of release.
   (B)   When a person has been bitten by a police dog, the police dog may
continue to perform its duties for the peace officer or Law Enforcement Agency
and any period of observation of the police dog may be under the supervision of
a peace officer. The supervision shall consist of the dog being locked in a
kennel, performing its official duties in a police vehicle, or remaining under
the constant supervision of its police handler. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff.
1-1-2016)
   (C)   If a dog or other animal without provocation, bites or injures any
person who is peaceably conducting himself or herself in any place where he or
she may lawfully be, the owner of such dog or other animal shall be in
violation hereof. (Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-2-9: DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS:
6-2-9-1: PROCEDURE FOR DECLARING A DOG DANGEROUS:
   (A)   An animal control officer or any adult person may request, under oath,
that a dog be classified as a dangerous dog by submitting a sworn, written
complaint on a form approved by the animal control officer. In addition, in any
instance where the animal control officer has reasonable grounds to believe
that a dog has bitten a person or a domestic animal, an investigation as
hereinafter described shall be conducted. Upon receipt of the complaint, the
officer shall notify the owner of the dog that a complaint has been filed and
that an investigation into the allegations as set forth in the complaint will
be conducted. During the investigation:
      1.   The custody of any dog which is the subject of the investigation
shall not be transferred by its owner to any other person; nor shall the place
of maintenance of the dog be changed from its owner's residence during that
time, without the consent of the animal control officer; and
      2.   In addition, the dog may be ordered impounded by the animal control
officer if he or she has reason to believe that during the investigation the
dog will cause an immediate danger to the community if it is not immediately
impounded. The owner may appeal the impoundment order to the Chief of Police at
any time by filing a written appeal with the Aledo Police Department. The Chief
of Police, or his or her designee, shall give the owner a hearing within three
(3) business days of the filing of the appeal.
   (B)   At the conclusion of the investigation, the officer may:
      1.   Determine that the dog is not dangerous and, if the dog is
impounded, waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its
owner; or
      2.   Determine that the dog is dangerous and, if the dog is impounded,
release the dog to the owner after the owner has paid all fees incurred for the
impoundment. If all impoundment fees have not been paid within ten (10)
business days after a final determination that a dog is dangerous, the officer
may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed; or
      3.   Determine that the dog is vicious, in which case the provisions of
section
6-2-9-3 of this chapter shall apply.
   (C)   1. Within five (5) business days after declaring a dog dangerous, the
officer shall notify the owner of the dog's designation as a dangerous dog, and
of the requirements and conditions for keeping the dog, as set forth herein.
The notice shall inform the dog owner that he or she may request, in writing, a
hearing to contest the finding and designation within five (5) business days
after delivery of the dangerous dog designation notice, by filing the request
with the animal control officer. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the
animal control officer shall promptly notify and deliver the request to the
Hearing Officer designated in subsection (D)2 of this section.
      2.   Within five (5) business days after finding a dog not dangerous, the
officer shall notify the complainant of this finding. The notice shall inform
the complainant that he or she may request, in writing, a hearing to contest
the finding, by filing said request with the animal control officer no later
than five (5) days after receiving the notice. Upon receipt of a request for a
hearing, the animal control officer shall promptly notify and deliver the
request to the Hearing Officer designated in subsection (D)2 of this section.
   (D)   1. Upon a request for a hearing being filed as set forth in subsection
(C) of this section, a hearing shall be held in an expeditious manner, no later
than fifteen (15) days after the date the request for the hearing was received
by the animal control officer.
      2.   The hearing shall be held before a Hearing Officer appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Hearing Officer
shall not be an employee of the City of Aledo or of the entity which employs
the animal control officer.
      3.   The Hearing Officer shall provide notice of the date, time and
location of the hearing to the dog owner and to the complainant by regular
mail. At the hearing, all interested persons shall be given the opportunity to
present evidence on the issue of the dog's dangerousness. Criteria to be
considered in a hearing required by this section shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
         (a)   Provocation;
         (b)   Severity of attack or injury to a person or domestic animal;
         (c)   Previous aggressive history of the dog;
         (d)   Observable behavior of the dog;
         (e)   Site and circumstances of the incident; and
         (f)   Statements from interested parties.
   (E)   A determination at a hearing that the dog is in fact a "dangerous dog"
as defined herein shall subject the dog and its owner to the provisions of this
section. A determination that a dog is a "vicious dog" as defined herein shall
subject the dog and its owner to the provisions of sections
6-2-9-2 and
6-2-9-3 of this chapter.
   (F)   Failure of the dog owner to request a hearing shall result in the dog
being finally declared a dangerous dog and shall subject the dog and its owner
to the provisions of this section.
   (G)   The determination by the Hearing Officer that a dog is dangerous or
not dangerous at the conclusion of a hearing conducted under this chapter shall
be final, subject to the right to appeal the determination to a court of
competent jurisdiction pursuant to Illinois law. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff.
1-1-2016)
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which
has been found to be a dangerous dog unless the person meets the following
requirements:
      1.   Registration Of Dangerous Dogs: The owner shall register a dangerous
dog within ten (10) days of the dog being declared dangerous. The dog must be
registered with the City Clerk by April 1 of each year thereafter. An annual
registration fee shall be paid to the City pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of
Fees", of this Code;
      2.   Insurance: The owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the City
Clerk proof that he or she has procured liability insurance or a surety bond in
the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering
any damage or injury that may be caused by the dangerous dog. The policy shall
contain a provision requiring that the City be notified immediately by the
agent issuing the policy in the event that the insurance policy is canceled,
terminated or expires. The liability insurance or surety bond shall be obtained
prior to the issuing of a permit to keep a dangerous dog. The dog owner shall
sign a statement attesting that he or she shall maintain and not voluntarily
cancel the liability insurance policy during a twelve (12) month period for
which a permit is sought, unless he or she ceases to own or keep the dog prior
to the expiration date of the permit;
      3.   Permanent Identification: Each dangerous dog shall have an injected
microchip to permanently identify the dog; and
      4.   Transfer Of Ownership: The owner of a dangerous dog shall not
transfer ownership of the animal to any other person without providing the City
Clerk and the animal control officer with the name and address of the new
owner. (Ord. 14/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (I)   No person shall permit any dangerous dog to leave the premises of its
owner when not under control by leash or within an enclosed vehicle.
   (J)   The owner of any dog found to be dangerous shall maintain the animal
in such a manner as to prevent its coming in contact with any person not
residing with the owner.
   (K)   Any dog found to be a dangerous dog by the animal control officer or
Hearing Officer on two (2) separate occasions shall be deemed a vicious dog.
(Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-9-2: VICIOUS DOG:
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to keep or maintain any dog in the City which has been found to be a
vicious dog pursuant to this chapter or the Animal Control Act. For purposes of
this section, the term "vicious dog" shall mean a dog that, without
justification, attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death or
any individual dog that has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon two (2)
separate occasions.
   (B)   If the existence of a nuisance is established, the owner of the dog or
other animal shall be in violation of this chapter. Furthermore, the court may
enter an order restraining the owner from maintaining the nuisance and may
order that the dog or other animal be humanely dispatched. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-
2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-9-3: PROCEDURE FOR DECLARING A DOG VICIOUS:
   (A)   An animal control officer or any adult person may request under oath
that a dog be classified as vicious by submitting a sworn, written complaint on
a form approved by the animal control officer. Upon receipt of the complaint,
the animal control officer shall notify the owner of the dog that a complaint
has been filed and that an investigation into the allegations as set forth in
the complaint will be conducted. During the investigation:
      1.   The custody of any dog which is the subject of the investigation
shall not be transferred by its owner to any other person; nor shall the place
of maintenance of the dog be changed from its owner's residence during that
time, without the consent of the animal control officer; and
      2.   In addition, the dog may be ordered impounded by the animal control
officer if he or she has reason to believe that during the investigation the
dog will cause an immediate danger to the community if it is not immediately
impounded. The owner may appeal the impoundment order to the chief of police at
any time. The chief of police, or his or her designee, shall give the owner a
hearing within three (3) business days of the filing of the appeal.
   (B)   At the conclusion of an investigation, the animal control officer may:
      1.   Determine that the dog is not vicious and, if the dog is impounded,
waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its owner.
      2.   Determine that the dog is vicious and cause the dog to be humanely
destroyed.
      3.   Determine that the dog is dangerous, in which case the provisions of
section
6-2-9-1 of this chapter shall apply.
   (C)   1. Within five (5) business days after declaring a dog vicious, the
animal control officer shall notify the owner and the complainant of the dog's
designation as a vicious dog. The notice shall inform the dog owner that he or
she may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the finding and designation
within five (5) business days after delivery of the vicious dog designation
notice, by filing the request with the animal control officer no later than
five (5) days after receiving the notice. Upon receipt of a request for a
hearing, the animal control officer shall promptly notify and deliver the
request to the hearing officer designated in subsection (D)2 of this section.
      2.   Within five (5) business days after finding a dog not vicious, the
animal control officer shall notify the complainant and the owner of this
finding. The notice shall inform the complainant that he or she may request, in
writing, a hearing to contest the finding, by filing said request with the
animal control officer no later than five (5) days after receiving the notice.
Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the animal control officer shall
promptly notify and deliver the request to the hearing officer designated in
subsection (D)2 of this section.
   (D)   1. Upon a request for a hearing being filed as set forth in subsection
(C) of this section, a hearing shall be held in an expeditious manner, no later
than fifteen (15) days after the date the request for the hearing was received
by the animal control officer.
      2.   The hearing shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The hearing officer
shall not be an employee of the city nor of the entity which employs the animal
control officer.
      3.   The hearing officer shall provide notice of the date, time and
location of the hearing to the dog owner and to the complainant by regular
mail. At the hearing, all interested persons shall be given the opportunity to
present evidence on the issue of the dog's viciousness. Criteria to be
considered in a hearing required by this section shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
         (a)   Provocation;
         (b)   Severity of attack or injury to a person or domestic animal;
         (c)   Previous aggressive history of the dog;
         (d)   Observable behavior of the dog;
         (e)   Site and circumstances of the incident; and
         (f)   Statements from interested parties.
   (E)   The determination by the hearing officer that a dog is vicious or not
vicious at the conclusion of a hearing conducted under this chapter shall be
final, subject to the right to appeal the determination to a court of competent
jurisdiction pursuant to Illinois law. A determination by the hearing officer
that the dog is vicious shall include an order that the dog be humanely
destroyed, in which case the animal control officer shall cause the dog to be
humanely destroyed.
   (F)   If no hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (C)1 of this
section, the dog shall be humanely destroyed.
   (G)   The dog owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs
and other fees as may be required for the city to humanely and safely keep the
animal during any legal proceeding. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-10: IMPOUNDMENT:
6-2-10-1: REDEMPTION OF ANIMAL BY OWNER:
   (A)   In order to redeem a dog, cat or other animal which has been
impounded, the owner shall pay to the animal control officer the current
minimum fee established by Mercer County animal control.
   (B)   In addition to the redemption fee, the owner shall pay to the animal
control officer the minimum current boarding fee established by Mercer County
animal control for the board of the animal for each day or fraction of a day
for which it has been impounded.
   (C)   In the event any impounded animal does not have a current rabies tag,
the owner redeeming the dog or cat shall pay, in addition to the above charges,
the minimum fee established by Mercer County animal control to be applied
toward rabies inoculation for the current year. The inoculation shall be given
within forty eight (48) hours of redemption.
   (D)   In addition to the above mentioned fees, the owner of an impounded
animal will be subject to the other penalties of this chapter. (Ord. 8/2015,
10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-11: PROHIBITED ACTIONS; CARE OF ANIMALS:
6-2-11-1: ANIMALS AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Dogs:
      1.   (a) It is unlawful for any dog to run at large within the corporate
limits of the city. If a dog does run at large, the owner or keeper of the dog
shall be in violation of this chapter. Any dog which goes upon any public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, unless so designated by the city
council as an off leash area, or upon any private property other than that of
the owner of the dog, shall be deemed to be running at large unless the dog is
firmly held on a leash under the complete control of a physically and mentally
competent person, or is in an enclosed vehicle.
         (b)   In addition, any dog found to be on the property of its owner
shall be deemed to be running at large, unless:
            (1)   It is then and there accompanied by and under the charge of a
physically and mentally competent person; or
            (2)   It is securely restrained by a leash, tether, fence or other
enclosure, or it is in the rear yard of its owner or keeper and is under the
direct control of a person physically capable of restraining the dog; or
            (3)   An electronic pet containment system is then and there in
place which effectively restrains the dog from leaving the property of its
owner.
      2.   Any dog found running at large upon a public street, sidewalk, alley
or other public place or upon any private property other than that of the owner
of the dog shall be impounded by the animal control officer; provided, however,
any vicious dog, which has bitten a human being and cannot be safely captured,
may be slain by the animal control officer or by a police officer.
   (B)   Cats: It is unlawful for any cat to run at large upon a public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place or upon any private property other than
that of the owner of it and create a nuisance or disturbance. If a cat does run
at large and create a nuisance or disturbance, the owner or keeper of the cat
shall be in violation of this chapter. In addition, the cat may be impounded;
provided, however, any vicious cat, which has bitten a human being and cannot
be safely captured, may be slain by the animal control officer or by a police
officer.
   (C)   Livestock And Fowl: No person shall permit any cattle, horses, swine,
sheep, goats or fowl to run at large within the corporate limits of the city.
No person shall picket or tie any animal in any of the streets of the city for
the purpose of grazing or feeding. Any animal running at large or improperly
tied shall be impounded by the animal control officer; provided, however, any
vicious animal which has bitten a human being and cannot be safely captured may
be slain by the animal control officer or a police officer. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-
19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-11-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   (A)   Cruelty To And Endangering Of Animals: No person shall beat, cruelly
ill treat, torment or abuse any animal. No person shall throw or deposit any
poisonous substance on any exposed or private place where it may endanger any
animal. No person shall provoke any animal to bark or bite by taunting it. It
shall be a violation of this chapter for any person convicted of a violation of
this section, or any similar provision of Illinois law, to own, keep, harbor or
act as custodian for any dog or other animal for a period of five (5) years
from the date of said conviction.
   (B)   Abandonment: It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to abandon an
animal where it may become a public charge or may suffer injury or exposure or
allow it to remain within a property in which there is no current resident or
on site proprietor.
   (C)   Impoundment Procedure: The animal control officer is hereby authorized
to remove from any premises and impound any animal or fowl on which cruel
treatment is being inflicted as listed in this section. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-
2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-11-3: NUISANCE FEEDING PROHIBITED:
No person shall feed, bait, or allow access to food to any wild, feral, or
stray animal or rodent. No person shall leave or store any food, refuse, or
other material or substance in a manner that creates an attractant for any
wild, feral, or stray animals or rodents. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-
2016)
6-2-11-4: POLICE DOGS:
   (A)   Teasing, Striking Or Tampering With Police Dogs Prohibited: No person
shall wilfully or maliciously taunt, torment, tease, beat, strike, or
administer or subject any desensitizing drugs, chemicals or substance to any
dog used by a police officer in the performance of his or her functions or
duties, or when placed in confinement off duty; and no person shall interfere
or meddle with any such dog used by the police department or any other law
enforcement agency or any handler thereof in the performance of the functions
or duties of the police department or other law enforcement agency.
   (B)   Injuring Or Killing Police Dogs Prohibited: No person shall wilfully
or maliciously torture, torment, mutilate, injure, disable, poison, or kill any
dog used by the police department or any other law enforcement agency in the
performance of the functions or duties of the police department or other law
enforcement agency or when placed in confinement off duty. However, the animal
control officer, police officer or veterinarian may perform euthanasia in
emergency situations when delay would cause the animal undue pain and
suffering. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-11-5: TRAPPING ANIMALS; EXCEPTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to trap animals within the city limits. For
purposes of this section, "trap" means to capture or attempt to capture, by
setting or placing a leg hold trap, body gripping trap, cage or live trap, or
similar device to capture, hold, or kill animals. This section shall not apply,
however, to any law enforcement officers acting in the course of their duties
or to any person who, prior to setting traps, obtains permission to trap within
the city limits from the police department and the state of Illinois. (Ord. 8/
2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-11-6: BURNING OF ANIMAL MATTER PROHIBITED:
No person shall burn any feathers, hides or any other animal matter within the
corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-11-7: DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
   (A)   Prohibited Disposal: No person shall deposit, place or throw any dead
animal or fatally sick or injured animal, or part thereof on any public or
private place, or into any reservoir, sewer or well, or on the banks of any
stream, lake, pond or other body of water.
   (B)   Burial: All dead animals, or parts thereof, may be buried at a
distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') of any residence or well; and
the carcass shall be placed underground and well covered with dirt at least
four feet (4') underground to the upper part of the carcass.
   (C)   Immediate Disposal: No person shall fail to immediately dispose of any
dead animal found upon the property under his or her possession or control.
(Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-11-8: DOGS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC AREAS ON CERTAIN DAYS:
No person shall permit or allow any dog owned by him or her, or under his or
her maintenance and control, to be present at any public event involving large
numbers of people, including, but not limited to, Aledo Rhubarb Festival and
Aledo Antique Days, and any other day when, in the discretion of the Chief of
Police, the presence of dogs at such an event constitutes a danger or threat to
the safety of the public, and the Chief of Police has caused signs to be posted
at the event informing the public that dogs are not permitted. This section
shall not apply to dogs trained to assist physically impaired individuals, nor
to certified police dogs. (Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-2-12: DOG PARK REGULATIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize the Aledo Bark Park in
a manner which violates the following rules:
      1.   Hours. The dog park is open daily from dawn until dusk unless closed
for maintenance or weather.
      2.   Dogs Only. The dog park is for use of dogs and handlers only. No
other animals are permitted in the dog park.
      3.   Leashes. Dogs must be on a leash when outside the designated off-
leash areas.
      4.   Regulations.
         (a)   Dogs must be in view and under control of their handler at all
times.
         (b)   All handlers must be 16 years of age.
         (c)   Children under the age of 13 must be supervised by an adult.
         (d)   Handlers are required to pick up and dispose of their dog’s
waste.
         (e)   No more than two dogs per handler.
         (f)   Handlers must stop their dog from digging and must fill any
holes their dog creates.
         (g)   Dogs displaying aggressive behavior are not permitted in the dog
park.
         (h)   All dogs must have a valid rabies vaccination tag.
      5.   Prohibited Items. The following items are prohibited at the dog
park:
         (a)   Bicycles, skates, or rollerblades.
         (b)   Strollers and baby carriages.
         (c)   Dog treats and rawhides.
         (d)   Food (dog or human).
      6.   Prohibited Activities. The following activities are prohibited at
the dog park:
         (a)   Smoking and use of any tobacco products or their like.
         (b)   Sports activities.
         (c)   Dog training classes.
         (d)   Business uses.
      7.   Prohibited Dogs. The following dogs are prohibited at the dog park:
         (a)   Dogs under five (5) months of age.
         (b)   Female dogs in heat.
   (B)   Any person entering the dog park acknowledges the risks and possible
dangers associated with dog parks and assumes the risk of injury to themselves
and their dogs.
(Ord. 09/2025, 4-7-2025)
6-2-13: PENALTY:
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined pursuant
to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code.
(Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 3
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2 of this title.
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Admission Fees, Fraudulently Avoiding Payment Of
6-4-2: Assault
6-4-3: Battery
6-4-4: Cigarettes Or Tobacco, Sale To Or Possession By Minors
6-4-4.1: Definitions
6-4-4.2: Smoking Prohibited In Public Places And Places Of Employment
6-4-4.3: Exemptions
6-4-5: Concealing Knowledge
6-4-6: Damage To City Property
6-4-7: Delinquency, Encouraging
6-4-8: Disorderly Conduct; Breach Of Peace
6-4-9: Drunkenness
6-4-10: False Pretenses
6-4-11: General Offense
6-4-12: Indecent Exposure
6-4-13: Injurious Material On Thoroughfares, Deposits Of
6-4-14: Junk, Keeping Of Restricted
6-4-15: Obscene Conduct
6-4-16: Posting Bills
6-4-17: Property, Malicious Injury To
6-4-18: Resisting An Officer
6-4-19: Trespassing
6-4-20: Water Flowing Upon Streets
6-4-21: Windowsills To Be Kept Clear
6-4-22: Liquor Consumption Or Possession On Public Property
6-4-23: Throwing Objects From Vehicles Prohibited In Parades
6-4-24: Litter Prohibited
6-4-25: Possession And Consumption Of Cannabis
6-4-1: ADMISSION FEES, FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of
the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police
officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public
entertainment or amusement. (1969 Code)
6-4-2: ASSAULT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "assault" which is hereby defined
as any conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a
battery. (1969 Code)
6-4-3: BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A person commits battery
if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means
causes bodily harm to an individual or makes physical contact of an insulting
or provoking nature with an individual. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-
2017)
6-4-4: CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO, SALE TO OR POSSESSION BY MINORS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to buy for or sell, furnish or
give away, to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, either directly or
indirectly, any cigar, cigarette, tobacco, compound of tobacco used in filling
up or making up of a cigarette, cigarette papers, tobacco product, nicotine
product, alternative nicotine product, electronic cigarette or other product,
device, or implement designed for use in inhaling or ingesting nicotine or
alternative nicotine products.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age
to buy or otherwise possess any cigar, cigarette, tobacco, compound of tobacco
used in filling up or making up of a cigarette, cigarette papers, tobacco
product, nicotine product, alternative nicotine product, electronic cigarette
or other product, device, or implement designed for use in inhaling or
ingesting nicotine or alternative nicotine products. (Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017;
Ord. 47/2019, 12-16- 2019)
6-4-4.1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:
                                      Any sole proprietorship, partnership,
                                      joint venture, corporation, association,
BUSINESS:                             limited liability partnership, limited
                                      liability company or other business
                                      entity, whether formed for profit or
                                      nonprofit purposes.
                                      Any device that utilizes or employs a
                                      battery or other mechanism to heat a
                                      solution or substance intended for
                                      inhalation and which causes such device
                                      to produce or the user to exhale smoke,
                                      nicotine, vapor, aerosol, or other
                                      substance other than those produced or
                                      exhaled by unenhanced human expiration of
                                      air from the lungs. "Electronic
                                      cigarette" includes, but is not limited
                                      to, any electronic nicotine delivery
                                      system, electronic cigar, electronic
                                      cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic
                                      hookah, vape pen, vape pod, or other
                                      similar product or device, and any
                                      components or parts that can be used to
                                      build any similar product or device.
                                      "Electronic cigarette" also includes any
                                      cartridge or container of a solution or
                                      substance intended to be used with an
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR E-CIGARETTE:  electronic cigarette and any solution or
                                      substance intended for use in an
                                      electronic cigarette. However,
                                      "electronic cigarette" does not include
                                      cigarettes as defined by the Illinois
                                      Cigarette Tax Act; tobacco products as
                                      defined by the Tobacco Products Act;
                                      products approved by the U.S. Food and
                                      Drug Administration for sale as tobacco
                                      cessation products, tobacco dependence
                                      products, or for other medical purposes
                                      and used solely for such purpose; asthma
                                      inhalers or other medical devices
                                      approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
                                      Administration, prescribed by a physician
                                      for the purpose of mitigation, treatment
                                      or prevention of a medical condition, and
                                      used solely for such prescribed purpose;
                                      and products approved for use under and
                                      in accordance with the Compassionate Use
                                      of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
                                      Any person, who is employed by an
                                      employer in consideration for direct or
                                      indirect monetary wages or profits or a
EMPLOYEE:                             person who volunteers his or her services
                                      for a non-profit entity "Employee"
                                      includes the owner or operator of a sole
                                      proprietorship or other similar business
                                      entity.
                                      Any person, business, partnership,
                                      association, or corporation, including a
EMPLOYER:                             municipal corporation, trust, or non-
                                      profit entity, that employs the services
                                      of one or more employees.
                                      All space between a floor and a ceiling
                                      that is enclosed or partially enclosed
                                      with: a) solid walls or windows,
ENCLOSED AREA:                        exclusive of doorways, or b) solid walls
                                      with partitions and no windows, exclusive
                                      of doorways, that extend from the floor
                                      to the ceiling, including, without
                                      limitation, lobbies and corridors.
                                      Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium,
                                      health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool,
                                      roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or
                                      other similar place where members of the
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS general public assemble to engage in
ARENA:                                physical exercise or participate in
                                      athletic competitions or recreational
                                      activities or to witness sports,
                                      cultural, recreational, or other
                                      activities.
                                      Any form of nicotine, regardless of
NICOTINE:                             whether it is naturally, chemically, or
                                      synthetically derived, including any salt
                                      or complex thereof.
                                      Any area under the control of a public or
                                      private employer within the city that
                                      employees are required to enter, leave,
                                      or pass through during the course of
                                      employment, including, but not limited
                                      to, entrances and exits to places of
                                      employment, including a minimum distance
                                      of fifteen feet (15') from entrances,
                                      exits, windows that open, and ventilation
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT:                  intakes that serve an enclosed area where
                                      smoking is prohibited; offices and work
                                      areas; restrooms; conference and class
                                      rooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and
                                      other common areas. A private residence
                                      or home-based business, unless used to
                                      provide licensed childcare, foster care,
                                      adult care, or other similar social
                                      service care on the premises, is not a
                                      "place of employment".
                                      A not for profit association, whether
                                      incorporated or not, that is the owner,
                                      lessee, or occupant of a building or
                                      portion thereof used exclusively for club
                                      purposes at all times and is operated
                                      solely for a recreational, fraternal,
                                      social, patriotic, political, benevolent,
                                      or athletic purpose, but not for
                                      pecuniary gain, and only sells alcoholic
PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE:                beverages incidental to its operation.
                                      For purposes of this definition, "private
                                      club" means an organization that is
                                      managed by a board of directors,
                                      executive committee or similar body
                                      chosen by members at an annual meeting,
                                      has established bylaws, a constitution,
                                      or both, to govern its activities, and
                                      has been granted an exemption from the
                                      payment of federal income tax as a club
                                      under 26 USC 501.
                                      The part of a structure used as a
                                      dwelling, including, without limitation,
                                      a private home, townhouse, condominium,
                                      apartment, mobile home, vacation home,
                                      cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of
PRIVATE RESIDENCE:                    this definition, a hotel, motel, inn,
                                      resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other
                                      similar public accommodation, hospital,
                                      nursing home, or assisted living facility
                                      shall not be considered a private
                                      residence.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE:                      Every doorway or other entrance to a
                                      public place or place of employment.
                                      That portion of any building or vehicle
                                      used by and open to the public,
                                      regardless of whether the building or
                                      vehicles is owned in whole or in part by
                                      private persons or entities, the state of
                                      Illinois, the city, or any other public
                                      entity and regardless of whether a fee is
                                      charged for admission, including a
                                      minimum distance of fifteen feet (15')
                                      from entrances, exits, windows that open,
                                      and ventilation intakes that serve an
                                      enclosed area where smoking is
                                      prohibited. A public place does not
                                      include a private residence unless the
                                      private residence is used to provide
                                      licensed childcare, foster care or other
                                      similar social service care on the
                                      premises. A public place includes, but is
                                      not limited to:
                                      Any business.
                                      Auditoriums.
                                      Bars/taverns.
                                      Bowling alleys.
                                      Cafeterias.
                                      Commercial establishments.
                                      Common or public areas (including,
                                      without limitation, lobbies, hallways,
                                      waiting rooms, reception areas, public
                                      restrooms, elevators and staircases) and
                                      common areas of multiple-family
                                      residences, condominiums, dormitory
                                      buildings, nursing home care facilities,
                                      and other multiple-family residential
                                      structures.
                                      Concert halls.
                                      Convention facilities.
                                      Educational facilities.
                                      Enclosed or partially enclosed sports
                                      arenas.
                                      Enclosed shopping centers.
                                      Exhibition halls.
                                      Financial institutions.
                                      Food stores.
                                      Gaming facilities.
PUBLIC PLACE:                         Government owned vehicles and facilities,
                                      including buildings and vehicles owned
                                      leased, or operated by the State of
                                      Illinois, State of Illinois subcontract,
                                      or the city.
                                      Healthcare facilities or clinics.
                                      Indoor shopping malls.
                                      Laundromats.
                                      Libraries.
                                      Lobbies.
                                      Museums.
                                      Not less than seventy-five percent (75%)
                                      of the sleeping quarters within a hotel,
                                      motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and
                                      breakfast, or other similar public
                                      accommodation that are rented to guests,
                                      excluding private residences.
                                      Nursing homes.
                                      Offices.
                                      Polling places.
                                      Private clubs.
                                      Public conveyances.
                                      Public restrooms.
                                      Public transportation facilities.
                                      Reception areas.
                                      Restaurants.
                                      Retail food production and marketing
                                      establishments.
                                      Retail service establishments.
                                      Retail stores.
                                      Rooms, chambers, halls, or other
                                      locations within which meetings,
                                      hearings, or gatherings are held, to
                                      which the public is invited or in which
                                      the public is permitted, including
                                      specifically, but without limitation, any
                                      indoor enclosed area under the control of
                                      the city where there is in progress any
                                      public meeting.
                                      Schools.
                                      Skating rinks.
                                      Theaters, indoor or outdoor.
                                      Ticket areas.
                                      Vehicles of public transport.
                                      Waiting areas.
                                      An eating establishment, including, but
                                      not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias,
                                      sandwich stands, and private and public
                                      school cafeterias that gives or offers
RESTAURANT:                           for sale food to the public, guests, or
                                      employees, and a kitchen or catering
                                      facility in which food is prepared on the
                                      premises for serving elsewhere.
                                      "Restaurant" includes a bar area within
                                      the restaurant.
                                      A retail establishment that derives more
                                      than eighty percent (80%) of its gross
                                      revenue from the sale of loose tobacco,
                                      plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes,
                                      pipes, and other smoking devices for
                                      burning tobacco and related smoking
                                      accessories and in which the sale of
                                      other products is merely incidental.
                                      "Retail tobacco store" includes and
                                      enclosed workplace that manufactures,
                                      imports, or distributes tobacco or
                                      tobacco products, when, as a necessary
                                      and integral part of the process of
                                      making, manufacturing, importing, or
                                      distributing a tobacco product for the
                                      eventual retail sale of that tobacco or
                                      tobacco product, tobacco is heated,
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE:                 burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco
                                      product is tested, provided that the
                                      involved business entity: (1) maintains a
                                      specially designated area or areas within
                                      the workplace for the purpose of the
                                      heating, burning, smoking, or lighting
                                      activities, and does not create a
                                      facility that permits smoking throughout;
                                      (2) satisfies the eighty percent (80%)
                                      requirement related to gross sales; and
                                      (3) delivers tobacco products to
                                      consumers, retail establishments, or
                                      other wholesale establishments as part of
                                      its business. "Retail tobacco store" does
                                      not include a tobacco department or
                                      section of a larger commercial
                                      establishment or any establishment with
                                      any type of liquor, food, or restaurant
                                      license.
                                      Inhaling, exhaling, burning, smoking, or
                                      carrying any lighted pipe, cigar,
                                      cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any
SMOKE OR SMOKING:                     other lighted smoking equipment. "Smoke"
                                      or "smoking" includes the use, inhaling,
                                      exhaling, or burning of any nicotine
                                      product or electronic cigarette.
                                      Any product containing or made from
                                      tobacco that is intended for human
                                      consumption, whether smoke, heated,
                                      chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled,
                                      snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any
                                      other means, including, but not limited
                                      to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars,
                                      chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff,
                                      snus, and any other smokeless tobacco
                                      product which contains tobacco that is
                                      finely cut, ground, powdered, or leave
TOBACCO PRODUCT:                      and intended to be placed in the oral
                                      cavity. "Tobacco product" includes any
                                      component, part, and accessory of a
                                      tobacco product, whether or not sold
                                      separately. "Tobacco product" does not
                                      include electronic cigarettes, nicotine
                                      products, and products that have been
                                      approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
                                      Administration for sale as tobacco
                                      cessation products, tobacco dependence
                                      products, or for other medical purposes
                                      and used solely for such purpose. (Ord.
                                      47/2019, 12-16-2019)
 
6-4-4.2: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in a public place or a place of
employment within the City of Aledo.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke within fifteen feet (15') of
the entrance of any public place or place of employment within the city.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle owned, leased,
or operated by the city.
   (D)   It is unlawful for the owner, employer, occupant or lessee in control
of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in a public
place or place of employment that is not specifically exempted as described in
section
6-4-4.2 of this chapter. (Ord. 47/2019, 12-16-2019)
6-4-4.3: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, smoking is
allowed in the following areas:
   (A)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a
childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home-based
business open to the public.
   (B)   Any public place or place of employment that is a tobacco dealer,
whose principal business is the sale at retail of tobacco and tobacco related
products; provided that smoke generated by smoking on the premises of the
tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is
otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been granted.
   (C)   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
   (D)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as
smoking rooms provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be
contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms
or other areas where smoking is prohibited. No more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as
rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking
may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms.
   (E)   Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or
government vehicles. (Ord. 47/2019, 12-16-2019)
6-4-5: CONCEALING KNOWLEDGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal knowledge of the commission of
any offense or to conceal knowledge of any unlawful act as defined in this
Code. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-6: DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, deliberately or maliciously
damage, deface, or in any way render inoperative, any property owned or under
the control and operation of the City. The word "property" as used hereinabove
means both real and personal property, including any locks, fences, gates,
chains, padlocks or other devices or fixtures whatsoever that may be installed
upon or used in connection with property owned or operated by the City. (Ord.
4/65, 10-18-1965; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-7: DELINQUENCY, ENCOURAGING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid
or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities; and it
shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license
of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a
motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. (1969
Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-8: DISORDERLY CONDUCT; BREACH OF PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct within the
City. A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she:
   (A)   Acts in a violent, tumultuous, or offensive manner so as to alarm or
disturb another, or to provoke a breach of the peace;
   (B)   Threatens, traduces, quarrels, fights or challenges to fight another;
   (C)   Uses obscene, offensive, profane or unseemly language to the
annoyance, disturbance or vexation of another;
   (D)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted, in any manner, to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee, a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that the offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been
committed;
   (E)   Calls the number "911" for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency; or makes
repeated unnecessary calls to the number "911" when no emergency exists;
   (F)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the Police
Department or Fire Department of the City, or any privately owned and operated
ambulance service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical
technician-ambulance or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the
time there is no reasonable ground for believing that the assistance is
required; and
   (G)   Enters upon the property of another, for a lewd or unlawful purpose or
to look into the dwelling through any window or other opening. (Ord. 22/2017,
6-19-2017)
6-4-9: DRUNKENNESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found drunk, intoxicated or under the
influence of intoxicating liquor upon any public thoroughfare or other public
place. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-10: FALSE PRETENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or
merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for
refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or
depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received the
food, goods, wares and merchandise. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-11: GENERAL OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any
requirement which is prohibited or required by State law, insofar as such laws
are applicable to Municipal government. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-
2017)
6-4-12: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts in any
public place within the City:
   (A)   Engage in sexual penetration or other sexual conduct;
   (B)   Appear in a state of nudity or make any indecent, lewd or lascivious
exposure of body parts;
   (C)   Engage in any other indecent, lewd or lascivious act or behavior.
Indecent exposure does not include the act of breast feeding of an infant.
"Public place" for the purpose of this section means any place where such act
or conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. (Ord. 22/2017, 6-
19-2017)
6-4-13: INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES, DEPOSITS OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or
upon any public thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person or
property. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-14: JUNK, KEEPING OF RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or
materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to
any schoolhouse, church, public parks, public grounds, business buildings or
residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage
of the same. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-15: OBSCENE CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any place open to
the public view within the City. (Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-16: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, hitchpost, telegraph pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door or
gate, without the consent in writing of the owner of the wall, door or gate;
provided, however, that this section shall not prevent posting by proper City
and County officials of election signs, polling place signs and other signs or
placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections. (1969 Code; amd.
Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-17: PROPERTY, MALICIOUS INJURY TO:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to injure, deface,
mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any manner interfere with or molest or
secrete or destroy any real or personal property belonging to or under the
control of any person or of the City. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-18: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere wilfully with, resist, delay,
obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the City in the exercise
of his official duties. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-19: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the City upon
either public or private property. A person commits trespass when he or she:
   (A)   Knowingly and without legal authority enters or remains within or on
any building;
   (B)   Enters upon any property or into any building in violation of a notice
posted or exhibited at any point of approach on the property;
   (C)   Enters upon any property or into any building when he or she has been
given prior written or verbal notice, by any owner or occupant thereof, that
such entry is prohibited;
   (D)   Remains in or on any building or property after being told, by any
owner or occupant thereof, to leave the building or property; or
   (E)   Enters a park after normal closing hours without having received
permission from the person with legal authority over the park. (Ord. 22/2017,
6-19-2017)
6-4-20: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any
public thoroughfare. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-21: WINDOWSILLS TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch
or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any
sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the
sidewalk in front of such building, unless such article be securely fastened or
protected by screens. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-22: LIQUOR CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
The consumption or the transportation and/or possession of alcoholic liquor by
any person while on public property including, but not limited to, all public
parks located within the City, is hereby forbidden except when the
transportation and/or possession of alcoholic liquor is in the original package
with the seal unbroken; provided, however, that no person shall be guilty of a
violation of this section if at the time he is in possession or the
transportation of alcoholic liquor he is located on public property operating
under a valid special events liquor license as provided under section
3-2-19  of this Code, or during a public event in locations as designated by
the Chief of Police or City Administrator.
Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject
to a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord. 22/
2017, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. 4/2023. 2-6-2023)
6-4-23: THROWING OBJECTS FROM VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN PARADES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, hand or deliver, or
cause to have thrown, handed or delivered any candy, treats, or any tangible
articles from any vehicle participating in any parade. Vehicles participating
in any parade shall include any and all vehicles located either along the
parade route or at the beginning or ending of any such route regardless of
whether any such vehicles are moving or stationary.
   (B)   Any person who violates subsection (A) of this section shall be fined
pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-
2017)
6-4-24: LITTER PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Declared Nuisance: All litter which has been stored, dumped or
accumulated upon any real property improved or vacant, and any used motor
vehicle parts or similar scrap metal stored or allowed to exist in the open on
any property, unless necessary for the operation of a business enterprise
lawfully conducted thereon, is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   Prohibition: No person shall throw, deposit or dump litter, used motor
vehicle parts or similar scrap metal on any property except in an approved
container or in a public landfill. (Ord. 08/2012, 6-4-2012; amd. Ord. 22/2017,
6-19-2017)
   (C)   Definitions:
      GARBAGE: All accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, including
grass, vegetation and noxious weeds and any other matter of any nature
whatsoever that is subject to decay, putrefaction, and the generation of
noxious and offensive smells or odors, of which, during and after decay, may be
a food source for rodents and may serve as breeding or feeding materials for
flies and/or other germ carrying insects; bottles, cans, or other food
containers which due to their ability to retain water can serve as a breeding
place for mosquitoes, or other water breeding insects. It includes rejected
household food waste, offal, pet feces, swill and carrion.
      LITTER: Includes but is not limited to garbage and any other worthless,
unwanted material, items, debris, cigarette butts, cans, bottles, chewing gum,
candy, food scraps or other scraps that is rejected, discarded or thrown out.
(Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-4-25: POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF CANNABIS:
   (A)   For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
 
ACT:                     The Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act
                         (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
                         Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which
                         are identified as including any parts of the plant
                         Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not, the seeds
                         thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such
                         plant and any compound, manufacture, sale, derivative,
                         mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
                         resin including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all
                         other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally
                         occurring or synthetically produced ingredients,
                         whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction,
CANNABIS:                or independently by means of chemical synthesis; but
                         shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
                         fiber produced from stalks, oil or cake made from the
                         seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture,
                         salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
                         mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
                         fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such
                         plant which is incapable of germination. "Cannabis"
                         does not include industrial hemp as defined and
                         authorized under the Illinois Industrial Hemp Act (505
                         ILCS 89/5).
                         Includes equipment, products, or materials intended to
                         be used for planting, propagating, cultivating,
                         growing, harvesting, manufacturing, producing,
CANNABIS PARAPHERNALI A: processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
                         repackaging storing, containing, concealing,
                         ingesting, or otherwise introducing cannabis into the
                         human body.
CRTA:                    The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1 et
                         seq.).
                         Any place where a person could reasonably be expected
                         to be observed by others. "Public place" includes all
                         parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or
                         leased, by the State of Illinois, the City of Aledo,
                         or any other unit of local government. "Public place"
                         also includes all areas in a park, recreation area,
PUBLIC PLACE:            wildlife area or playground owned in whole or in part,
                         leased, or managed by the State, the City of Aledo, or
                         any other unit of local government. "Public place"
                         does not include a private residence unless the
                         private residence is used to provide licensed child
                         care, foster care, or other similar social service
                         care on the premises.
 
   (B)   In General: It is unlawful for any person who is twenty-one (21) years
of age or older to possess cannabis in excess of the following limits:
      1.   For residents of the State of Illinois:
         a.   Thirty (30) grams of cannabis flower;
         b.   Five hundred (500) milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-
infused product;
         c.   Five (5) grams of cannabis concentrate.
      2.   For individuals who are not residents of the State of Illinois:
         a.   Fifteen (15) grams of cannabis flower;
         b.   Two hundred fifty (250) milligrams of THC contained in a
cannabis-infused product;
         c.   Two and one half (2.5) grams of cannabis concentrate.
   (C)   Minors:
      1.   Possession: It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-
one (21) to possess or consume cannabis.
      2.   Sales To Minors: No cannabis business, or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent, or employee thereof shall sell, give, or deliver
cannabis to any person under the age of twenty-one (21). No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining cannabis shall sell, give, or deliver such
cannabis to any person under the age of twenty-one (21).
      3.   Furnishing Or Using False Or Fraudulent ID: Any person under the age
of twenty-one (21) who presents or offers to any cannabis business, or any
officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee thereof, any
evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, modified, or not their
own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, procuring, or attempting to order,
purchase, or procure cannabis, or who has in their possession any false,
fraudulent, or modified evidence of age or identity is guilty of a violation of
this Section 6-2-5-3.
   (D)   Medical Use Of Cannabis: Notwithstanding anything in this Section to
the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any individual who is a registered
qualifying patient or a registered designated caregiver, as those terms are
defined in the Act, to engage in the medical use of cannabis, or to possess
cannabis for the purpose of engaging or assisting in the medical use of
cannabis in accordance with the provisions of the Act. An individual is
presumed to be acting lawfully and in compliance with this Section and the
terms of the Act where such individual is in possession of (i) a valid registry
identification card issued pursuant to the Act, and (ii) no more than two and
one half (2.5) ounces of cannabis (or such other amount as authorized by the
Act or the CRTA).
   (E)   Cultivation Of Cannabis: It shall be unlawful for any individual to
cultivate cannabis for personal use; provided, however, that a registered
qualifying patient under the Act may cultivate up to five (5) cannabis plants,
with a cumulative limit of five (5) plants per household.
   (F)   Possession And Use Prohibited: Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall
be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following:
      1.   Possession or use of cannabis on a school bus, unless permitted for
a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Act;
      2.   Possession or use of cannabis on the grounds of any preschool,
primary school, or secondary school, unless permitted for a qualifying patient
or caregiver pursuant to the Act;
      3.   Possession or use of cannabis in any correctional facility;
      4.   Possession of cannabis in a vehicle, unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving;
      5.   Use of cannabis in a motor vehicle;
      6.   Possession or use of cannabis in a private residence that is used at
any time to provide licensed child care or similar social service care on the
premises;
      7.   Use of cannabis in any public place within the City, including any
public area as defined in Section 6-11-1 of this Code;
      8.   Use of cannabis knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone
under twenty-one (21) years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis
patient under the Act;
      9.   Smoking cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited under the
Smoke Free Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.);
      10.   Operating, navigating, or being in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat while using or under the influence of
cannabis in violation of Section 11-501 or 11-502.1 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code;
      11.   Facilitating the use of cannabis by any person who is not allowed
to use cannabis under this Section;
      12.   Transferring cannabis to any person contrary to this Section, the
Act or the CRTA;
      13.   The use of cannabis by a person who has a school bus permit or a
commercial driver's license while on duty.
   (G)   Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than three hundred dollars
($300.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 49/
2019, 12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 5
NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-5-1:   Offensive, Obnoxious Premises
6-5-2:   Saloons; Disorderly Houses
6-5-3:   Dead Animals 1  (Rep. by Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-5-4:   Watercourse Obstructions
6-5-5:   Dilapidated Buildings
6-5-6:   Notice To Abate
6-5-7:   Process Of Action
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-2-11-7 of this title.
6-5-1: OFFENSIVE, OBNOXIOUS PREMISES:
Any pen, pigsty, stable, shed or other place, on or upon which any horse, cow,
hog or other animal, or animals, have been, are or may be kept or confined; or
any cellar, vault, privy, sewer, or other place; the leaving of any dead animal
in or upon any street or other place unburied; or the obstructing of any street
or other public ground; or the obstructing or fouling any watercourse within
the corporate limits of the city; or the keeping of any slaughterhouse, soap
factory or rendery, either within said corporate limits or within one and one-
half (11/2) miles thereof, in such manner or condition as to become filthy,
offensive, or an annoyance to any person or neighborhood, or to the public
generally, are each hereby severally defined and declared to be nuisances, and
the owner or keeper thereof, or person permitting any of the aforesaid
nuisances to exist or continue, shall be deemed to be the author of a nuisance
and shall be subject to the provisions and penalties as in this code provided.
(Ord. 13/00, 4-19-1901)
6-5-2: SALOONS; DISORDERLY HOUSES:
Any person who shall own, occupy, keep or maintain any saloon, beer garden or
gallon shop; or any house of prostitution, or assignation; or any bawdy or
disorderly house; or any gaming or gambling place, or any business place or
establishment within the city or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the
corporate limits of said city, in such manner as to be offensive or unwholesome
to the neighborhood in which it is located or any family residing therein,
shall be deemed to be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. (Ord. 13/00, 4-19-1901)
6-5-3: DEAD ANIMALS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 8/2015, 10-19-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  6-2-11-7 of this title.
6-5-4: WATERCOURSE OBSTRUCTIONS:
Any person who shall erect or maintain, or cause the same to be done, any
obstruction to any watercourse, ravine or slough within the limits of the city,
so as to interrupt or interfere with the running of water in the same, or shall
cause to be placed in any watercourse, ravine or slough, any substance which
will stop or interfere with the flow of water therein, or place or cause to be
placed in any watercourse any dead animal, garbage, or other filthy or unclean
thing, shall be deemed the author of a nuisance. (Ord. 13/00, 4-19-1901)
6-5-5: DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS:
Any person or persons who shall suffer or permit any old building, or other
structure, on or upon any premises belonging to or occupied by him, to become
dilapidated, or in such condition that it will be liable to fall down; or in
such condition that it is dangerous on account of fire or storms, shall be
deemed the author of a nuisance. (Ord. 4/02, 7-7-1902)
6-5-6: NOTICE TO ABATE:
In all cases when the provisions of this chapter, or any section thereof, shall
have been violated and notice to the person so offending shall have been given
to remove or abate the same and such person shall fail or neglect or refuse so
to do within the time required by such notice, when notice is required to be
given, or shall fail to do as required by this chapter or any section thereof,
it shall be the duty of the chief of police at once to proceed to remove or
abate the same and all reasonable charges and expenses incurred by the chief of
police in the performance of such duty may be recovered from the offender in a
separate action, or may be included in the judgment for the fine or penalty
incurred by reason of the violation of this chapter, or the particular section
so violated. (Ord. 13/00, 4-19-1901)
6-5-7: PROCESS OF ACTION:
In all actions for violations of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any
section thereof, the first process shall be a summons; provided, however, that
a warrant for the arrest of the offender may issue, in the first instance, upon
the affidavit of any competent person that the chapter has been violated, and
that the person making the complaint, has reasonable grounds to believe that
the party charged is guilty thereof; and any person arrested upon such warrant
shall, without unnecessary delay be taken before a proper court, or before the
clerk of the circuit court, to be tried for the alleged offense. (Ord. 13/00,
4-19-1901)
CHAPTER 6
RAILROADS
(Rep. by Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 7
TOY VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-7-1:   Definitions
6-7-2:   Restricted Areas
6-7-3:   Outside Restricted Areas
6-7-4:   Parental Responsibility
6-7-5:   Signs Posted
6-7-6:   Penalty
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The term "pushcart" when used in this chapter shall also include a scooter or
any other device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride. (Ord.
6/01, 7-16-2001)
6-7-2: RESTRICTED AREAS:
   (A)   Business District: No person shall operate or use an electric battery
powered scooter, skateboard, pushcart, rollerblades, or roller skates within
the city's "business district" as defined below during any calendar day. For
the purposes of this section, the "business district" is defined as follows:
A rectangular area within the city of Aledo, the perimeter of which is located
where the following streets and avenues intersect with the other: The northern
boundary line is N.W. 2nd Street and N.E. 2nd Street; the eastern boundary line
is N.E. 3rd Avenue and S.E. 3rd Avenue; the southern boundary line is S.E. 3rd
Street and S.W. 3rd Street; and the western boundary line is S.W. 3rd Avenue
and N.W. 3rd Avenue, the District to include any sidewalk and/or parking area
lying on the other side of the outside right-of-way line for any of the streets
and avenues named above.
   (B)   Central Park Pavilion: No person shall operate or use an electric
battery powered scooter, skateboard, pushcart, rollerblades, or roller skates
in the Central park pavilion located in the city of Aledo, Illinois. (Ord. 8/
2003, 11-3-2003)
6-7-3: OUTSIDE RESTRICTED AREAS:
In all areas outside the "business district" of the city of Aledo as defined in
section
6-7-2 of this chapter, no person shall use or operate an electric battery
powered scooter, skateboard, pushcart, rollerblades, or roller skates
(collectively referred to as "toy vehicles") in the city of Aledo, Mercer
County, Illinois, in violation of any of the following regulations:
   (A)   Each person using or operating any toy vehicle on a roadway shall obey
all traffic signals and signs unless otherwise directed by a police officer;
   (B)   No person using or operating any toy vehicle on a roadway shall use or
operate such toy vehicle in a reckless manner so as to pose a danger of harm or
injury to another individual, including the operator thereof, or pose a
potential likelihood of accidental death or injury to anyone, including the
operator, from a collision with a vehicle lawfully operated upon the city's
roadway;
   (C)   Every person using or operating any toy vehicle on a roadway shall
ride as near as possible to the right hand side of the roadway and shall
exercise due care when passing a standing or parked vehicle;
   (D)   Any person using or operating a toy vehicle on a roadway shall yield
the right of way to any motor vehicle thereon and to any pedestrian located in
any crosswalk on any street in the city; and
   (E)   No person using or operating a toy vehicle on a roadway shall attach
himself to any moving motor vehicle. (Ord. 08/2003, 11-3-2003)
6-7-4: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 6/01, 7-16-2001)
6-7-5: SIGNS POSTED:
The chief of police shall erect appropriate signs designating the city's
"business district" as defined in section
6-7-2 of this chapter as a no battery powered scooters, skateboard/pushcart,
rollerblades or roller skates area. Such signs giving reasonable notice of the
foregoing prohibition shall be posted in conformance with the provisions of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-207 and 5/11-208(b). (Ord. 8/2003, 11-3-2003)
6-7-6: PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any
act required under any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who
violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine pursuant to title 12,
"Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 8
ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS
SECTION:
6-8-1:   Abandonment Restrictions
6-8-1: ABANDONMENT RESTRICTIONS:
Whoever abandons or discards in any place accessible to children any
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2)
cubic feet or more, which has attached a lid or door which may be opened or
fastened shut by means of an attached latch, or who, being the owner, lessee or
manager of such place, knowingly permits such abandoned or discarded
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain there in such condition, or whoever
maintains or allows upon his premises, being the owner, lessee or manager of
such premises any well, cistern, cave or other aperture accessible to children
without sufficient covering so that children cannot have access thereto, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 6/54, 7-19-1954)
CHAPTER 9
WEEDS
SECTION:
6-9-1:   Definitions
6-9-2:   Weeds And Trees Declared A Nuisance
6-9-3:   Grass Exceeding Six Inches In Length Declared A Nuisance
6-9-4:   Length Restriction
6-9-5:   Notice To Remove
6-9-6:   Abatement
6-9-7:   Lien For Unpaid Charges
6-9-8:   Foreclosure Of Lien
6-9-9:   Violations
6-9-10:   Dead Trees
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
   Each word below when used in this chapter, including this section, shall
have that definition as given herein:
   ANYONE: Shall include contract seller or purchaser, trustee, partner,
partnership, tenant, land trustee beneficiary, association, or corporation.
   OCCUPANT: Shall include any tenant, lessee, licensee, or anyone having the
right to be in possession of any lot or tract of land in the city that is
privately owned.
   PERSON: See definition of Anyone.
   RENDERED: The date that the statement or notice was deposited in a
receptacle of the United States post office.
   WEEDS: Are not restricted to those named in section
6-9-2 of this chapter, but shall include other common species that will grow in
the city. (Ord. 13/87, 9-21-1987)
6-9-2: WEEDS AND TREES DECLARED A NUISANCE:
   Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr or other
weeds of like kind, found growing or standing uncut or otherwise uncontrolled
on any lot or tract of land in the city, including any land lying between any
property line thereof running next or nearest to any street or alley and the
closest edge of the concrete, asphalt, or other surface material constituting
the publicly traveled street or alley running in front, along the side, or in
the rear of said lot or tract of land, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   Any tree which is so located as to extend its branches over an alley,
street, sidewalk, public way or highway, unless the same shall be kept so
trimmed that there shall be a clear height of not less than 12 feet above
vehicular traffic and not less than nine feet above all sidewalks, unobstructed
by branches is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   Dead, decaying, or broken branches or stubs of trees which fall or may fall
upon the public ways, sidewalks, or adjacent parcels of private property, or
which are or may become a menace to persons or vehicles upon the public ways,
sidewalks, or adjacent parcels of private property are hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(Ord. 13/87, 9-21-1987; amd. Ord. 03/2025, 2-18-2025)
6-9-3: GRASS EXCEEDING SIX INCHES IN LENGTH DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any grass or other cover allowed or permitted to grow to a length in excess of
six inches (6"), excluding any trees, brushes, flowers or other ornamental
plants, on any lot or tract of land in the city, including any land lying
between any property line thereof running next or nearest to any street or
alley and the closest edge of the concrete, asphalt, or other surface material
constituting the publicly traveled street or alley running in front, along the
side, or in the rear of said lot or tract of land, are hereby declared to be a
nuisance to the extent that such grass or other cover exceeds such length.
(Ord. 13/87, 9-21-1987)
6-9-4: LENGTH RESTRICTION:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit or allow any weeds, grass or other
cover, or plants, but excluding trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental
plants properly cultivated, to grow to a length in excess of six inches (6") on
any lot or tract of land in the city either owned or occupied by anyone either
individually or as a trustee, contract seller or purchaser, partner in a
partnership, tenant, land trust beneficiary, or corporation, including any land
lying between any property line thereof running next or nearest to any street
or alley and the closet edge of the concrete, asphalt, or other surface
material constituting the publicly traveled street or alley running in front,
along the side, or in the rear of said lot or tract of land, the owner and the
occupant being each responsible to keep the weeds, grass or other cover, or
plants described above cut and mowed to a length no greater than six inches
(6") on not only the lot(s) or tract of land owned or occupied by him, but also
any strip of land lying within any property line and street surface line as
described above. (Ord. 13/87, 9-21-1987)
6-9-5: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
It shall be the duty of the city clerk upon receipt of notice that a violation
(s) of this chapter has occurred, to serve or cause to be served, a notice upon
the owner or the occupant of any premises on which weeds, trees, grass or other
cover, or plants are permitted or allowed to grow in violation of the
provisions of this chapter and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within
five (5) days after the date notice is sent. Premises shall include any strip
of land between any property line located nearest any street or alley and the
edge of the surface area of any street or alley as defined above.
(Ord. 13/87, 9-21-1987; amd. Ord. 03/2025, 2-18-2025)
6-9-6: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five (5) days, then
the Director of Public Works and Utilities may proceed to abate such nuisance
(s), keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall
be charged and paid by such owner or occupant. The fee for abatement shall be
computed pursuant to title 13, “Schedule Of Fees”, of this Code for the
cutting, mowing, trimming, or removal of any and all weeds, grass or other
cover, or plants, all as described above, for each time that abatement of a
nuisance by the City becomes necessary.
(Ord. 14/2017, 6-5-2017; amd. Ord. 03/2025, 2-18-2025)
6-9-7: LIEN FOR UNPAID CHARGES:
Charges for cutting, mowing, trimming, or removing any weeds, trees, grass or
other cover, or plants shall be a lien upon the premises owned or occupied by
any person in any capacity as defined above. Charges shall include any expense
incurred in removing any nuisance existing on any strip of land between any
property line of any lot or tract of land and the edge of any street or alley
running in front, to the side, or in the rear of the lot or tract premises, but
the lien shall apply only against the lot or tract of land in question.
Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after it
has been rendered, the City Clerk may file with the Recorder of Deeds for
Mercer County, a statement of the lien claim. This statement shall contain a
legal description of the lot(s) or tract of land in question, the expenses and
the costs incurred, the date the weeds, trees, grass or other cover, or plants
constituting the nuisance were either cut, mowed, trimmed, or removed, and a
notice that the City claims a lien for this amount. Notice of such lien claim
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known, but the
failure of the City Clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or
the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right of
the City to foreclose the lien for such charges as provided below nor affect
the right of the City to elect to file an action at law to collect such unpaid
charges by securing a judgment and thereafter pursuing all available collection
remedies against the owner or occupant.
(Ord. 13/87, 9-21-1987; amd. Ord. 03/2025, 2-18-2025)
6-9-8: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges for cutting, mowing, trimming, or
removing weeds, trees, grass or other cover, or plants constituting nuisances
as defined above shall be sold for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of
such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting for costs,
including attorney fees, incurred by the City in filing suit to foreclose its
lien. Such a foreclosure action shall be brought in the name of the City as an
equitable action and shall proceed in the same manner as in the case of the
foreclosure of other statutory liens.
The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the City, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters, against any property for which such bill remains unpaid thirty
(30) days after it has been rendered.
(Ord. 13/87, 9-21-1987; amd. Ord. 03/2025, 2-18-2025)
6-9-9: VIOLATIONS:
In addition to the foregoing provisions, any person who fails to cut, mow,
trim, or remove any weeds, trees, grass or other cover, or plants constituting
a nuisance as defined above, within five (5) days after notice is sent to him
by the City Clerk to abate same, shall be subject to a fine pursuant to title
12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this Code. Each day after the five (5) day notice
is sent that a violation of this section or any other provision of this chapter
continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense subjecting the
person to a fine for each day thereafter that a violation continues.
Any nuisance defined in this chapter is intended to be an absolute, forbidden
condition with evidence of the person’s mental state or lack of negligence
being irrelevant. Any violation of this section or any other provision of this
chapter is intended to be a malum prohibitum offense.
(Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. 03/2025, 2-18-2025)
6-9-10: DEAD TREES:
Any dead or declining tree growing or standing on private property is declared
to be a nuisance and a hazard.
Any dead or declining tree shall be removed by the owner of the premises on
which the tree grows or stands so that the nuisance is abated.
If a dead or declining tree that is declared a nuisance is not removed within
fourteen (14) days after notice to the owner in accordance with Section
6-9-5 hereof, the City police chief, or his representative, or any other
authorized representative of the City, may cause for the removal of the tree
and the actual cost of such work shall be assessed and collected pursuant to
the procedures established in this code for the collection of costs of
abatement of nuisances.
In the event any such owner fails to abate the nuisance in the manner
aforesaid, the provisions of Sections
6-9-7 and
6-9-8 of this Chapter shall apply herein.
(Ord. 03/2025, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
SECTION:
6-10-1:   Offensive Premises
6-10-2:   Offensive Vehicles, Appliances And Household Items
6-10-3:   Responsibility For Removal
6-10-4:   Enforcement
6-10-5:   Penalties
6-10-6:   Hearing
6-10-1: OFFENSIVE PREMISES:
It is hereby declared that the keeping, or suffering to be kept, within the
Municipal limits of this City, of any yard, lot or premises in a foul,
offensive, nauseous or filthy condition constitutes a public nuisance. (Ord. 7/
99, 11-1-1999)
6-10-2: OFFENSIVE VEHICLES, APPLIANCES AND HOUSEHOLD ITEMS:
It is hereby declared that the keeping, or suffering to be kept, within the
Municipal limits of this City, of any vehicles, machinery, televisions,
furniture, rugs, carpeting, appliances, or other household items outdoors in a
rotted, rusted, deteriorated or filthy condition, constitutes a public
nuisance. (Ord. 7/99, 11-1-1999)
6-10-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
The owner and the occupant of the property on which any of the conditions
described in sections
6-10-1 and
6-10-2 of this chapter exist shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
removal thereof and shall be jointly and severally liable for the expense of
its removal in the event it becomes necessary for the City to remove and
dispose of the conditions constituting any of the public nuisances declared
above. (Ord. 7/99, 11-1-1999)
6-10-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   In the event of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the
Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department of this City shall issue
a citation to the owner or occupant of the property on which the violation
exists, either by regular mail or in person, and shall give said owner or
occupant a period of not more than seven (7) days to correct the violation. In
the event the said owner or occupant fails to correct the violation in the time
given to correct it, the Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department
shall issue a second and subsequent citations if necessary to secure the
abatement thereof.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, if the owner or occupant does not remove
the nuisance within the above seven (7) day period, then the City may abate the
nuisance in any reasonable manner thereafter, including the removal and
disposition of articles constituting the nuisance and may collect from such
violators the reasonable cost of such removal and disposition, provided,
however, that with respect to the owner, he or she must have been issued a
citation before the City may collect from the owner the reasonable cost of
removing and disposing of the nuisance. The cost of removal and disposition
shall become a lien on the real estate affected, provided that the owner has
been given a citation and fails to remove the nuisance within the prescribed
time and a notice of lien is filed in the Office of the Mercer County Recorder
within sixty (60) days after the date that the nuisance has been abated. The
lien notice shall set forth a description of the real estate involved, the
amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred in the abatement
of the nuisance, and the dates when said costs and expenses were incurred by
the City.
   (C)   In addition to the foregoing, the City Attorney is authorized and
directed to initiate litigation in court to recover the costs incurred by the
City in abating the nuisance. (Ord. 7/99, 11-1-1999)
6-10-5: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to the following penalties, to be paid to the City at the Police
Department located in the City Hall building:
   (A)   Upon detection of the first nuisance violation, the owner and/or the
occupant of the real estate on which the violation occurs shall be issued a
notice of the violation and a warning ticket. The owner and/or occupant of the
property is/are required to abate the violation within seven (7) days of the
date of the warning ticket.
   (B)   Upon detection of a second violation during any consecutive twenty
four (24) month period following the issuance of the first violation notice, or
if the owner and/or occupant fails to abate the previous violation within the
seven (7) day period, then the owner and/or the occupant of the real estate on
which the violation occurs shall be issued a second notice of violation and the
owner and/or the occupant shall be assessed a penalty pursuant to title 12,
"Schedule Of Fines", of this Code.
   (C)   Upon detection of any third or subsequent violation during this
consecutive twenty four (24) month period, or if the owner and/or the occupant
fails to abate a previous violation or violations within the seven (7) day
period, then the owner and/or the occupant of the real estate on which the
violation occurs shall be issued a third (or subsequent) notice of violation
and each shall be assessed a penalty pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines",
of this Code.
   (D)   Failure of the person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this chapter to pay the above listed penalties will result in the Chief of
Police instructing the City Attorney to seek recovery of the above fines and
other remedies in court against any defaulting person, firm, or corporation.
   (E)   Proceeding under this chapter shall not prevent the City from seeking
a judicial remedy to abate the nuisance. Payment of a penalty does not
alleviate the violator's responsibility to remedy the violation. (Ord. 22/2017,
6-19-2017)
6-10-6: HEARING:
   (A)   Request For Hearing: The person or persons to whom the first notice is
directed or their duly authorized agent or agents may file a written request
for hearing before the Chief of Police or his designee, within the seven (7)
day period of compliance for the purpose of defending the charges brought by
the City.
   (B)   Time And Place Of Hearing: The hearing shall be held as soon as
practicable after the filing of the request, and the person or persons to whom
the notice is directed shall be advised of the time and place of hearing of
such at least three (3) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing the City
and the person or persons to whom the notice has been directed may introduce
such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary.
   (C)   Hearing Decision: In the event that a hearing is had and the existence
of the violation is affirmed by the Chief of Police or his designee, then the
Police Department shall have the right to take possession of the offensive
property and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person
to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow the Police Department to enter
upon private property for the purpose of removing the offensive property and
then hauling it to a waste disposal site appropriate for the disposition of
such property in accordance with Illinois law. (Ord. 7/99, 11-1-1999)
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC AREA REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-11-1:   Definitions
6-11-2:   Hours Of Operation
6-11-3:   Prohibited Activity
6-11-4:   Penalties
6-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter:
   DISORDERLY OR TUMULTUOUS CONDUCT: Any act that unreasonably disturbs another
or provokes a breach of the peace, including, but not limited to, use of
obscenities, fighting, breaking up or disturbing a lawful assembly, the
squealing of tires, loud noise or similar actions.
   PUBLIC AREA: Any area owned or operated by the City of Aledo for use as a
park, recreation area, parking lot, band shell, cemetery or similar area. Such
definition shall also include any park or recreational area owned or operated
by a county, township, park or school district, provided, the City of Aledo and
such entity have entered into an intergovernmental agreement permitting the
City to enforce this chapter on such property. A public area shall include, but
not be limited to:
      (A)   Central Park, including band shell;
      (B)   Central Park pavilion;
      (C)   Municipal parking lot adjacent to Central Park pavilion;
      (D)   Municipal parking lot adjacent to VFW;
      (E)   Municipal parking lot adjacent to City Hall and Carnegie Library;
      (F)   City of Aledo Cemetery;
      (G)   Berglund Park. (Ord. 08-06-07-2, 8-20-2007)
6-11-2: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   (A)   Hours: The hours of operation for a public area, including the Aledo
Cemetery, shall be from dawn to dusk each day, unless otherwise designated by
City ordinance or intergovernmental agreement. Anyone entering a public area
during nonhours of operation shall be in violation of this chapter and subject
to the penalties therein. (Ord. 14/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (B)   Exceptions:
      1.   Use of a Municipal parking lot is permitted for after hours motor
vehicle parking as approved by the City of Aledo.
      2.   Use of a Municipal park and band shell is permitted after hours as
part of a permitted or lawfully sanctioned event or activity as approved by the
City of Aledo.
   (C)   Posting Of Hours: The City shall post the hours of operation and
prohibited uses at each Municipal area. In the event such posting has been
effected but has been removed without authorization, destroyed or defaced, such
condition shall not provide a defense to a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 08-
06-07-2, 8-20-2007)
6-11-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITY:
Anyone committing a prohibited activity on or upon a public area, as enumerated
herein, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties
therein. Activities not defined in this section shall be construed according to
the common definition.
   (A)   Disorderly or tumultuous conduct;
   (B)   Littering;
   (C)   Violation of Municipal curfew;
   (D)   Illicit or illegal use of drugs, and illegal possession of drugs or
drug paraphernalia, unless otherwise permitted or authorized by State law,
including, but not limited to, the applicable sections of the Compassionate Use
of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), the Drug Paraphernalia
Control Act (720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.), and the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles
Act (720 ILCS 635/0.01 et seq.), as the same may be amended from time to time;
   (E)   Illegal use or possession of tobacco;
   (F)   Use of ATV, motor scooters, motorcycles and similar vehicles;
   (G)   Use of skateboards;
   (H)   Reckless or inappropriate use of bicycles;
   (I)   Dumping of garbage, refuse, debris, junk or similar items;
   (J)   Use of alcoholic beverages unless otherwise permitted by the City of
Aledo;
   (K)   Parking or storage of unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles;
   (L)   Parking in Municipal parking lot for more than forty eight (48) hours,
unless otherwise permitted by the City of Aledo;
   (M)   Using premises for habitation of any kind;
   (N)   Possession of spray paint unless otherwise permitted by the City of
Aledo;
   (O)   Defacing, damaging or destroying City property;
   (P)   Igniting or maintaining a fire of any kind, unless specially approved
by the City of Aledo. (Ord. 08-06-07-2, 8-20-2007; amd. Ord. 49/2019, 12-16-
2019)
6-11-4: PENALTIES:
A person found to have committed a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord.
22/2017, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 12
CURFEW
SECTION:
6-12-1:   Definitions
6-12-2:   Offenses
6-12-3:   Defenses
6-12-4:   Enforcement
6-12-5:   Penalties
6-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter:
   CURFEW HOURS:
      (A)   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. Saturday;
      (B)   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday; and
      (C)   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN:
      (A)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (B)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
   PARENT: A person who is:
      (A)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person;
or
      (B)   At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of the minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
   REMAIN: Means to: a) linger or stay; or b) fail to leave premises when
requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person
in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 08-06-07-3,
8-20-2007)
6-12-2: OFFENSES:
   (A)   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the City during curfew hours. (Ord. 08-06-07-3, 8-20-2007)
6-12-3: DEFENSES:
It is a defense to prosecution under section
6-12-2 of this chapter that the minor was:
   (A)   Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian, or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
   (B)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
   (C)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (D)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (E)   Involved in an emergency;
   (F)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor's presence;
   (G)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the City, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
   (H)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
   (I)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with the Illinois Emancipation of Minors Act 1 . (Ord. 08-06-07-3,
8-20-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
6-12-4: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer shall
ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this chapter unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in section
6-12-3 of this chapter is present. (Ord. 08-06-07-3, 8-20-2007)
6-12-5: PENALTIES:
A person found to have committed a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code, except
that neither a person who has been made a ward of the court under the Juvenile
Court Act of 1987 nor that person's guardian, shall be subject to any fine. In
addition to or instead of the fine imposed by this section, the court may order
a parent, guardian, or other person found to have committed a violation of
section
6-12-2 of this chapter to perform community service as determined by the court,
except that the guardian of a person who has been made a ward of the court
under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 may not be ordered to perform community
service. The dates and times established for the performance of community
service by the parent, guardian, or other person found to have committed a
violation of section
6-12-2 of this chapter shall not conflict with the dates and times that the
person is employed in his or her regular occupation. (Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 13
TRUANCY
SECTION:
6-13-1:   Truancy And Excessive Absenteeism Prohibited
6-13-2:   Parental Allowance Of Truancy Or Excessive Absenteeism Prohibited
6-13-1: TRUANCY AND EXCESSIVE ABSENTEEISM PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Truancy: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within the
corporate limits of the City, to absent himself or herself from attendance at
school without valid cause. Any person who should so absent himself or herself
shall be guilty of the offense of truancy.
   (B)   Excessive Absenteeism: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years enrolled in a public, private or parochial school
within the corporate limits of the City, to absent himself or herself from
attendance at school for five (5) or more student attendance days during any
one school year, unless such absenteeism is for valid cause and has been
approved by his or her school district.
   (C)   Emergency Conditions: Emergency or unforeseen absence due to illness
or other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting himself or
herself shall not constitute truancy or excessive absenteeism if a valid cause
has been obtained from the parent or person in loco parentis and such valid
cause is submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within twenty
four (24) hours after such absence.
   (D)   Valid Cause: A valid cause for absence is an illness that would
temporarily impair or interfere with a student's learning ability, observance
of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency or such
other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent, guardian or
custodian for the safety or health of the student. Valid cause shall not
include baby sitting, employment activities (unless specifically sanctioned by
the student's school district) or any other reason that does not temporarily
impair or interfere with a student's learning ability. (Ord. 04/2013, 2-19-
2013)
   (E)   Penalty: Any person thirteen (13) years of age or older found guilty
of truancy or excessive absenteeism under this section shall be fined pursuant
to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord. 22/2017, 6-19-2017)
6-13-2: PARENTAL ALLOWANCE OF TRUANCY OR EXCESSIVE ABSENTEEISM PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a parent or a person in loco parentis to
knowingly permit any person under the age of thirteen (13) years to commit an
act of truancy or excessive absenteeism as defined in section
6-13-1 of this chapter.
   (B)   A parent or person in loco parentis shall be considered to have
knowingly permitted a minor under the age of thirteen (13) to commit an act of
truancy as defined in section
6-13-1 of this chapter when the parent or person in loco parentis knows that
said minor absents himself or herself from attendance at school without valid
cause and the parent or person in loco parentis fails to act to ensure that the
minor attends the school in which he or she is enrolled.
   (C)   A parent or person in loco parentis shall be considered to have
knowingly permitted a person under the age of thirteen (13) years to commit the
offense of excessive absenteeism as defined above when the parent or person in
loco parentis provides a written or oral excuse for the minor's nonattendance
which is false or does not amount to valid cause. (Ord. 04/2013, 2-19-2013)
   (D)   A parent or person in loco parentis found guilty under this section
shall be fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord.
22/2017, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 14
LOITERING
SECTION:
6-14-1:   Loitering Prohibited
6-14-2:   Penalty
6-14-1: LOITERING PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either
alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such a manner as to:
      1.   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding free and uninterrupted
passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.
      2.   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk
or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction
or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any
business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or
building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and
regress, therein, thereon, and thereto.
      3.   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort of any person passing along any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building.
   (B)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
subsection (A) of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer
shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to
move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders, or
who thereafter continues to engage in such conduct, shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 09/2013, 7-1-2013)
6-14-2: PENALTY:
A person found to have committed a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord.
22/2017, 6-19-2017)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
SEWERS
SECTION:
7-1-1:   Definitions
7-1-2:   Licenses Required
7-1-3:   Application; Bond
7-1-4:   Term Of License
7-1-5:   Inspection
7-1-6:   Forfeiture Of License
7-1-7:   Licenses Nontransferable
7-1-8:   Licensees Liable
7-1-9:   Work To Be Done By Licensees Only
7-1-10:   Application And Permit To Alter Required
7-1-11:   Use of Public Sewers Required
7-1-12:   Private Sewage Disposal
7-1-13:   Building Sewers, Connections, Extensions, And Associated Fees
7-1-14:   Use Of Public Sewers
7-1-15:   Wastewater Charges
7-1-16:   General Provisions
7-1-17:   Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
7-1-18:   Openings In Streets
7-1-19:   Specifications And Rules
7-1-20:   Protection From Damage And Penalties
7-1-21:   Validity
7-1-22:   Enforcement
7-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees
centigrade (20°C).
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning three feet (3') outside the inner face of the building wall.
      Sanitary: A building drain which conveys sanitary or industrial sewage
only, and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally
admitted.
      Storm: A building drain which conveys storm, surface, or ground water
drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage, other than unpolluted cooling
water.
   BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
      Sanitary: A building sewer which conveys sanitary or industrial sewage
only.
      Storm: A building sewer which conveys storm water or other clear water
drainage but no sanitary or industrial sewage.
   CITY: The city of Aledo, Mercer County, Illinois, a municipal corporation,
its mayor and corporate authorities.
   CLASSES OF USERS: The division of wastewater treatment customers by waste
characteristics, and process or discharge similarities.
      Commercial: Includes transient lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise for personal, household
or industrial consumption, and/or rendering services to others.
      Governmental: Includes legislative, judicial, administrative and
regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments, such as
courthouses, police and fire stations, city halls and similar governmental
users.
      Industrial: Includes manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials or substances into other products. These
activities occur in establishments usually described as plants, factories or
mills and characteristically use power machines and material handling
equipment.
      Institutional: Includes social, charitable, religious and educational
activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, penal
institutions and similar institutional users.
      Residential: Includes all dwelling units such as detached, semidetached,
and row houses, mobile homes, garden and standard apartments, and permanent
multi-family dwellings.
   COMBINED SEWAGE: A combination of both sanitary and industrial wastewater
and storm or surface water.
   COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive wastewater, storm surface, and
ground water drainage.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: A pollutant for which the treatment works is designed
to treat and includes biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal
coliform bacteria, or a pollutant for which the plant is able to remove to a
substantial degree, being eighty percent (80%) or greater.
   CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the city representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding.
   DEPRECIATION: An annual operating cost reflecting capital consumption and
obsolescence of the treatment works.
   DIRECTOR: The director of public works and utilities of the city of Aledo,
Illinois, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
   EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA: Is defined in the NPDES permit.
   FECAL COLIFORM: Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract
of man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution.
   FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the authority.
   GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of
produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible
pollutant, including nonbiodegradable dissolved solids.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INFILTRATION: The water entering a sewer system including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW: The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the sources.
   INFLOW: The water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges,
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections with
storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff,
street wash waters or drainage.
   INSPECTOR: The person or persons duly authorized by the authority to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connection to the
public sewer system.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industry that either: a) has a flow of fifty
thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday, or b) has a flow greater
than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the public sewer system receiving
the waste, or c) has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined
in standards issued under section 308(a) of PL 92-500, or d) is found by the
permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of NPDES permit to
the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant
impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on
that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment.
   METERED USAGE: The metered water usage of any individual customer, unless
separate metering of sewage flow is provided for the customer, wherein it shall
mean metered sewage flow of any individual customer.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand (1,000)
milliliters of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts
per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results
of water and wastewater analysis.
   NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued under the national pollutant discharge
elimination system for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the
United States, pursuant to section 402 of PL 92-500.
   NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE: As defined for the purpose of determining surcharge,
a wastewater or sewage having an average daily suspended solids concentration
of not more than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), and average
daily BOD of not more than two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS: All costs, direct and indirect, including
depreciation, necessary to ensure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing
basis, conforming with federal, state and local requirements, and assuring
optimal long term facility management. Such costs shall not include debt
service costs.
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   PERSON: An individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group discharging any wastewater to the wastewater treatment works.
   pH: The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
The pH of any discharge into the public sewer system shall not be less than
five (5) nor more than nine (9).
   POLLUTION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20
pounds of suspended solids.
   PRETREATMENT: The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned
industrial sources prior to introduction into public treatment works.
   PRIVATE SEWER: A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY: Any governmental agency having jurisdiction by law over
construction and use of a wastewater collection treatment facility.
   PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and which is owned and controlled by the public authority and will
consist of the following increments:
      Collector Sewer: A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewater
from individual point source discharges.
      Force Main: A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      Interceptor Sewer: A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      Pumping Station: A station positioned in the public sewer system at which
wastewater is pumped to a higher level.
   REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the usual life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes, and to
which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE: The combination of liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions. The three (3) most
common types of sewage are:
      Combined Sewage: Wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial sewage,
storm water, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater treatment
facilities by a combined sewer.
      Industrial Sewage: A combination of liquid and water carried wastes,
discharged from an industrial establishment, and resulting from any trade or
process carried on in that establishment, including wastes from pretreatment
facilities and polluted cooling water.
      Sanitary Sewage: The combination of liquid and water carried wastes
discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SEWERAGE FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   SHALL OR MAY: The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY: Any industry that will contribute greater than ten
percent (10%) of the design flow and/or design pollutant loading of the
treatment works.
   SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty
four (24) hours' concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS: The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SURCHARGE: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in subsection
7-1-15(A) of this chapter.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOTAL SOLIDS: The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOXIC AMOUNT: The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause
adverse effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations, and physiological
manifestations as defined in standards issued pursuant to section 307(a) of PL
92-500.
   TREASURER: Treasurer of the city of Aledo, Illinois.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
   USER CHARGE: A charge levied on users of a wastewater treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance of such works pursuant to section 204(b)
of PL 92-500.
   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER: The matter in the sewage solids transformed to
gases or vapors when heated at five hundred fifty degrees centigrade (550°C)
for fifteen (15) to twenty (20) minutes.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS OR SEWAGE WORKS: The structures, equipment and
processes required to collect, transport, and treat domestic and industrial
waste and dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids.
   WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATERWORKS: All facilities for water supply, filtration plant, storage
reservoirs, water lines and services and booster stations for obtaining,
treating, and disturbing potable water. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to do business as a sewer builder or drain layer, in
connection with the sewer system of the City, shall first obtain a license as
such sewer builder or drain layer from the Clerk of the City and shall pay a
fee therefor pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code, and no
person shall receive such license who shall not have attained the age of twenty
one (21) years, and who shall not furnish to the City satisfactory evidence of
this responsibility and skill to carry on his trade in accordance with the
laws, rules and regulations of the City. (Ord. 15/2017, 6-5-2017)
7-1-3: APPLICATION; BOND:
Every person desiring such license shall file with the Clerk a petition in
writing giving his name, or his firm, or if a firm, the name of each member
thereof, and place of business, asking to become a licensed sewer builder or
drain layer, and said petition shall be accompanied by a bond signed by two (2)
or more individual sureties, or in the alternative, signed by one corporate
surety if qualified to act as a surety on sewer builder's or drain layer's
bonds under the applicable laws of the State of Illinois, subject in either
case to approval by the City, in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00),
unless a different sum be specifically ordered by the City, conditioned that he
will indemnify and save harmless the City from all accidents and damages caused
by any negligence in either the execution or protection of his work, either by
himself or anyone acting under his direction, or for any unfaithful or
inadequate work done under and by virtue of his license, and that said
licensee, as such, will also conform to all the conditions and requirements of
the City and will restore the streets, alleys, sidewalks and pavement disturbed
by him, so as to leave the same in as good state and condition as he found
them, or in default thereof will pay all damages occasioned by reason of such
default, and also such penalties as are or may be prescribed by law for the
government of licensed sewer builders and drain layers.
Such bond shall remain in force and must be executed for a period of one year
except that on such expiration, it shall remain in force as to all penalties,
claims and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior to such execution.
(Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-4: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses granted to sewer builders and drain layers under the provisions of
this chapter shall be for the term of one year, or the unexpired portion
thereof, and shall expire on April 30 in each year, unless sooner revoked.
(Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-5: INSPECTION:
All work done within the City by licensed sewer builders and drain layers shall
be subject to the inspection, supervision and approval of the inspector or
someone duly appointed by him, and all faulty or defective work done by or
under the direction of any such person, when discovered, shall be made
satisfactory to the said inspector, and no further permits will be issued to
the party in default until all defects have been corrected and made right. No
work shall be covered until it is inspected. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-6: FORFEITURE OF LICENSE:
Any sewer builder or drain layer whose license shall be declared forfeited by
the Director for a violation of any of the rules, regulations and provisions of
this Code governing drain laying, shall not be permitted to do any work
whatsoever in connection with the public or private sewers of the City, unless
said declaration of forfeiture shall for good cause be revoked by the Director.
(Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-7: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
When two (2) or more persons are partners, licenses shall be issued in the name
of the copartnership, and any charge of the firm name must be promptly reported
to the Director. All such licenses shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place
at the business place of the licensee and shall not be transferable. (Ord. 14/
88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-8: LICENSEES LIABLE:
All licensed sewer builders and drain layers shall be held responsible for all
acts and defaults of their agents and employees, done under his or their said
license. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-9: WORK TO BE DONE BY LICENSEES ONLY:
No person, except a licensed sewer builder and drain layer, licensed by the
authority of the City shall make connection with, construct any work, or put in
place any parts or fixtures connected with, or intended to be connected with,
the sewer system of the City. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-10: APPLICATION AND PERMIT TO ALTER REQUIRED:
No person shall cause or permit to be made, alter or disturb any connection of
his premises, or any part thereof, for any purpose, with the City sewer system,
without first obtaining a written permit therefor, issued to him, or any
regularly licensed drain layer employed to do the City work, from the Clerk,
which permit shall in no case be issued until the applicant or his agent shall
have executed an application in writing therefor on the form provided by
authority of the City. Each application shall state the name of the applicant,
the permit desired, the location to be used, and the fee to be paid; and each
application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the
proper guidance of the City officials in the issuing of the permit.
Any connection or opening made with the sewerage system without such signed
permit or in any manner different from the mode described in the provisions of
this chapter for such opening or connection, shall subject the maker to a
penalty hereinafter provided. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-11: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property in any area
under the jurisdiction of the City any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste which ordinarily would be regarded as sewage or
industrial wastes.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural
outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter and the NPDES
permit.
   (C)   No person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
except as hereinafter provided.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
jurisdiction of the City and abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located, a public sewer of
the City, is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable sanitary
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the property
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within sixty
(60) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public
sewer is within two hundred feet (200') of the property line. (Ord. 14/88, 3-
20-1989)
7-1-12: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of
subsection
7-1-11(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with all requirements of the Illinois
Department of Public Health and with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 14/
88, 3-20-1989)
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Clerk of
the City. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the City which the applicant shall supplement with any plans, specifications,
other information as are deemed necessary by the Clerk of the City. A permit
and inspection fee shall be paid to the City at the time the application is
filed pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 15/2017, 6-
5-2017)
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
inspector. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made no later than
the next normal working day after receipt of written notice by the Clerk of the
City.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois Private
Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code with the State of Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than twenty one thousand six hundred (21,600) square feet (1,944
square meters). No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to
any natural outlet.
   (E)   The owner of a private sewage disposal facility shall operate and
maintain the facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
City.
   (F)   At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the
public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools
and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned, abandoned, and
filled with suitable material. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Director of Public
Works. (Ord. 05/2014, 4-7-2014)
7-1-13: BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS, EXTENSIONS, AND ASSOCIATED FEES:
   (A)   Application: Service shall be furnished only upon the filing of an
application with the Clerk of the City upon a form to be supplied by the City.
This application shall state the name of the applicant, the premises to be
served, the size of the service desired, and date service is desired and
include a record of service installation, inspection and approval by the City,
and a record of water meter or sewer meter reading upon commencement of service
to the applicant.
   (B)   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Clerk
of the City.
   (C)   Types Of Permits: There shall be the following types of building sewer
permits:
      1.   For single-family residential dwelling units and commercial service;
      2.   For multi-family residential dwelling units;
      3.   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes;
      4.   For the institutional/governmental class of users;
   In any case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the City. The permit applications shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the City.
   Any industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type
of activity.
   (D)   Reserve Capacity: A building sewer permit will only be issued and a
sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater
treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-
1989)
   (E)   Permit And Inspection Fee: At the time of filing a building sewer
permit application, a permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 15/2017, 6-5-
2017)
   (F)   Costs: The applicant for sewer service shall pay all costs and
expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer,
and the maintenance thereof, from the point of connection to the public sewer
of the City, or to the collector sewer of the City if located within a right-
of-way of the City, to the premises of the applicant. The owner or the person
installing the building sewer for said owner shall indemnify the City from any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by said
installation. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
   (G)   Building Sewer: A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer; and except that
multi-family dwelling units, including apartments and mobile home trailer
parks, may use a single common building sewer for drainage of individual
dwelling units unless required otherwise by the City. However, notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this sewerage ordinance, when in the opinion of the
City, and based upon sound engineering reasons, the City believes that it is in
the best interest of the City to permit more than one hookup to a lateral to a
sewage main owned and maintained by the City, then upon the request of any
property owner or owners or at the direction of the said City, it shall be
lawful for such property owner or owners to connect more than one building or
buildings to one sewer lateral installed by said property owners at their
expense, subject to those terms and conditions as hereinafter set forth. In
those cases where the City approves more than one building or buildings,
whether owned by one property owner or other owners to connect to one sewer
lateral, said owner or owners shall pay the sole cost of installing same unless
otherwise agreed to in writing between the City and the said owner or owners.
Furthermore, said owner or owners installing said lateral to which more than
one building is connected shall own and have the responsibility of maintaining
said sewer lateral unless the owner or owners in question agree in writing with
the City that a contrary agreement shall control and upon payment of the
application fee and monthly fee pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of
this Code. Also, under such circumstances, if the said sewer lateral which is
serving more than one building, whether one owner or multiple owners are
involved, breaks or malfunctions, and said owner or owners refuse to take the
necessary steps to repair same, then the City shall have the right to take
whatever action may be necessary, including the termination of water and sewage
services by terminating same at the point where said laterals may be tapped
into City mains, in order to avoid any damage or harm to the water mains and/or
sewage mains owned and maintained by the City. (Ord. 15/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (H)   Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers or any portion thereof may be
used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination
and test by the inspector, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (I)   Acceptable Sewer Pipe: The building sewers and/or public sewers shall
be constructed of extra strength vitrified clay sewer pipe and fittings meeting
the current ASTM "specification for extra strength clay sewer pipe", or service
weight (SV) cast iron soil pipe and fittings meeting the current ASTM
"specifications for service weight cast iron soil pipe", or ductile iron sewer
pipe and fittings meeting the current ASTM "specification for ductile iron
fittings"; or PVC sewer pipe or PVC composite sewer pipe and fittings meeting
the current ASTM "specifications for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe and
fittings (minimum Schedule 40 or SDR 21)", and ASTM "specifications for PVC
composite sewer piping"; or reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) meeting the current
ASTM "specification for reinforced concrete sewer pipe". If installed in filled
or unstable ground, the building sewers and/or public sewers shall be of cast
iron soil pipe, ductile iron sewer pipe or reinforced concrete pipe, except
that vitrified clay pipe or PVC sewer pipe meeting the above specification
requirements may be accepted if laid on a suitable improved bed or cradle as
approved by the inspector.
   (J)   Joints And Connections: All joints and connections shall be made
gastight and watertight. Vitrified clay sewer pipe shall be fitted with factory
made resilient compression joints meeting the current ASTM "specification for
compression joints for vitrified clay pipe and fittings".
   Before joining the pipe in the trench, the bell and spigot surfaces shall be
wiped free of dirt or other foreign matter. A lubricant or sealer as
recommended by the pipe manufacturer shall be applied to the bell and spigot
mating surfaces just before they are joined together. The spigot end shall be
positioned into the bell end of the pipe previously laid and shall then be
shoved home to compress the joint and to assure a tight fit between the
interfaces.
   Joints for SV cast iron soil pipe shall be as described below for ductile
iron sewer pipe.
   Joints for ductile iron sewer pipe shall be "mechanical joint" or "push on
joint". To assemble a push on joint the following method is to be used unless
the manufacturer specifically recommends another method. After placing a length
of pipe in the trench, the spigot end shall be centered in the bell and the
pipe forced home and brought to correct line and grade. The pipe shall be
secured in place with approved backfill material tamped under it except at the
bells.
   To assemble a mechanical joint, the following method is to be used, unless
the manufacturer specifically recommends another method. Wash thoroughly with
soapy water the pipe socket (or bell) plain end (or spigot) and the rubber
gasket. Place gland followed by gasket over the plain end of the pipe. Insert
in socket. Push the gasket into position, making sure that it is evenly seated
in the socket of the pipe bell. Move the gland into position against the face
of the rubber gasket, insert bolts and make fingertight. Tighten bolts
alternately, that is, tighten a bottom bolt, then a top bolt and so on all
around the joint until tight.
   Joints for PVC sewer pipe shall be "elastomeric gasket joints" or "solvent
cement joints". A solvent cemented joint is one in which pipe solvent cements
into a coupling to form the joint closure. Ensure that surfaces to be jointed
are clean and dry. Liberally apply solvent to pipe end and inside of coupling.
Shove pipe home, set pipe to line and grade.
   The elastomeric gasket joint is a sliding assembly in which the lubricated
pipe spigot end slides under the rubber ring and into the bell. Make certain
the bell and rubber ring area are clean. Make sure the pipe spigot end is
clean.
   Lubricate the spigot end of the pipe. Be sure to cover the entire spigot and
circumference. Insert the spigot end into the bell so that it is in contact
with the rubber ring. Keep the pipe lengths in proper alignment. Brace the bell
while the spigot end is pushed in under the rubber ring, so that previously
completed joints will not be closed up. Push the spigot into the bell until the
reference mark on the pipe barrel is flush with the end of the bell.
   Joints for RCP sewer shall be "rubber gasket joint" construction.
Immediately before making joint, lubricate entire gasket and inside of bell of
last pipe and spigot end of pipe with an approved vegetable lubricant. Take
care that gasket and ends of pipe are clean and free of sand or gravel.
Introduce spigot of pipe being laid with gasket in place, into bell end of
previously laid pipe. Set pipe to line and grade and then jack or push
completely home.
   (K)   The size and slope of building sewers shall be subject to the approval
of the inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches
(4"). The slope of such four inch (4") pipe shall not be less than one-eighth
inch (1/8") per foot. A slope of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot shall be used
wherever practical.
   (L)   Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to or within three feet (3') of any bearing wall, which might thereby
weaken. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The
building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment in so
far as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved
pipe and fittings.
   (M)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall
be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. No
water operated sewage ejector shall be used.
   (N)   All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the inspector. Pipe
laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with current ASTM
specification designation C-12 except that no backfill shall be placed until
the work has been inspected by the inspector or his representative.
   (O)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (P)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the "Y" or "T" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable
location. If no branch is available on sewers twelve inches (12") in diameter
or less, a connection may be made, at the owner's expense, using a manufactured
saddle type connection at the location and of the type specified by the
inspector. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve inches (12") in
diameter, and no properly located "Y" or "T" branch is available, a neat hole
may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in
the downstream direction at an angle of about forty five degrees (45°). A forty
five degree (45°) ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end
cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. Under no
circumstances will the sewer service protrude into the sewer main to which the
connection is made. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection
shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public
sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and
watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the
connection only when approved by the inspector. Manholes shall be constructed
at any junction of an eight inch (8") diameter line or larger into a public
sewer.
   (Q)   The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the inspector when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the inspector or his
representative.
   (R)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of such work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (S)   The city shall be responsible for determining whether or not an
extension of a public sewer is economically feasible based on the estimated
cost of the extension and the number of existing potential users that will use
said sewer line. If the extension is economically feasible, then the city may
install and pay the cost of the extension at the discretion of the city. If the
city elects not to pay the costs of extending the public sewer, then the person
or persons desiring sewer service shall install the extension at their own
personal expense upon written consent of the city. The city shall not pay for
any extensions to an undeveloped area, such as a subdivision being developed,
unless there are sufficient existing residents or businesses to make the
extension economically feasible.
   (T)   Sewer Expansion And Extension Connection Fee: The sewer expansion and
extension connection fee is hereby established to reimburse the city for its
costs in extending sewer lines to serve new and additional users and to
increase its capacity to transport and treat sewage. Such fee shall be based
upon the pro rata share of the cost of said exploration, construction and
extension which cost was required to provide the sewer services being made
available to the new or additional user. The sewer expansion and extension
connection fee shall be based upon all such costs including, but not limited
to, engineering fees, supervision, legal fees, land costs and construction.
   When a new or additional user of the system wishes to connect into the
sewerage system of the city, he shall request from the director an estimate of
the sum of the sewer expansion and extension connection fee attributable to the
property which he wishes to serve with the municipal sewerage system. Within
ten (10) days after such application, the director shall certify to such
applicant the then current amount of the sewer expansion and extension
connection fee attributable to the property sought to be served. In arriving at
the sewer expansion and extension connection fee, the director may request such
information from the applicant and shall be reasonably necessary in order that
he may compute the amount of the fee. He shall, for example, be allowed to
inquire as to the use which the applicant desires to make of the land. Any
sewer expansion and extension connection fee so certified by the city shall
remain in effect for a period of sixty (60) days and may, at the option of the
city, be further extended. After such sixty (60) day period, if the connection
fee has not been paid, the city may recompute the amount of such connection
fee. In arriving at a recomputed figure, the director shall consider any
additional costs incurred by the city in providing the sewer services desired
by the applicant. If an applicant should disagree with or dispute the amount of
the sewer expansion and extension connection fee, in whole or in part, as
determined by the director, he shall be allowed to appeal such decision to the
city. The city shall allow the applicant to appear before it, either at a
regular or special city council meeting or otherwise, to present his objections
to the estimate of costs. The city may require the director to appear before it
to explain the manner in which said connection fee has been computed. The
decision of the city regarding this matter shall be final.
   (U)   The city must approve all plans and specifications for any extensions.
Before any extensions are installed, the plans and specifications must be
reviewed and approved by the state of Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (V)   Ownership rights of way, and title must be conveyed to the city for
all extensions installed by anyone other than the city. The city shall maintain
the extended public sewers thereafter.
   (W)   No extension of the public sewer will be permitted if, in the opinion
of the city, the system does not have the necessary capacity to serve the
proposed extension. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-14: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
jurisdiction of the city any wastewater or other polluted water except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this
chapter and the NPDES permit. All disposal by any person into the sewer system
is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent state and local
standards.
   (B)   Users of the treatment works shall immediately notify the city as to
unlawful flows or wastes that are discharged accidentally or otherwise to the
sewer system.
   (C)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (D)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a
storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   (F)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and the maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100)
parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil, or grease.
      3.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
soils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (0 and 65°C).
      4.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the city for such materials.
      7.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      8.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
      9.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      10.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligrams
per liter as Hg at any time except as permitted by the city in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.
      11.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligrams per liter at any time
except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations.
      12.   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations or inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions;
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      13.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
      14.   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention to expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant.
      15.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
   (G)   If any waters are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsections (E) and (F) of this section, and/or
which are in violation of the standard for pretreatment provided in chapter 1,
EPA rules and regulations, subchapter D, water programs part 128 - pretreatment
standards, federal register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and
any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the city may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of subsection (P) of this section.
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.
   (H)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures. They shall
be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable
covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.
   (I)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at
all times.
   (J)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having:
1) a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than two hundred (200)
parts per million by weight, or 2) containing more than two hundred fifty (250)
parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or 3) containing any quantity
of substances having the characteristics described in subsections (E) and (F)
of this section, or 4) having an average daily flow greater than two percent
(2%) of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the
review and approval of the director. Where necessary in the opinion of the
director, the owner shall provide, at his expense such preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to: 1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to two hundred
(200) parts per million and the suspended solids to two hundred fifty (250)
parts per million by weight, or 2) reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsections (E) and
(F) of this section, or 3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for the approval of the director and of the environmental protection
agency of the state of Illinois, and no construction of such facilities shall
be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
   (K)   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
   (L)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained and operated by him so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (M)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (N)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analysis to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year
the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analysis to the city at such times and in such
manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analysis, and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analyses by an outside laboratory service.
   (O)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards of life, limb, and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from a twenty four (24) hour composite of all outfalls, whereas
pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.
   (P)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with the federal
state guidelines for user charge system and industrial cost recovery system,
and provisions of section
7-1-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
   (Q)   Any persons violating the provisions of this section shall be subject
to a penalty pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. Each day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 23/2016, 1-3-2017)
7-1-15: WASTEWATER CHARGES:
   (A)   Basis For Wastewater Charges: The wastewater charge for the use of and
for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of
a service charge, a capital improvement charge, a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance plus replacement, and a surcharge, if applicable.
   The service charge shall not be less than that computed by dividing the
annual debt service costs, including minimum required depreciation and reserve
accounts, by the total number of users. Through further divisions, the
quarterly minimum required service charge can be computed.
   The capital improvement charge shall be based on a quarterly charge to each
customer of the system to apply toward future capital improvement projects.
   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water
meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
      1.   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
      2.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l)
It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall
not be less than that computed as follows:
      1.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including replacement of selected
equipment, for all work categories.
      2.   Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by
volume, suspended solids and BOD, if possible.
      3.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated.
      4.   Proportion the estimated costs to customer classes by volume,
suspended solids and BOD.
      5.   Compute costs per one hundred (100) cubic feet for normal sewage
strength.
      6.   Compute surcharge costs per one hundred (100) cubic feet per
milligrams per liter in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal
concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be
based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all
wastes which exceed the two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and two
hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) concentration for BOD and SS,
respectively. Subsection (F) of this section specifies the procedure to compute
a surcharge.
   The service charge, the capital improvement charge, the basic user charge,
and the surcharge are all computed as shown on the attached "Engineering Data"
sheets, which are hereby made a part of this chapter.
   The adequacy of the wastewater charges shall be reviewed annually by
certified public accountants for the city in their annual audit report. The
wastewater charges shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in service
costs, in operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, or in
administrative and reserve costs.
   (B)   Measurement Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing basic user
charges and surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the
nearest whole cubic foot.
      1.   If the person discharging waters into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the city waterworks system,
all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall
install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the
city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these
other sources.
      2.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
      3.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the city.
   (C)   Minimum User Charge: There shall be and there is hereby established a
minimum user charge (including a service charge and a basic user charge) for
the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city. A
minimum user charge of twenty eight dollars fifty cents ($28.50) per quarter
shall be applied to all users whose water consumption does not exceed five
hundred (500) cubic feet per quarter. The minimum user charge consists of
twenty three dollars seventy five cents ($23.75) for the service charge, three
dollars ($3.00) for the capital improvement charge, and one dollar seventy five
cents ($1.75) for operation, maintenance and replacement for the first five
hundred (500) cubic feet. A basic user rate of thirty five cents ($0.35) per
one hundred (100) cubic feet shall be applied to all users for water
consumption over five hundred (500) cubic feet per quarter.
   (D)   Flat Rate Charge: All nonmetered residential users of the wastewater
facilities shall pay a minimum flat rate charge consisting of twenty three
dollars seventy five cents ($23.75) per quarter to cover the costs of the
service charge, three dollars ($3.00) for the capital improvement charge, and
the basic user charge of thirty five cents ($0.35) per one hundred (100) cubic
feet. The flat rate charge will allow a maximum of two thousand five hundred
(2,500) cubic feet per quarter; and is hereby established to be thirty five
dollars fifty cents ($35.50) per quarter. In the event the twelve (12) month
average use of the wastewater facilities is determined by the city to be in
excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet per quarter, the city
may require such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply
or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied.
   (E)   Surcharge Rate: The rates or surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as
follows:
      1.   For BOD, a surcharge rate of $0.0754 per pound shall be applied for
a waste strength in excess of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
      2.   For SS, a surcharge rate of $0.0430 per pound shall be applied for a
waste strength in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
   (F)   Computing Of Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for computing
surcharges shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be
performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be binding
as a basis for surcharges. The surcharge shall be the sum of subsections (F)1
and (F)2 of this section computed as follows:
      1.   For BOD, multiply the surcharge rate by 8.34 (conversion factor for
number of pounds per gallon) multiplied by .0007481 million gallons (100 cubic
feet = 748.1 gallons). This number is then multiplied by the concentration
amount above the allowable two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l),
multiplied by the number of one hundred (100) cubic foot units contributed for
the day. This yields a surcharge per day for BOD (in cost per 100 cubic feet
per milligrams per liter in excess).
      2.   For suspended solids, multiply the surcharge rate by 8.34
(conversion factor for number of pounds per gallons) multiplied by .0007481
million gallons (100 cubic feet = 748.1 gallons). This number is then
multiplied by the concentration amount above the allowable two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), multiplied by the number of one hundred (100)
cubic foot units contributed for the day. This yields a surcharge per day for
suspended solids (in cost per 100 cubic feet per milligrams per liter in
excess).
   (G)   Computation Of Wastewater Charge: The wastewater charge shall be
computed by the following formula:
      W = SC + CIC + (V times BUR) + S
   Where:
 
W   = Amount of wastewater charged ($) per billing period
SC  = Service charge (subsection (A))
CIC = Capital improvement charge (subsection (A))
V   = Wastewater volume for the billing period
BUR = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection
      (C))
S   = Amount of surcharge (subsections (E) and (F))
 
(Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-16: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Bills: Said rates or charges for service shall be payable quarterly.
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises
and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are
jointly and severally liable therefor to the city. Bills for sewer service
shall be sent out by the city clerk on the first day of the month succeeding
the period for which the service is billed.
   (B)   Nonresidential Use: When sewage treatment service is made available to
nonresident users, the rates therefor shall be based on the formula as set
forth in section
7-1-15 of this chapter multiplied by 1.5.
   (C)   Delinquent Bills: If the charges for such services are not paid within
thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for such services, such
services shall be considered delinquent and a notice of such effect shall be
mailed by the city clerk to the owner, occupant and/or user of such premises.
   (D)   Lien Notice Of Delinquency And Termination Of Service: Whenever a bill
for sewer service remains delinquent for ten (10) days for quarterly service,
the city clerk shall cause services to be discontinued without further notice
and such services shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled. The
city clerk may file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien
claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises
served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien
for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by
the bill.
   The failure of the city clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice or
the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing item.
   (E)   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in
the name of the city. The city attorney may, upon authorization of the city
council, institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid for ninety (90) days, after it has been rendered.
   (F)   Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the
sewerage system shall be deposited in the water and sewer fund of the city. All
such revenues and monies shall be held by the city treasurer separate and apart
from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city
and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the
city treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at
such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the city.
Said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner
provided by statute of the "revised cities and villages act", effective January
1942.
   The revenue received by the city from the sewer permit and inspection fee
and the sewer expansion and extension connection fee shall be used by the city
for its sewer purposes, with primary application thereof being made to the
necessary expansion of the works of the sewer system to meet the requirements
of new or additional users thereof. Such funds shall be placed, until they are
used, into a fund which is designated as the "water and sewer fund".
   (G)   Accounts: The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewer
system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewer system.
The financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the
following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
      3.   Debt services for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged.
   (H)   Notice Of Rates: A copy of this section and section
7-1-15 of this chapter properly certified by the city treasurer, shall be filed
in the office of the recorder of deeds of Mercer County, and shall be deemed
notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewer system of said
city on their properties. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
   (I)   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. (Ord. 23/2016,
1-3-2017)
   (J)   Access To Records: The Illinois environmental protection agency, or
its authorized representative, shall have access to any books, documents,
papers and records of the city for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the
special and general conditions to any state grant.
   (K)   Change In Occupancy: Any user requesting a termination of service
shall give written notice to the city ten (10) days prior to the time such
termination of service is desired. Responsibility for payment for sewer service
prior to the date of termination shall be with the property owners as well as
the user. There shall be no charge for transferring the sewer service to the
subsequent user.
   (L)   Notification: Each user will be notified, at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services.
   (M)   Appeals: The method of computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges shall be made available to a user within seven (7)
days of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method
used or in the computations thereof shall be remedies by the city within
fifteen (15) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-17: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   (A)   The city and other duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois
environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city or its
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection (A) of this section, the city or duly authorized employees of the
city, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental
protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the person and the person shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the person against
loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions as
required in subsection
7-1-14(L) of this chapter.
   (C)   The city and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
   (D)   Employees of the sewerage system shall have the right of access to any
premises served by the sewerage system for the purpose of reading any meters at
the regular prescribed intervals or for the purpose of making inspections in
order to maintain in good condition and provide for the protection of said
sewerage system and the efficient management thereof. Where such inspections
are not of an immediate or urgent nature, employees of the sewerage system
shall arrange for appointments mutually convenient to the persons of the
premises served and said employees. Any person refusing to permit the said
employees of the sewerage system to the above described right of access to his
premises shall be subject to cessation of sewage services until the required
opportunity to inspect is accorded the officers and employees of the city.
(Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-18: OPENINGS IN STREETS:
All openings made in sidewalks or roadways, for the purpose of constructing
house drains or private sewers, shall be surrounded and efficiently protected
at all hours by ample and sufficient barriers, on which red signal lights shall
be placed and maintained at nighttime, together with such additional precaution
as may be deemed necessary by the street committee for the absolute protection
of the traveling public. The conditions of this clause are imperative and drain
layers will be held responsible for all claims that may arise from damages to
persons or property following neglect or violation of any of its provisions.
(Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-19: SPECIFICATIONS AND RULES:
The mayor and city council are hereby authorized to make such rules and
regulations consistent with this chapter for the connections to the sewerage
system, specifying the types and sizes of pipes and all the other appurtenances
and extensions thereto, and amend the same from time to time as may be deemed
necessary. All service pipes and connections to the sewerage system shall
comply with the said specifications and rules for connection to the sewerage
system and any person, persons, firm or corporation failing to comply with said
specifications and rules shall be subject to a penalty as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-20: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works of the city. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the
charge of disorderly conduct.
   (B)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter except
subsection (A) of this section shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. For the purposes
of this section a reasonable time limit shall be considered and deemed to be a
period of not more than ninety (90) days, as the circumstances of the
particular violation and the action necessary to correction thereof may
dictate. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
   (C)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (B) of this section shall be fined pursuant to title
12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. (Ord. 23/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city
by reason of such violation. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-21: VALIDITY:
The validity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter
shall not effect the validity of any other part of this chapter which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts. (Ord. 14/88, 3-20-1989)
7-1-22: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   A copy of the ordinance codified herein properly certified by the city
clerk, shall be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county of
Mercer, and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their
liability for services supplied to any user of the service of the waterworks
and sewerage systems of said city on their properties, and it shall be the duty
of the city clerk and such other officers of this city to take all action
necessary or required by the laws of the state of Illinois thereunto enabling
to file all claims and liens for money due to the city and to prosecute and
enforce such claims in the manner, form and time as permitted by the laws of
the state of Illinois.
   (B)   This ordinance shall be published in pamphlet form by the city clerk
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by the statutes of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 14/88,
3-20-1989)
CHAPTER 2
FOOD DISPLAYS
(Rep. by Ord. 23/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE
SECTION:
7-3-1:   Throwing And Dumping Waste Prohibited
7-3-2:   Containers Required
7-3-3:   Nonresidential Waste Collection And Disposal
7-3-4:   Yard Waste
7-3-1: THROWING AND DUMPING WASTE PROHIBITED:
No person shall throw, dump, or deposit any waste in any street, alley, or on
public property in the city. No person shall cast or leave exposed any waste in
or about any private premises or on any lot, street, or alley or about any
sewer or storm sewer in the city. (Ord. 11/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3-2: CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
No person shall permit any waste to accumulate on his or her premises whether
residential, commercial, or industrial, except in containers or receptacles
appropriate for the type of waste involved excepting yard waste, tree and shrub
branches and trimmings, and construction debris. The term "container" includes
garbage cans, metal or plastic, with lids fitting nearly airtight and
watertight as practicable. It also includes toters having a capacity of not
less than thirty five (35) gallons nor more than forty (40) gallons, with an
attached lid, a handle and wheels having a minimum of six inches (6") in
diameter. And it also includes recyclable containers or bins which need not
have lids. Every person in possession of a dwelling unit, including multi-
family dwellings of four (4) units or less, shall be required to have
accumulations of refuse and waste collected and disposed of regularly and
systematically at least once per week by a residential waste hauler duly
licensed by the city, except for recyclable materials, which shall be collected
and disposed of by a duly licensed residential waste hauler at least weekly.
(Ord. 11/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3-3: NONRESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
Other than owners of dwelling units as provided above, it shall be the duty of
every property owner, including multi-family dwellings of more than four (4)
units, and commercial, business, and industrial establishments, to provide for
the collection and removal of all waste of any quantity whatsoever generated on
such property at least once per week, or more frequently if required, so as to
avoid health hazards or unreasonable accumulations of waste. This duty shall
also extend to the lessee of any such type of property. (Ord. 11/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3-4: YARD WASTE:
   A.   The City may, from time to time, provide a yard waste disposal site for
use by City of Aledo Residents. Only grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs and
trimmings, and landscape waste generated from properties within the City of
Aledo shall be accepted at the disposal site. Treated lumber, garbage bags, and
other materials are prohibited. Dumping at the City's yard waste disposal site
of yard and tree waste generated from properties outside of the City of Aledo
is prohibited.
   B.   Dumping by commercial businesses of tree limbs and trimmings and other
tree waste shall be subject to the fees set forth in Section
13-1-1 of the Aledo City Code.
(Ord. 11/2024, 7-1-2024)
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL WASTE HAULERS
SECTION:
7-3A-1:    License Required
7-3A-2:    Collection Without License Prohibited
7-3A-3:    Suspension Or Revocation
7-3A-4:    Duration And Annual Fee
7-3A-5:    Application
7-3A-6:    Duty To Update Information
7-3A-7:    Conditions Of License
7-3A-8:    Recycling Requirements
7-3A-9:    Waste And Recycling Prices
7-3A-10:    Monthly Reports And Right Of Inspection
7-3A-11:    Authority To Promulgate Rules
7-3A-12:    Nonresidential Waste Collection And Disposal Requirements
7-3A-13:    Scavenger's License Required
7-3A-14:    Burning And Burying Of Certain Waste Prohibited
7-3A-15:    Soft And Hard Yard Waste Excluded
7-3A-16:    Construction Debris
7-3A-17:    Hazardous Waste
7-3A-18:    Nonresidential Collections
7-3A-19:    Violation And Penalties
7-3A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every person engaged in the business of residential waste hauling within the
City shall obtain a residential waste hauling license. Such license shall be
issued by the City Clerk in accordance with the requirements of this article.
The word "person" when used in this section or any other section of this
article shall include a partnership, limited partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, or any other type of entity engaged in the business of
residential waste hauling within the City. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-2: COLLECTION WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No person shall collect residential waste, or advertise such services, within
the City without having a valid license issued under this article. (Ord. 12/98,
4-5-1999)
7-3A-3: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
All licenses or permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be suspended or revoked, and all refusals to issue a license or permit shall be
made, as a result of a violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-4: DURATION AND ANNUAL FEE:
Each residential waste hauling license shall expire on April 30 of each year
unless renewed in accordance with this article. Each applicant for a waste
hauling license shall pay, in advance, an annual fee pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 15/2017, 6-5-2017)
7-3A-5: APPLICATION:
The application for and renewal of a residential waste hauling license shall
include the following information:
   (A)   Name and phone number of the business operating the vehicles;
   (B)   The name of the Manager of the business;
   (C)   The address of the business;
   (D)   Type of each collection vehicle (pickup, dump truck, semitruck, etc.);
   (E)   Proof of current general and automobile liability insurance in the
form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the State of Illinois in the amounts required by State law,
reporting the vehicle identification number of each collection vehicle used by
the business residential waste hauler within the City; and
   (F)   If the applicant is or will be collecting on a regular basis from
residential dwellings, including multi-family dwellings of four (4) units or
less, a description of how and by whom recyclables will be collected. (Ord. 12/
98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-6: DUTY TO UPDATE INFORMATION:
The licensee shall notify the city in writing within fourteen (14) days
following a change in any information contained in the licensee's application
or any change in the information furnished by the licensee after its
application pursuant to the requirements of this article. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-
1999)
7-3A-7: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
All persons required to have a license under this article shall comply with the
following conditions:
   (A)   All licensees must provide an integrated service combining and
including a minimum of weekly curbside refuse collection and weekly recyclable
collection. Neither service may be made available individually;
   (B)   All vehicles used for residential waste hauling shall display the
license upon the vehicle as directed by the director of public works and
utilities;
   (C)   Every vehicle utilized by a person required to have a license under
this article and used for the transfer of residential waste through the streets
of the city shall have and utilize a watertight bed or receptacle having a
closed cover and be so constructed that no portion of the waste conveyed
therein shall be scattered or left in or upon the sidewalks, streets, alleys,
or public grounds of the city;
   (D)   No person required to have a license under this article shall deposit
or store any residential waste, when collected, within the corporate limits of
the city;
   (E)   No vehicle used for the collection of residential waste by a person
required to have a license under this article shall be allowed to become
offensive to the sense of smell of a person of ordinary sensibilities. Such
vehicle shall be cleaned inside and out at regular intervals;
   (F)   Every vehicle utilized by a person required to have a license under
this article hauling garbage or putrescible rubbish must be evacuated of its
contents within twenty four (24) hours of the deposit of such garbage or
putrescible rubbish;
   (G)   No vehicle utilized by a person required to have a license under this
article shall be parked overnight in or adjacent to residential areas outside
of an enclosed structure. If a vehicle licensed under this article is stored in
a residential district within an enclosed structure, the owner of the vehicle
shall have a rodent control plan approved by and on file with the director of
public works and utilities;
   (H)   No person required to have a license under this article shall transfer
residential waste from one vehicle to another vehicle on any city street or in
such a manner as to cause the release of waste onto any property;
   (I)   Any person required to be licensed by this article shall maintain in
full force and effect general liability insurance, vehicle liability insurance,
workers' compensation insurance, and unemployment insurance with insurance
companies licensed to do business in the state of Illinois in the amounts
required by state law. Upon request of the city, such a person shall produce
evidence of such coverage; and
   (J)   Upon request by the city, any person required to have a license under
this article shall provide the city, in writing, with schedules of rates in
effect at the time of the request. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-8: RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS:
All persons who provide residential waste hauling services to residential
dwellings, including multi-family dwellings of four (4) units or less, must
provide the following services:
   (A)   Pick up of recyclable materials, including at least newsprint, clear
glass jars or bottles, tin cans, aluminum cans, steel cans, and HDPE no. 1 and
no. 2 plastic containers; and
   (B)   Once collected, all recyclables must be processed for transfer to the
secondary materials market by either the residential waste hauler or a material
recovery center. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-9: WASTE AND RECYCLING PRICES:
Each licensee shall set one price for its combined waste and recyclable
services, which price shall not be higher than the price charged to those
customers for waste pick up services who elect not to recycle. Recycling
services shall not be separately priced by any licensee. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-10: MONTHLY REPORTS AND RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
   (A)   Every licensee shall file a monthly report with the Director of Public
Works and Utilities in a form designated by the Director of Public Works and
Utilities which states the following information:
      1.   How much recyclable material was collected; and
      2.   Where and to whom the recyclable material was disposed, or if
stored, where stored. If stored, such licensee shall store the recyclables
under conditions which will not degrade the quality of the recyclable
materials.
   Such reports shall be filed no later than the twentieth day following the
month for which a report is due and all such reports shall be signed under
penalties of perjury.
   (B)   The licensee shall also provide certification by the recycling
processor at least quarterly of the quantity of recyclables which have been
delivered by the licensee from the City.
   (C)   The licensee shall admit, for the purpose of making an inspection, any
officer or employee of the City who is authorized or directed to make such
inspection at any reasonable time that such admission is requested for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with this article. Such right of inspection
shall extend to the place of first delivery of recyclables. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-
1999)
7-3A-11: AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES:
   (A)   The Director of Public Works and Utilities is empowered to promulgate
rules for the following purposes:
      1.   To designate acceptable areas along or upon City rights-of-way for
the deposit for pick up of recyclable material;
      2.   To promulgate such other rules relative to recycling as are
reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the City; and
      3.   To designate procedures or forms necessary to fulfill the
requirements of this article.
   (B)   Such rules may be adopted and/or amended from time to time by the
Director of Public Works and Utilities and such rules and regulations or
amendments shall be deemed effective thirty (30) days after the date of written
notification to the City Council of such amendments unless the City Council
shall disapprove of all or any such rules and regulations or amendments within
such thirty (30) day period.
   (C)   No person shall violate any rules promulgated by the Director of
Public Works and Utilities which have been approved or deemed approved pursuant
to subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-12: NONRESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the duty of every property owner or lessee thereof to provide not
only for the collection and removal of waste generated by multi-family
dwellings of more than four (4) units, commercial, business and industrial
properties, but to also effect the proper placement of containers storing waste
thereon so as to not be visible from the street or adjacent properties if
reasonably possible. All areas set aside for the collection of waste shall be
so located as to not be unsightly in appearance or offensive in odor and shall
be so maintained as to be flyproof when the nature of the waste involved so
requires that condition and to prevent waste from scattering and becoming
windblown when the nature of the waste poses that threat. It shall be the duty
of every property owner or lessee thereof in providing for the collection and
removal of waste, in any quantity whatsoever generated by any of the above
described properties, to see that such collection is affected either by a
residential waste hauler duly licensed by the City who also offers commercial
waste pick up services or by a scavenger duly licensed to do business in the
City pursuant to section
7-3A-13 of this article. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-13: SCAVENGER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, either as principal or agent, shall engage in the business of
collecting and hauling waste generated from multi- family dwellings of more
than four (4) units, and commercial, business, and industrial properties
located in the City without having first obtained a license as a scavenger. As
a condition to obtaining a scavenger's license, each applicant must comply with
the same insurance requirements for a residential waste hauler in the City.
Each applicant for a scavenger's license shall pay an annual fee pursuant to
title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code and each scavenger's license shall
expire on April 30 of each year unless renewed in accordance with this article.
(Ord. 15/2017, 6-5-2017)
7-3A-14: BURNING AND BURYING OF CERTAIN WASTE PROHIBITED 1 :
No person shall burn or bury any waste in the city except that leaves and tree,
shrub, and brush trimmings may be burned by residential owners or lessees
thereof. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-2-1 of this code.
7-3A-15: SOFT AND HARD YARD WASTE EXCLUDED:
No residential waste hauler duly licensed by the city hereunder shall be
required to collect and dispose of hard yard waste (tree and shrub branches and
trimmings) or soft yard waste (grass clippings, leaves, prunings of small
diameter, green stemmed shrubs, and plant stalks). (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-16: CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS:
The removal of construction debris shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the premises and the person or building contractor performing the construction
work. The owner and the person or building contractor may employ a licensed
scavenger to remove such construction debris, provided the scavenger shall not
remove waste generated by the occupants of any single-family residential
dwelling or any multi-family dwelling of four (4) units or less whether or not
any such dwelling unit is under repair or construction. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-17: HAZARDOUS WASTE:
The applicable state regulations shall govern the removal and disposal of all
hazardous waste. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-18: NONRESIDENTIAL COLLECTIONS:
Waste collection and disposal service to nonresidential establishments and the
collection of waste other than from single-family residential dwellings,
including multi-family dwellings of four (4) units or less, shall be performed
either by a residential waste hauler duly licensed by the city for residential
waste removal or by a scavenger duly licensed to do business in the city in
accordance with section
7-3A-13 of this article at such schedules and rates as may be mutually agreed
upon between either the licensed residential waste hauler or the licensed
scavenger, depending upon whatever the case may be, and such nonresidential
accounts. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
7-3A-19: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   In addition to the revocation or suspension provided in section
7-3A-3 of this article, any person who violates any provision of this article
shall be subject to a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this
code. (Ord. 23/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (B)   The suspension or revocation of a residential waste hauler's license
by the city or fine imposed by the city in an administrative hearing presided
over by the mayor of the city shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so
as to bar any court imposed fine from being enforced. (Ord. 12/98, 4-5-1999)
CHAPTER 4
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
SECTION:
7-4-1:   Tests Required
7-4-2:   Dealer Responsible
7-4-3:   Pasteurized Products
7-4-1: TESTS REQUIRED:
No milk or cream or ice cream shall be sold or offered for sale in the city,
for use in said city, either by the producer thereof or any dealer therein
unless the said milk, cream or ice cream shall come from cows which have been
tested for tuberculosis by some recognized state or federal veterinarian within
twelve (12) months next prior to such sale or offer of sale; and no milk, cream
or ice cream shall be sold or offered for sale in the city for use in the city,
either by the producer thereof or any dealer therein that came from a cow that
ever reacted to the tuberculin test or that is infected with tuberculosis.
(Ord. 7/21, 4-4-1922)
7-4-2: DEALER RESPONSIBLE:
It shall be the duty of every person selling or offering to sell milk, cream or
ice cream within the city, for use in said city as a producer or as a dealer in
the same to ascertain whether such product so sold or offered for sale is a
proper product to sell or offer to sell under section
7-4-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 7/21, 4-4-1922)
7-4-3: PASTEURIZED PRODUCTS:
This chapter shall not apply to milk or cream which has been properly
pasteurized nor to ice cream made from pasteurized milk or cream. (Ord. 7/21,
4-4-1922)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-5-1:   Nuisances Prohibited
7-5-1: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation shall allow or permit on their premises, whether
owned, rented, or occupied, in the city of Aledo, state of Illinois, any of the
following conditions:
   (A)   Trash and/or garbage to be strewn about so as to cause offensive odors
or to be detrimental to the health of any person or persons.
   (B)   Appliances, furniture and mattresses to be strewn about outdoors so as
to cause a health hazard and become a breeding place for rodents.
   (C)   The use of defective garbage cans containing holes.
   (D)   Automobiles in hazardous condition because of their condition,
including, but not limited to, being on blocks, without wheels, broken windows
or with other missing or damaged parts that cause a dangerous condition or
provide a breeding place for rodents. (Ord. 4/76, 7-6-1976)
   (E)   Burning of refuse or garbage, except in an incinerator approved by the
EPA.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this
code. (Ord. 23/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 6
PRIVIES
SECTION:
7-6-1:   Privies Prohibited
7-6-1: PRIVIES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any outside privy, privy vault or
water closet, within the fire limits of the city, as the same are now, or
hereafter may be established; and all outside privies, privy vaults or water
closets now existing or being maintained within said fire limits are hereby
declared to be nuisances.
All outside privies, privy vaults or water closets shall be removed and all
excavations under the same, filled with ashes or clean soil; provided, this
chapter shall not apply to the buildings only over such privy vaults, where the
excavations under the same have been filled in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the same are in nowise used as privies or water closets, or
receptacles for sewage or offal of any character; and provided further this
chapter shall not apply to outside water closets equipped with flush tanks, and
connected properly by discharge pipes or tile with the city sewer system, nor
to privies or outside water closets on premises not assessed for sewer
improvement purposes. (Ord. 4/11, 9-4-1911)
CHAPTER 7
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
7-7-1:   Adoption Of U.S. Public Health Service Ordinance
7-7-1: ADOPTION OF U.S. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ORDINANCE:
The inspection, grading, regrading and placarding of eating and drinking
establishments within the city or its police jurisdiction, the issuing,
suspension and revocation of permits for the operation of such establishments,
the sale of adulterated, misbranded or unwholesome food and drink and the
enforcement of this chapter shall be regulated in accordance with the terms of
the unabridged form of the 1943 edition of the U.S. public health service
ordinance regulating eating and drinking establishments, three (3) certified
copies of which shall be on file in the office of the clerk; provided however,
that in section 2 of said U.S. public health service ordinance, itinerant
restaurants shall be required to secure a permit.
Provided further, that when any restaurant fails to qualify for any of the
grades specified in the U.S. public health service ordinance the health officer
or other designated official is authorized to suspend the permit or in lieu
thereof to degrade the restaurant and permit its operation during a temporary
period not exceeding thirty (30) days. (1969 Code)
CHAPTER 8
RETAIL SALE PLACEMENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SECTION:
7-8-1:   Definitions
7-8-2:   Acceptable Locations
7-8-3:   Prohibited Locations
7-8-4:   Fine
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the respective meanings ascribed to them:
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust,
or any other legal entity.
   RETAIL BUSINESS: Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
trust, or any other legal entity which offers tobacco products for sale at
retail on its business premises.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or
dipping tobacco. (Ord. 2/2004, 5-17-2004)
7-8-2: ACCEPTABLE LOCATIONS:
All tobacco products offered for sale at retail within the city of Aledo must
be displayed on the business premises in a location other than on the counter
where any cash register is maintained and must be displayed in a showcase or
other secured display rack so that clerk assistance is required before any
person wishing to purchase any tobacco products can come into possession of
such tobacco products. (Ord. 2/2004, 5-17-2004)
7-8-3: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person selling or offering to sell any tobacco
products at retail on its business premises within the city of Aledo to display
tobacco products on the counter where any cash register is maintained or to
display any tobacco products for sale at retail other than in a showcase or
other secured display rack that requires clerk assistance before any customer
wishing to purchase tobacco products can come into possession of such tobacco
products. (Ord. 2/2004, 5-17-2004)
7-8-4: FINE:
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine pursuant to
title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. (Ord. 23/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 9
HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS
SECTION:
7-9-1:   Definitions
7-9-2:   Home Kitchen Operations
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the definitions found in the Illinois Food
Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, 410 ILCS 625 et seq., are hereby adopted
by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 01/2020, 1-19-2021)
7-9-2: HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS:
   (A)   Subject to all applicable city ordinances, including, without
limitation, land use and zoning regulations and privilege taxes, the statutory
provisions contained within the Illinois Food Handling Regulation Enforcement
Act (410 ILCS 625/3.6) regarding home kitchen operations, as now or hereafter
amended are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   The direct sale of baked goods as described in the Illinois Food
Handling Regulation Enforcement Act is hereby authorized, provided the
following conditions are satisfied:
      1.   Monthly gross sales do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      2.   The baked goods are non-potentially hazardous baked good, as
described in 410 ILCS 625/3.6(a-5) of the Act.
      3.   A notice is provided to the purchaser that the product was produced
in a home kitchen.
      4.   The food package is affixed with a label or other written notice is
provided to the purchaser that includes:
         (a)   The common or usual name of the food product; and
         (b)   Allergen labeling as specified in federal labeling requirements
by the United States Food and Drug Administration.
      5.   The food is sold directly to the consumer by the home owner or a
family member.
      6.   The food is stored in the residence where it is produced or
packaged. (Ord. 01/2020, 1-19-2021)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
CEMETERY
SECTION:
8-1-1:   Ownership Of Lots
8-1-2:   Control Vested In Corporate Authorities
8-1-3:   Rules And Regulations
8-1-4:   Mausoleum Fees
8-1-5:   Endowment Fund
8-1-6:   Fees
8-1-7:   Interment
8-1-1: OWNERSHIP OF LOTS:
The ownership of the lots as laid out and platted in the cemetery shall be in
the City, unless sold to a person or persons specified and recorded as owners
of lots in the records as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 03-17-08-1, 3-17-2008)
8-1-2: CONTROL VESTED IN CORPORATE AUTHORITIES:
The control of the cemetery shall be vested in the Corporate Authorities of the
City, which shall be governed by the provisions of this Code. It shall be the
duty of the Corporate Authorities to fix the price of lots in said cemetery,
and to cause to be platted into lots of regular size and shape all of the land
to be designated for such purposes by action of the City Council. The Cemetery
Committee of the City Council may be assigned by the Corporate Authorities to
make such inquiry, review and recommendations as deemed necessary to the best
operation of the Aledo Cemetery. (Ord. 03-17-08-1, 3-17-2008)
8-1-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (A)   The City Council retains at all times the authority to adopt rules and
regulations for cemetery operations. The Cemetery Sexton shall enforce those
rules adopted by the City Council. The Cemetery Sexton shall have authority to
give appropriate direction on day to day operations wherein formal policy has
not been adopted.
   (B)   The cemetery when platted shall show the location of each lot in the
cemetery, and if there be double lots, to show the location of such double lot
or lots. Each lot shall be numbered numerically as shall be deemed best by the
Cemetery Sexton of said cemetery.
   The original plat of said cemetery shall be kept by the Clerk at his office
in the City Hall and shall be properly filed for record in his care and
custody. A copy of said plat shall be kept by the Sexton of the Cemetery.
   Both plats shall show the lots which are sold and unsold and shall be kept
up to date by the Clerk and the Cemetery Sexton respectively. Such records
shall show the location of all lots and the respective price determined
therefor. (Ord. 03-17-08-1, 3-17-2008)
   (C)   The sale of all lots of the cemetery shall be by deed from the City,
by its Mayor or authorized designee, under his hand and the Corporate Seal of
the City, and attested to by the Clerk and the signing, sealing, and delivering
of the cemetery deed shall be acknowledged before an officer duly qualified and
authorized to certify such execution of a deed as provided by law. No person,
partnership, corporation, or other type of entity, either directly or
indirectly acting through a trust or any other type of legal arrangement, may
purchase or own an interest in more than one lot (8 burial plots) without first
securing approval of the City's Corporate Authorities. In addition, sale of a
lot by an owner(s) cannot be made without first securing approval of the City's
Corporate Authorities. No such transfer is valid until entered on the cemetery
records maintained by the City for the recording of deeds of conveyance for
cemetery lots, and no such transfer of a lot by sale or otherwise by a lot
owner will be recognized unless the City's Corporate Authorities have consented
to the transfer. All transfers of ownership in lots will be subject to a fee
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code, which must be paid to
the Comptroller when the transfer is recorded. The cemetery grounds are exempt
from taxation and liability of the lot owners for the payment of their debts.
(Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (D)   Proper recording materials shall be provided by the City
administration for the keeping of all records provided by the provisions of
this chapter. Such records, when assembled in book or card form or any other
method deemed desirable, shall be known as the cemetery record of deeds.
   (E)   The Cemetery Sexton shall have the right to determine what plants,
shrubs, or trees, or anything of ornament may be planted or placed on or about
the lots unless otherwise directed by vote of the City Council. All grading and
improvement of lots, all excavations for vaults, the building of foundations,
graves, or any other work if done for a consideration must be done as provided
by the provisions of this chapter and as directed by the Cemetery Sexton. No
person will be allowed to plant trees or shrubs on graves or lots and no tree
or shrub shall be cut down, removed or trimmed, without permission of the
Cemetery Sexton and all planting of flowers, watering, cutting and trimming the
same, or special care of the grass shall be done under the supervision and
authority of the Cemetery Sexton or his designee. All persons are forbidden to
pick or cut flowers on any other lot than their own lot without special
permission from the Sexton of the Cemetery.
   (F)   No fence, or enclosure of any kind, will be permitted on or about
burial lots. The placing of boxes, shells, toys, metal designs and similar
articles upon the graves or lots is inconsistent with the proper keeping of the
grounds, and will not be permitted. Cornerstones shall be set on a level with
the surface of the ground, and the Cemetery Sexton is authorized to take down
and remove fences surrounding lots, and in exchange to give and set
cornerstones properly marked, also to grade and improve such lots free of
expense to owners. Where fences or other structures on any lot have, by reason
of neglect, become objectionable in the judgment of the Cemetery Sexton, they
are authorized to have the same removed, in which case the outline of the lot
shall be preserved by cornerstones, or other proper landmarks.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do any labor in or
about any lot or ground within the cemetery except by authority and under the
direction of the Cemetery Sexton. (Ord. 03-17-08-1, 3-17-2008)
   (H)   Any work done by an employee of the City in the cemetery or elsewhere,
including but not limited to, the moving of bodies, marking of graves or
monuments, repairing markings on monuments, digging graves, setting vaults, or
any other work in connection therewith, shall be billed by the Sexton in the
name of the City against the person or persons ordering the same pursuant to
title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code, and such bill shall be delivered to
and collected by the finance authority designated for the collection and
receipt of City funds. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (I)   The care of the grounds, setting of monuments, grave markers and care
of graves shall be under the supervision of the Sexton and according to the
regulations and specifications of this chapter and the policies adopted by the
Corporate Authorities of the City.
   (J)   Any owner, or part owner, of a lot has the right to give permission,
either in person or by a written order, for the burial of the remains of other
than his immediate family in his lot, or portion thereof, but not for money or
other consideration, or profit. (Ord. 03-17-08-1, 3-17-2008)
8-1-4: MAUSOLEUM FEES:
No bodies, ashes, or remains shall be temporarily kept in any mausoleum
receiving vault or crypt for more than fifteen (15) days unless special
permission is granted by the Cemetery Sexton for an extension of time. A fee
shall be charged for the opening and closing of a mausoleum vault or crypt
recognized by the City of Aledo when any body, ashes, or remains is either
placed therein or removed therefrom for any reason. Such fee shall be charged
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-
2017)
8-1-5: ENDOWMENT FUND:
   (A)   A portion of all fees collected pursuant to this chapter and title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code shall be deposited to the Cemetery Endowment
Fund. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City to care for all cemetery lots which
are sold hereafter; to mow the grass and weeds from the same and to keep said
lot or lots in general good condition.
   (C)   The City finance authority shall keep a permanent record showing the
money received by him for endowment purposes, from whom it is received and the
particular lot or lots to which said several endowments apply. Such records
shall be kept by the Comptroller as required by law. The City finance authority
shall report annually to the Corporate Authorities as to the financial
activities of the Endowment Fund. (Ord. 03-17-08-1, 3-17-2008)
8-1-6: FEES:
All fees and charges for cemetery sales, operations and services shall be
established by ordinance or resolution of the Corporate Authorities, and set
forth in title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-1-7: INTERMENT:
Each interment of human remains shall be placed in a single box made of durable
material and meeting industry standards for such use and a vault constructed of
concrete, steel or other like durable material. No wood vault shall be
permitted. No grave liner shall be required for any interment of human remains,
but may be used if requested by the family. The Cemetery Sexton shall have the
authority to deny the use of any container or vault if such item, in his
opinion, does not meet industry standards, or, is detrimental to the operations
or appearance of the cemetery or the health, safety and welfare of the cemetery
staff or to the community. Such denial may be appealed to the City Council.
(Ord. 03-17-08-1, 3-17-2008)
CHAPTER 2
DATUM PLANE
SECTION:
8-2-1:   Datum Plane Established
8-2-1: DATUM PLANE ESTABLISHED:
A datum plane to govern elevations, be and is hereby established in the city.
Said datum plane is a horizontal plane passing seven hundred thirty seven feet
(737.00') below the United States geological survey bench mark located in the
northwest portion of the Mercer County court house ground, being a fixed
galvanize iron pipe with bronze metal cap, bearing the inscription, "U.S.
Geological Survey B.M. Elevation above sea datum 737 ft". (Ord. 2/26, 5-3-1926)
CHAPTER 3
PARKS
SECTION:
8-3-1:   Park Rules And Regulations
8-3-2:   Central Park Shelter
8-3-3:   Smoking Prohibited In Central Park
8-3-1: PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations shall govern all parks owned and maintained
by the City:
   (A)   No person shall walk, stand or lie upon any portion of any enclosed
grounds, public square or park, laid out or appropriated to the cultivation of
shrubbery, grass or flowers, or trample upon, pull up, or otherwise injure or
destroy any such grass, flowers or shrubbery, or turn loose any horse, cow, ox,
ass, mule, sheep, hog or other animal into or upon any such public park or
other public grounds owned and controlled by the City, or work or climb upon
any fence or railing surrounding such public grounds or any part thereof, or
erect any booth or stall thereat without permission from the City authorities.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent, and he is hereby
authorized and required to superintend and control the parks, public squares
and grounds owned and improved by the City, to maintain and keep up the fences
surrounding the same, and to trim and keep in proper order the trees, walks and
shrubbery therein, and perform such other duties as may be required of him by
the Mayor and Council.
   (C)   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, except the officials or
employees of the City to throw anything into any fountain in any park or public
grounds in the City or to wade or walk in or upon said fountains, or to permit
dogs or other animals to be in same, and it shall be unlawful for any person,
except said officers or employees of the City, to molest, or in any manner
disturb the fish swimming in said fountains; or to pick, cut, mangle, trample
upon, or in any manner to injure or mutilate any flower, shrub, tree, or
ornamental plant of whatsoever kind growing in or upon any park or public
ground in the City.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to either enter or occupy any part
of any premises constituting a City park owned and maintained by the City
between dusk and dawn each day. In the event that any person violates the
provision of the foregoing curfew imposed on any and all parks owned and
maintained by the City, such person shall be fined pursuant to title 12,
"Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord. 1/01, 6-6-1901; amd. Ord. 28/79; Ord.
24/2016, 1-3-2017; Ord. 19/2021, 11-1-2021)
8-3-2: CENTRAL PARK SHELTER:
The use of the bandshell and pavilion located in Central Park, and related
audio equipment shall be subject to payment of a fee pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-3-3: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CENTRAL PARK:
   (A)   Prohibition: Smoking is hereby prohibited in the City owned park known
as "Central Park" located at the northeast intersection of South College Avenue
and S.E. 3rd Street.
   (B)   Posting Of Signs: The Director of Public Works shall post one or more
signs in Central Park clearly stating that smoking is prohibited and violations
are punishable by fine.
   (C)   Enforcement: Any police officer who observes a violation of this
section may issue a citation in the same manner as with other ordinance
violations. (Ord. 14/2010, 5-3-2010)
   (D)   Penalties: A person found to have committed a violation of this
section shall be fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code.
(Ord. 24/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 4
RAILROADS
(Rep. by Ord. 24/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 5
SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-5-1:   Construction Requirements
8-5-2:   Supervision
8-5-3:   Costs Of Construction
8-5-4:   Repairing Of Sidewalks
8-5-5:   Condemn Sidewalks
8-5-6:   Financing Of Sidewalk Construction
8-5-1: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any sidewalk to be constructed or renewed within the
corporate limits of the City of Aledo unless cement is used in said
construction or renewal of said sidewalk and said construction or renewal work
is done in accordance to the specifications as set forth in ordinance codified
herein pertaining to sidewalks, including, but not limited to, specifications
and regulations as the City Council and/or the Director of Public Works and
Utilities may from time to time require for sidewalk construction.
All sidewalks hereinafter constructed or renewed shall conform to and be laid
in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the Illinois Department
of Transportation, in its "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", duly adopted on July 1, 1976, and as may be amended by said
department from time to time, and said construction or renewal of sidewalks
shall conform to all other rules and regulations that the City Council and/or
the Director of Public Works and Utilities may adopt from time to time
pertaining to construction of sidewalks within the City of Aledo. (Ord. 2/78,
6-19-1978)
8-5-2: SUPERVISION:
All sidewalks hereinafter constructed, renewed or repaired shall be
constructed, renewed or repaired under the direction and supervision of the
Director of Public Works and Utilities, or a proper officer of the City acting
for the said Director of Public Works and Utilities. (Ord. 2/78, 6-19-1978)
8-5-3: COSTS OF CONSTRUCTION:
The City shall pay fifty percent (50%) of the construction cost or costs of
renewing any sidewalk within the City subject to a limitation that the City
shall not be obligated to pay more than twelve dollars ($12.00) per square foot
for its share for the construction or renewal of any sidewalk within the City.
However, as to that portion of any sidewalk that is constructed or renewed at
the corner of a City block and which runs from the curb thereto to a
perpendicular line created by the nearest edge of a cross sidewalk to the said
curb which exists or where said cross sidewalk would exist if constructed in a
proper place, the City shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of said
construction or renewal costs. (Ord. 34/2017, 12-4-2017)
8-5-4: REPAIRING OF SIDEWALKS:
Except for minor repairs, it shall be unlawful to repair any sidewalk now
constructed in the City with any material other than cement. The Director of
Public Works and Utilities shall have sole authority to determine if any
particular repair work for any existing sidewalk is minor or incidental
resulting in no requirement that cement be used for said proposed repair work.
(Ord. 2/78, 6-19-1978)
8-5-5: CONDEMN SIDEWALKS:
The City Council shall have the power, upon the recommendation of the Director
of Public Works and Utilities to condemn any and all sidewalk or sidewalks now
constructed in the City, when the same shall be in such state of decay or
repair as to be dangerous or unsuited any longer for the purposes of a
sidewalk, and the passing of an ordinance, and approving thereof, for the
construction or renewal of any sidewalk, shall operate and be construed as a
condemnation of the sidewalk then existing along the proposed line of the
sidewalk provided to be constructed or renewed by such ordinance. (Ord. 2/78,
6-19-1978)
8-5-6: FINANCING OF SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
Upon proper application to the City Clerk by all of the persons and/or entities
owning a particular lot upon which construction or renewal of a sidewalk within
the City is proposed, said owners shall have the right to finance their portion
of the cost of said construction or renewal of said sidewalk in question with
the City of Aledo upon the following terms and conditions. First, said owner or
owners must sign a promissory note payable to the City of Aledo, Illinois,
promising to pay said owner's or owners' portion of the sidewalks cost in
question in five (5) equal annual installment payments plus accrued interest at
the rate of six percent (6%) per annum due on the outstanding balance that may
exist from time to time under the terms of said promissory note, the first said
equal principal payment plus accrued interest at the rate of six percent (6%)
per annum to be paid on or before the first day of the thirteenth month
following the month during which construction or renewal of said sidewalk or
sidewalks in question has been completed. Thereafter, each equal annual
installment payment plus accrued interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per
annum on the outstanding balance shall be paid on or before the first day of
each consecutive month immediately after a respective twelve (12) month period
has run from said beginning date as herein described.
Second, said owner or owners shall execute a promissory note that provides that
in the event of default and if such default is not made good within thirty (30)
days, the entire principal sum and accrued interest shall at once become due
and payable without notice by the city of Aledo.
Third, this promissory note shall further provide that in the event it becomes
necessary to collect said note through an attorney, said owner or owners will
agree to pay all costs of collection, including a reasonable attorney fee and
all court costs.
Last of all, the owner or owners desiring to avail themselves of the benefits
of this financing section pertaining to sidewalks shall further agree that said
amount due shall be a lien against the property and said owner or owners shall
be obligated to sign any and all necessary documents that may be required in
order to place the amount financed for construction or renewal of any sidewalk
or sidewalks pursuant to the provisions of this section as a lien against the
real estate in question upon which said sidewalk or sidewalks have been
constructed. (Ord. 2/78, 6-19-1978)
CHAPTER 6
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-6-1:   Water And Sewer Systems Combined
8-6-2:   Prohibited Uses Of Water System
8-6-3:   Rules And Regulations
8-6-3-1:   Water Lines, Owner's Responsibility
8-6-3-2:   Sewer Laterals, Owner's Responsibility
8-6-4:   Agree To Assessment
8-6-5:   Monies Collected, Credited To Fund
8-6-6:   Climbing On Water System Towers
8-6-7:   Meters
8-6-8:   Water And Sewer Rates
8-6-9:   Storm Sewer Drains
8-6-10:   Cross Connection Control And Backflow Prevention
8-6-10-1:   Definitions
8-6-10-2:   Scope
8-6-10-3:   Purpose
8-6-10-4:   Water System
8-6-10-5:   Violations, Penalties And Liabilities
8-6-10-6:   Administration And Enforcement
8-6-10-7:   City's Right Of Entry
8-6-10-8:   Inspection And Maintenance
8-6-10-9:   Surveys; Investigations
8-6-10-10:   Fees
8-6-10-11:   General Requirement
8-6-10-12:   Cross Connections Prohibited
8-6-10-13:   Where Protection Required
8-6-10-14:   Type Of Protection Required
8-6-10-15:   Approved Backflow Prevention Devices
8-6-10-16:   Booster Pumps
8-6-1: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The existing municipally owned waterworks system and the existing sanitary
sewerage system shall be combined, maintained and operated together as a
combined waterworks and sewerage system and said combined system shall include
the entire waterworks and sewerage systems of the city, including all the
improvements and extensions thereto. The combined municipal waterworks and
sewerage system of said city shall be operated on a fiscal year basis which
shall conform to the city's fiscal year, and the entire revenues derived from
the operation of said combined system shall be set aside as collected and be
deposited in a separate fund to be designated as the "waterworks and sewerage
fund" of the city which shall be used only in paying the cost of operation and
maintenance of said system, providing an adequate depreciation fund and paying
the principal of and interest on any waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds of
the city that are payable by their terms only from such revenues, which may
hereafter be issued. (Ord. 3/38, 9-12-1938)
8-6-2: PROHIBITED USES OF WATER SYSTEM:
   (A)   No person shall interfere in any manner with any public or private
hydrant or stopcock, or deposit any dirt or other material in any stopcock box,
or turn any public or private stopcock, or do any act tending to obstruct the
use thereof, or injure in any manner any building, machinery, pipe, apparatus,
fixtures or tools of or belonging to, the system of waterworks of the city
without permission from the general superintendent or his duly authorized agent
or representative.
   (B)   No person shall make any excavation in any street for the purpose of
laying water pipes of any description nor tap any water pipe or main, or any
service pipe after being laid down, without written permission from the general
superintendent or his duly authorized agent or representative, and then only
such persons as are duly authorized to perform such work, and the particular
persons so to be employed shall in such case be named in the permit.
   (C)   No plumber or other person shall make any addition, or alteration to
any water main, pipe or water fixture connected with the waterworks,
distributing pipe to conduct water into adjoining premises or into stables,
baths, water closets, wash basins, cisterns, fountains, or for any other
purpose whatever, without application having first been made to, and written
permission obtained from the general superintendent or his duly authorized
agent or representative.
   (D)   No person shall make any excavation in any street or highway within
four and one-half feet (41/2') of any laid water pipe or main while the ground
is frozen, except by permission of the general superintendent or his duly
authorized agent or representative. (Ord. 8/1889, 10-23-1889; amd. Ord. 8/1904,
1-16-1905)
8-6-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (A)   The Mayor and Council shall appoint all necessary officers and agents
for furnishing water, collecting water rents, and fix the term of office,
salaries of such officers and agents.
   (B)   All work done in the streets must be done under the supervision of,
and subject to the direction and approval of the General Superintendent or his
duly authorized agent or representative.
   (C)   Each ferrule inserted in the mains or distributing pipes, and the
service pipe to be laid shall be of the size specified in the permit and order;
and the person to whom such work is entrusted shall report to the General
Superintendent or his duly authorized agent or representative regularly and
truly the exact location, number and sizes of all taps inserted and the length
of service pipe laid in each case. (Ord. 8/1889, 10-23-1889; amd. Ord. 8/1904,
1-16-1905)
   (D)   Applications for permits to connect service pipe with main or supply
pipe shall be made to the City Clerk and there shall be payable to the City of
Aledo at the time of making the application a fee pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. However, any fees or costs above and beyond
the normal fees for a residential customer shall be charged for the cost to the
City for the installation, fixtures and meter set in the amount that it exceeds
a normal residential installation cost. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (E)   In making excavations in streets or highways for the laying of service
pipes, the planks, bricks or paving stones, and earth removed shall be
deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public
and provide for the passage of water along the gutters. Suitable barricades
must be erected around the excavations and amber lights maintained at night if
unfilled before nightfall. (Ord. 8/1889, 10-23-1889; amd. Ord. 8/1904, 1-16-
1905; Ord. 15/92, 2-1-1993)
   (F)   All taps must be forty five degrees (45°) from the top of the main or
pipe, and in no case within fifteen inches (15") of the bell or hub. (Ord. 15/
92, 2-1-1993)
   (G)   Before filling the trench, the service cock in the street mains must
be covered with a suitable cover and the earth must be well rammed under the
main and to a level with the top thereof; from thence the trench must be filled
in layers of not more than twelve inches (12") in depth, and each layer
thoroughly rammed or puddled to prevent settling.
   (H)   It shall be the duty of the General Superintendent or his duly
authorized agent or representative to supervise and direct these operations
and, from time to time, report to the Council the manner in which the plumber
performs his work and the condition in which he finds the filling, relaying and
paving has been done.
   (I)   No water taken from the waterworks of the City shall permit the
service pipe or fixtures connected therewith to become out of good repair, or
unprotected from injury by frost.
   (J)   Hydrants, taps, hose, water closets, urinals, baths and other fixtures
will not be permitted to be kept running when not in actual use.
   (K)   All service pipes shall be laid to a depth that will leave at least
five feet (5') of earth over the top of the pipe at every point. (Ord. 8/1889,
10-23-1889; amd. Ord. 8/1904, 1-16-1905)
   (L)   All pipes used as service pipes shall be of ductile iron, copper, ABS
plastic, PB and PE plastic or PVC and shall be submitted to and stand a
hydraulic pressure of one hundred sixty (160) pounds to the square inch. All
nonconductive buried service lines shall be installed with copper "tracing"
wire.
   (M)   Indoor plumbing shall be constructed of pipe in weight at least equal
to the kind of pipe known as "extra strength" and shall be submitted to and
stand a hydraulic pressure of one hundred sixty (160) pounds to the square
inch. The composition of indoor plumbing pipe shall be restricted to those
types named in subsection (L) of this section. (Ord. 15/92, 2-1-1993)
   (N)   No private hydrant shall be located on the sidewalk or elsewhere
beyond the limits of the lot or grounds owned by the party or parties to whom
the permit is issued, except by permission of the Superintendent of the Water
Department. (Ord. 8/1889, 10-23-1889)
   (O)   Each separate building or premises connecting to the City water
distribution system shall have a separate and independent service line
connecting directly to the City main. Each service line shall be equipped with
a curb stop installed on the service line at the property line of the premises
to be served. (Ord. 15/92, 2-1-1993)
   (P)   When it shall be necessary to break up a sidewalk for the putting in
of water service pipes, there shall be maintained a safe crossing for foot
passengers, and if found necessary to remove the whole width of the walk,
travel may be shut off for the time being by the erection of suitable barriers.
(Ord. 8/1889, 10-23-1889)
   (Q)   All applications for water service shall state fully and truly the
purposes for which it is required; and when paying the water rents, the parties
shall be required to truly answer all proper questions relative to consumption
of the water, and in each application, the person or persons applying shall
agree that in consideration of the insertion of the ferrule for his benefit, he
will pay or cause to be paid the assessments to be levied on such premises for
such water mains or pipe which is proposed to be tapped; and in case of
misrepresentation by the applicant, or other use of the water not embraced in
his petition, or unreasonable waste of water, being made to appear, the supply
of water may be cut off, and all payments made thereon shall be forfeited to
the City. (Ord. 8/1889, 10-23-1889; amd. Ord. 15/92, 2-1-1993)
   (R)   The Superintendent or his duly authorized agent shall be allowed free
access at proper hours of the day, to all parts of every building in which
water is delivered and consumed and to examine the pipes and fixtures, and to
ascertain whether there is any unnecessary waste of water.
   (S)   The City reserves the right to order a meter to be applied to any
service pipe whenever the Superintendent may deem it advisable the Mayor and
Council concurring.
   (T)   Within forty eight (48) hours after completing any attachment or
connection the plumber or pipe fitter shall make a true return, in writing, on
the back of the permit, of the number of rooms or apartments in the building or
premises, or other contemplated uses of water therein, according to the rules
and regulations, and the tariff of water rates as shall be adopted by the
Council, and file such report in the Office of the Superintendent of the
Waterworks, and the supply of water shall not be turned onto any such premises
until full returns are made by the said plumber or pipe fitter.
   (U)   No hydrants except fire hydrants, and public drinking fountains, shall
be placed within the limits of any street; and no drinking fountain shall be
erected for public use which shall have openings by which it can be used as a
source of domestic supply.
   (V)   Water supplied to any place of which the rates and system of
measurement is not provided for by other rules, shall be estimated by the
Superintendent of the Water Rates Division and assessed at regular water rates,
but whenever practicable a meter shall be used as a basis for estimation.
   (W)   All water meters or other water apparatus within any building together
with the pipes and cocks shall be kept in good repair and protected from injury
by frost or otherwise at the expense of the owner, or occupant of the premises
using the same, and no claim shall be allowed against the City on account of
the breakage of any such water service pipe, cock, meter or any of its
attachments and connections. All defects must be reported to the Superintendent
of Waterworks, in writing, and all such meters or other apparatus shall at all
times be kept accessible for the inspection and examination by the proper
authorities. (Ord. 8/1889, 10-23-1889)
   (X)   All water meters used by corporations or persons using large
quantities of water shall be placed in such suitable location as the
Superintendent of Waterworks shall direct, and such meters shall be kept under
lock and key and be under the sole control of the proper officers of the City,
who shall be the only persons entitled to have access thereto.
   (Y)   For a violation of any of the foregoing rules and regulations, or such
as the Council may hereafter adopt, the City reserves the right to cut off the
supply of water for any legal, just or proper cause shown, and twenty four (24)
hours' notice given to the offender, either verbal or written, delivered to a
person of proper age on the premises where the violation shall have occurred
and being an occupant of any part thereof at the time of notice. And, in such
case the water shall not be restored until back rents and damages shall have
been paid, together with the sum as provided for in this chapter, for the
expense of turning off the water and turning it on again. And the Council
hereby reserves the full right, and power and authority to cut off the supply
of water without incurring any liability, or cause of action for damages of any
kind, for good cause shown (or in case of necessity on the part of the City)
any permit granted, or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding, and in case
of a second violation of any of these rules and regulations by any person, the
Superintendent of the Water Rates Division may cause the supply of water to be
again cut off, and a charge as provided for in this chapter be made for again
turning on the supply, when applied for and the charge paid. (Ord. 8/1889, 10-
23-1889; amd. Ord. 15/92, 2-1-1993)
8-6-3-1: WATER LINES, OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   The property owner(s) to which any water line runs to a City water
main is the owner of the entire water line, regardless of where such water line
may be located, whether on private property or on City owned property. (Ord.
15/87, 12-21-1987)
   (B)   The property owner(s) to which any water line runs from a City water
main is responsible to repair and maintain at his sole cost the entire length
of the water line without regard to the fact that any break in such water line
may have occurred on City owned property, unless otherwise agreed to in writing
between the City and said owner(s) and upon payment of the application fee and
monthly fee pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 16/
2017, 6-5-2017)
   (C)   The City grants an easement to the owner(s) of any property to which
any water line runs from a City water main over such City owned property as is
reasonably necessary in order to repair and maintain any such water line
running to his property from the City water main, subject to the prior approval
of any such contemplated repair work by the City's Director of Public Works and
Utilities.
   (D)   This section shall be deemed retroactive to the date of installation
of any water line since the Corporate Authorities deem this section to be a
mere restatement of the City's prior and existing policy of having the property
owner(s) in question pay for all such repair and maintenance work required for
any water line. The City's water and sewerage charges are not intended and have
never been intended to cover the cost of repairing any water lines. (Ord. 15/
87, 12-21-1987)
8-6-3-2: SEWER LATERALS, OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   The property owner(s) from which any sewer lateral runs to a City
sewer main is the owner of the entire sewer lateral, regardless of where such
sewer lateral may be located, whether on private property or on City owned
property. (Ord. 16/87, 12-21-1987)
   (B)   The property owner(s) from which any sewer lateral runs to a City
sewer main is responsible to repair and maintain at his sole cost the entire
length of the sewer lateral without regard to the fact that any break in such
lateral may have occurred on City owned property, unless otherwise agreed to in
writing between the City and said owner(s) and upon payment of the application
fee and monthly fee pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code.
(Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (C)   The City grants an easement to the owner(s) of any property from which
any sewer lateral runs to a City sewer main over such City owned property as is
reasonably necessary in order to repair and maintain any such sewer lateral
running from his property to the City sewer main, subject to the prior approval
of any such contemplated repair work by the City's Director of Public Works and
Utilities.
   (D)   This section shall be deemed retroactive to the date of installation
of any sewer since the Corporate Authorities deem this section to be a mere
restatement of the City's prior and existing policy of having the property
owner(s) in question pay for all such repair and maintenance work required for
any sewer lateral. The City's water and sewerage charges are not intended and
have never been intended to cover the cost of repairing any sewer laterals.
(Ord. 16/87, 12-21-1987)
8-6-4: AGREE TO ASSESSMENT:
In all cases of application for a supply of water from the waterworks of the
City to be used upon premises not assessed for water mains or pipes laid for
the supplying said premises with water as aforesaid, the applicant, before such
permission is granted, and before such tap or connection is made shall be
required to sign an agreement to the effect that he will not resist any legal
and equitable special assessment which may be made thereafter upon said
premises, for the purpose of laying water mains or supply pipes along the
street or highway on which such premises may abut, or be contiguous thereto,
and providing also that the City authorities for any violation of such
agreement or other good cause shown shall have the right at any time, upon
twenty four (24) hours' notice, to cut off the supply of water from said
premises either temporarily or permanently. (Ord. 8/89, 10-23-1889)
8-6-5: MONIES COLLECTED, CREDITED TO FUND:
All fines and forfeitures and all income received by the City from the payment
and collection of water taxes, fines, rents or rates shall be kept in a
separate fund, and be applied in the payment and discharge of the cost,
interest on bonds, or money borrowed, and also used in the further extension
and construction of the waterworks and the running expenses thereof. (Ord. 8/
89, 10-23-1889)
8-6-6: CLIMBING ON WATER SYSTEM TOWERS:
No person shall be allowed to climb or go upon the trestle work or tower frame
of the waterworks of the City, or upon any part thereof, or upon any ladder
unless by written permission from or accompanied by the Superintendent of the
Waterworks, the Mayor, an Alderman, Clerk or Chief of Police. (Ord. 1/90, 5-9-
1990)
8-6-7: METERS:
   (A)   Meters Furnished By The City: One water meter only shall be furnished
by the City for any building, residence or other property whose occupant or
occupants may use or shall desire to use water supplied by the City and no
charge shall be made for said meter except the regular meter rent charge from
and after installation; provided however, that an additional meter or meters
shall be supplied by the City upon application therefor in writing by the owner
of said property and payment with said application of the installation fee
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. Such application and
payment shall be made to the Clerk who shall notify the Superintendent thereof.
Such application shall specify with reasonable certainty the location of the
premises where such additional meter or meters is or are to be installed. (Ord.
16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (B)   Installation Of Additional Meters: Any additional meter installed in
or on any premises in the City shall be placed as close to the existing meter
connections as possible, or if there is an initial multiple installation of
meters, then all shall be installed as close together as is reasonably
possible. If there shall be more than one water meter on any premises each
shall be connected so as to be entirely separated from any other water meter so
that each meter will accurately meter the water used in connection with the
particular part of the premises for which the meter is installed and so that
the charges for use of water may be computed for each particular meter through
which water passes. In all cases where more than one water meter shall be in
use or on any premises in the City each shall be read separately and charges
for the same made to the user thereof, but it is not intended that this section
shall in any way conflict with any existing provisions.
   (C)   Material And Labor: The City shall not be required to furnish any
material or labor for piping water to the place where any meter, or additional
meter if more than one, is to be installed, but the "installation" as above
provided for, shall include only the services actually necessary to connect
said meter under the supervision of the Water Superintendent after the pipes to
lead into and out of said meter are in place. (Ord. 6/40, 3-17-1941)
   (D)   Meter Testing: Any consumer may request the City to make a test of the
accuracy of the water meter then in use on their premises. Prior to conducting
the test the consumer shall be required to deposit with the City a fee pursuant
to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code for a residential meter testing
conducted by the City, or in the event that an independent test is requested or
required, the deposit shall be the amount necessary to cover all expenses
associated therewith.
   In the event such meter is found by testing to register incorrectly by more
than one hundred five percent (105%) capacity then another accurate meter shall
be substituted and the test deposit shall be refunded. Past water bills shall
be adjusted by refund or credit of such percentage in excess of one hundred
percent (100%) capacity of the amount of the water bills for a period of not
more than two (2) months previous to such test.
   In the event that the meter is found to be registering at an error of one
hundred five percent (105%) capacity or less the consumer shall forfeit the
test deposit and such funds shall be deposited in the water operating funds of
the City.
   (E)   Meter Deposit Application: In those cases where the applicant
requesting service is a tenant, contract purchaser, or a trustee of an Illinois
land trust, the applicant shall also be required to state the capacity in which
he makes application for such service as a condition of approval of the
application, and in those cases, the landlord, contract seller or each
beneficiary of the land trustee, depending upon whatever the case may be, must
also sign the City's meter deposit application form, indicating not only the
capacity in which he signs such form, but also his correct legal mailing
address, including zip code. The City's meter deposit application form shall
state that the owner or occupant of any service is jointly or severally liable
to pay for all utilities furnished to the premises, and in the event any bill
is not paid within thirty (30) days after its rendition, the delinquent bill
shall constitute a lien against the premises. In addition to the meter deposit
application form, each applicant who is a tenant, contract purchaser or a
trustee of an Illinois land trust for the premises for which the application is
made shall be required to accompany his application with a deposit pursuant to
title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code, to be known as a meter deposit fee,
and the deposit proceeds may be used to pay delinquent gas, water and sewer or
service charges or refunded as provided below.
   The meter deposit charge shall be deposited in the Meter Deposit Fund and in
the event any customer discontinues service and has paid in full all amounts
due for gas, water and sewer and service charges, then the full amount of the
deposit shall be refunded. However, in the event that any amounts are due from
said customer, either for gas, water and sewer or service charges, then such
amounts shall be deducted and paid into the proper fund and the balance shall
be refunded.
   Any tenant, contract purchaser or trustee of an Illinois land trust who has
paid a deposit and later becomes the owner of record of the property served
shall, upon application to the City, be refunded his deposit. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-
5-2017)
8-6-8: WATER AND SEWER RATES 1 :
   (A)   1. Monthly Billings: All water and sewer customers of the City shall
be billed on the basis of computations as hereinafter set forth and the minimum
monthly consumption for billing purposes shall be one hundred (100) cubic feet
per customer per month. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
      2.   Water And Sewer Cost Categories; Restricted Funds And Operation
Maintenance And Replacement: Annual costs incurred by the City for water and
sewer customers, water source, water treatment, water distribution, sewage
collection and sewage treatment shall be classified into two (2) general
categories for rate making purposes. The two (2) general categories shall be
entitled "restricted funds" and "operation, maintenance and replacement". The
anticipated costs for each of these categories shall be annually projected by
the City in order to calculate the rates required to recover budget costs for
each year. Also, the City shall determine the number of water customers from
the preceding fiscal year and the amount of billable flow attributed to all
customers in one hundred (100) cubic feet of units averaged over the preceding
five (5) fiscal years.
      The number of water customers and the billable flow for all customers
shall be obtained from the City Clerk's billing records for the preceding
fiscal year.
      The "restricted funds" category referred to herein shall include those
costs which are mandated by bond ordinance presently and in the future which
must be collected and paid each year that any bond issue or portion thereof
remains outstanding. Each outstanding bond issue may have up to five (5) cost
components being commonly designated "operation and maintenance account"; "bond
and interest account"; "bond and interest reserve account"; "depreciation
account"; and "surplus account". The term "restricted funds" shall also include
all other forms of indebtedness for the payment of all capital expenditures
incurred in connection with the water system.
      Notwithstanding the above definition of "restricted funds", the amount of
restricted funds computed under the above definition shall be reduced for the
sewer portion thereof as follows for the first two (2) fiscal years:
 
Fiscal Year                       Amount
Fiscal year ending April 30, 1993 $30,000.00
Fiscal year ending April 30, 1994 15,000.00
 
      The "operation, maintenance and replacement" category referred to herein
shall include those costs required to operate, maintain, upgrade and replace
equipment used in the waterworks and sewerage system on an annual basis,
including pumping, distribution, sewerage collection, capital improvements and
administration. In addition, in each of the respective fiscal years designated
above, the foregoing category shall also include the lump sum specified above
for each such fiscal year in question for the sewer portion thereof.
      3.   Procedure For Computing Monthly Billings: Upon approval of the
annual Water and Sewer Fund budget, line item budget entries described therein
shall be applied to allocations set forth below:
         (a)   Service Charge: To determine the monthly service charge:
            (1)   Determine the total number of water and sewer customers
served on the last day of the preceding fiscal year from reports in the Office
of the City Clerk.
            (2)   Divide the total budgeted costs for restricted funds for the
coming fiscal year by the total number of water and sewer customers determined
under subsection (A)3(a)(1) of this section to compute the annual customer
water and sewer service costs.
            (3)   Divide the annual customer service costs by twelve (12)
months to determine the monthly customer service charge.
         (b)   Basic User Rate: To determine the basic user rate charge:
            (1)   Determine the average total one hundred (100) cubic feet of
units billed over the last preceding five (5) fiscal years.
            (2)   Divide the total budgeted costs for operation, maintenance,
and replacement by the total units of one hundred (100) cubic feet of units
billed determined under subsection (A)3(b)(1) of this section.
         (c)   Charges To Customers:
            (1)   Minimum Charges: Water and sewer customers consuming one
hundred (100) cubic feet of metered water or less per month shall be charged
the sum of the service charge plus the product of multiplying the base user
rate times the constant unit of one hundred (100) cubic feet of water consumed
for such customers.
            (2)   For Customers With Monthly Consumption Above One Hundred
Cubic Feet: Water and sewer customers whose monthly water metered consumption
is more than one hundred (100) cubic feet shall be charged the sum of the
service charge plus the product of multiplying the base user rate times the
number of one hundred (100) cubic feet of units consumed.
      4.   Water And Sewer Charge Computation Booklet: There shall be kept on
file in the Office of the City Clerk a "Water and Sewer Charge Computation
Booklet for the City of Aledo, Illinois", showing the water and sewer charge
computations which will be billed to customers as applied through the formula
and allocations as herein set forth, and each fiscal year hereafter within
thirty (30) days after adoption and approval of the annual Water and Sewer Fund
fiscal year budget of the City. The City Clerk shall compile and place on file
in his office for public inspection during regular business hours a revised
"Water and Sewer Charge Computation Booklet for the City of Aledo, Illinois",
showing the updated water and sewer charge computations to be billed to
customers based on the then current annual budget figures so adopted and
approved and as applied through the formula and allocation herein set forth.
      5.   Measurement Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing the basic
user rate shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even
increments of cubic feet. (Ord. 14/91, 4-20-1992)
      6.   Nonresident Use: When City water or sewer service is made available
to nonresident users, the respective monthly bills therefor shall be determined
based upon the calculations set forth in this subsection (A) times two hundred
percent (200%) in the case of any nonresident water user and two hundred
percent (200%) of the sewerage bill based on the calculation set forth in this
subsection (A) except for: a) any not for profit corporation nonresident water
user organized for charitable, educational, religious, scientific, research,
agricultural, or horticultural purposes, and b) any nonresident user connecting
to the City's water transmission line located between the City's west corporate
limits and the City treatment plant shall only pay one hundred percent (100%)
of the amount calculated to be due for its water usage charge under this
subsection (A). (Ord. 11/2018, 6-18-2018)
      7.   Sewer Service Without Water Service: When a sewer service is allowed
without a corresponding water connection, the monthly rate shall be based on an
estimated usage determined by the Director of Public Works and Utilities and
applied to the current sewer rate structure. (Ord. 14/91, 4-20-1992)
      8.   Bulk Sales, Tank: Sale of water in bulk to consumers desiring the
same will be made at the water treatment plant through a coin operated meter at
the rate pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. Consumer will
furnish necessary containers for such water and any transportation thereof.
(Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
      9.   Miscellaneous Provisions: Notwithstanding the above rates, any park
district organized under Illinois law or religious corporation or organization
owning or leasing any entire building or structure within the City, which is
used solely for nonresidential purposes related to its main function, shall pay
the minimum water service charge per quarter for each water connection to any
such building or structure and if the latter are also connected to the City's
sewer system, shall pay the additional minimum charge per quarter for each
sewer connection thereto as a sewer service charge. However, no water and sewer
charges shall be imposed on the swimming pool located in the City and owned by
the park district due to the terms of a prior existing contract whereby WPA
constructed such improvement at no cost to the City in exchange for a covenant
by the City to impose no utility charges thereon.
   Upon request by the City, a responsible officer of any religious corporation
or organization shall certify in writing as to the religious status of the
corporation or organization, depending upon whatever the case may be, and in
addition thereto, shall furnish copies of corporate or organization documents
or business records establishing the religious purpose thereof.
   (B)   The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof and the user of
either water or sewerage service, or both water and sewerage service, shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on said premises, and the
service is furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition that
the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the City. Water and sewer bills shall be rendered
monthly and shall be payable by the fifth day of the month following its date
of rendition. If not paid by that date, the account shall be considered
delinquent and a service charge of three percent (3%) for each month or
fraction of a month shall be assessed on the outstanding amount due at the
close of the fifth day of the month following the month the statement in
question was rendered excluding any service charges previously assessed
thereon. Accounts that remain delinquent for more than sixty (60) days, shall
incur an additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) administrative fee on the
sixty-first (61st) day following the rendition of the bill for service. (Ord.
14/91, 4-20-1992)
   (C)   In the event said rates or charges for water and sewerage service, or
either of them, are not paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the
bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to
be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon
the real estate for which such services are supplied, and the Clerk is hereby
authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in
the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Mercer County, Illinois, and the filing
of such statements shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for
such service. (Ord. 6/38, 10-22-1938)
   (D)   If the charges for water and sewerage service, or either of them, are
not paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for such
services, then the water service shall be discontinued without further notice
until all past due bills for either utility service are paid in full, together
with payment of a fee pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code.
(Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (E)   It is hereby made the duty of the Clerk of the City to render bills
for water and sewerage service, or either of them, and all other charges in
connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon.
   (F)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined
waterworks and sewerage shall be held by the Clerk separate and apart from his
private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the City, and all
of said sums, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be delivered to the City
Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after the receipt of the same, or at such
more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Council of
the City.
   (G)   The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined
waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of said system, as the same may be delivered to him, and deposit the
same in a separate fund, designated as the "Waterworks and Sewerage Fund of the
City of Aledo", and said Treasurer shall administer said fund in every respect
in the manner provided by "an act providing for the acquisition, construction,
extension, improvement, maintenance and operation of a combined Municipal
waterworks and sewerage system, the means of financing the same and in
connection therewith the refunding of securities previously issued for any
existing waterworks or sewerage system, or both, and the imposition and
collection of charges and rates for the use thereof, in cities, villages and
incorporated towns having a population of less than 500,000", approved May 15,
1934, as amended.
   (H)   Said City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts, in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined system, and
at regular annual intervals the Council shall cause to be made an audit, by an
independent auditing concern, of the books, to show the receipts and
disbursements of the combined system. (Ord. 6/38, 10-22-1938; amd. Ord. 05/
2024, 4-1-2024)
 
Notes
  1. Each consumer who is connected to the combined waterworks and sewerage
1 system shall pay the rates as established by this section from and after May
  1, 1992.
8-6-9: STORM SEWER DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect the discharge from any water
flush toilet, the effluent from any septic tank, cesspool, chemical or septic
toilet or the overflow therefrom, kitchen, cellar or bathroom drains or
industrial wastes with any surface water or storm water sewer or any tile
system installed for the collection of surface and shallow ground water only,
of this city, or to make any connections with such sewers which permit
substances of a polluting nature to enter such sewers. All such existing
connections with any existing storm or surface water, sewer or tile system
installed for the collection of surface and shallow ground water only of this
city shall be disconnected. (Ord. 8/40, 4-22-1941)
8-6-10: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION:
8-6-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section
8-6-10, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
   AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
All air gaps must be fixed proper air gaps, solidly piped; flexible couplings
or spring hoses do not constitute an air gap.
   APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the research
foundation for cross connection control of the University of Southern
California, American Water Works Association (AWWA), American Society of
Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) or American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or
certified by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) to be in compliance with
applicable industry specifications.
   APPROVED CHECK VALVE: A check valve that seats readily and completely. It
must be carefully machined to have free moving parts and assured
watertightness. The face of the closure element and valve seat must be bronze,
composition, or other noncorrodible material which will seat tightly under all
prevailing conditions of field use. Pins and bushings shall be of bronze or
other noncorrodible, nonsticking material, machined for easy, dependable
operation. The closure element (e.g., clapper) shall be internally weighted or
otherwise internally equipped to promote rapid and positive closure in all
sizes where this feature is obtainable.
   APPROVED DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves under ASSE standard 1015. A double check
valve assembly must include tight shut off valves located at each end of the
assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check
valve.
   APPROVED DOUBLE DETECTOR CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: A double check valve that
detects leakage or unauthorized use of water from fire or automatic sprinkler
systems.
   APPROVED FIRE ALARM RECEIPT POINT: A central facility constantly manned by
trained personnel with equipment installed to receive a signal from a sprinkler
alarm indicating that the sprinkler has been activated.
   APPROVED INSTALLATION: The installation of approved backflow prevention
devices as specified by the research foundation for cross connection control of
the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association,
American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards
Institute.
   APPROVED REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device
containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with
an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between
the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal
flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2)
check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of
either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the
atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at
less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff
valves located at each end of the device; and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks.
   APPROVED WATER SUPPLY: Water free from contaminant in amounts sufficient to
cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and
chemical quality shall conform to the requirement of the federal and state
drinking water regulations and to any regulation of the public health authority
having local jurisdiction.
   ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER: An antisiphon device consisting of a soft disc,
reaction cup, stem guide with machined brass seat, and large atmospheric vent
port hood.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system. These auxiliary waters may
include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from
a source such as wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids; or used water.
These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a
water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW: The flow of water of questionable quality, other liquids,
mixtures, substances, wastes or other contaminants into the distribution pipes
of the public water supply system due to a reversal of flow, or from any source
other than the intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in the city must meet the standards of the Illinois state
plumbing code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   BOARD: The Illinois pollution control board.
   CCCDI: Cross connection control device inspector.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which houses
stores, offices, or businesses engaged in trade, sales, and services.
   CONDITION OF SERVICE: All restrictions, requirements, permits, and fees
required by a public water supply prior to installation or supply of water from
the public waste system.
   CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to the public water system.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system, located on the customer's
premises. A building's plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.
   CONTAINMENT: The proper installation of an approved backflow device or
assembly at the service connection between the public water supply and the
private water system so as to contain any pollutant or contaminant within the
private water system, thus preventing its entrance into the public water supply
distribution system.
   CONTAMINANT: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, any odor or any form of
energy which, when present in the public water supply distribution system, may
cause the water to degrade so that the applicable water quality standards are
not met or physical illness or injury to persons consuming the water could
result.
   CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the city water supply by the
entrance or presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological
or biological solid, liquid or gas) to a degree which could create or creates a
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems or vessels, one of which contains potable
waste and the other water of unknown or questionable safety or steam, gases or
chemicals whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other.
   CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR OR CCCDI: A person who has
successfully completed agency sponsored training and certification to install
and test backflow devices, in accordance with law.
   DIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection formed when a potable water
system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   HIGH HAZARD CONNECTION: Any vessel, piping arrangement, or other direct
connection to a public water supply containing a contaminant.
   ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE: 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
   INDIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection formed when an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water supply.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which houses
mechanical, trade and/or manufacturing activities.
   INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois state
plumbing code.
   INSPECTOR: The plumbing inspector of the city or his duly authorized agent.
The inspector shall be a plumber licensed in the state who has successfully
completed a course on cross connection control devices given by the agency and
who has been certified by the agency to inspect and repair such devices.
   INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or building complex which houses
activities for social, health, educational, or religious purposes such as
hospitals, sanitariums, correctional facilities, schools, churches, or
charitable organizations or agencies.
   INTERCONNECTION: A physical connection between two (2) or more potable water
systems.
   ISOLATION: The proper installation of an approved backflow device or
assembly at each connection within the private water system, between the public
water supply and each piping arrangement or plumbing appurtenance on those
private premises.
   LOW HAZARD CONNECTION: Any vessel, piping arrangement, or other direct
connection to a public water supply containing a pollutant.
   NFPA: The National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy,
MA 02269.
   NATIONAL CONSENSUS STANDARDS: Standards which are adopted by a nationally
recognized organization which examines devices for such elements as the minimum
requirements for the design, installation, operation and safety aspects of such
devices, evaluated on the basis of sound engineering principles, test data, and
field experience.
   NONPOTABLE SOURCE: Any source of water not an integral part of a public
water supply system or approved by the agency to be connected to a public water
supply system according to law.
   PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust or association of persons, joint venture, corporation, or company, and
includes the United States, the state, the county, any special purpose
district, and any officer or agent thereof.
   PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. "Plumbing" includes all piping
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building where a person lives, works or
assembles. "Plumbing" includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to
and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. "Plumbing" includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a
sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building where a person
lives, works or assembles from the point of connection of such building drain
to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet (5') beyond
the foundation walls.
   POLLUTANT: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, any odor or form of energy
which, when present in the public water supply distribution system, may cause
the water to be aesthetically degraded to the senses of taste, sight or smell
without tending to cause any actual physical illness or injury to persons
consuming the water.
   POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois
administrative code 608 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PREMISES: An integrated land area including improvements thereon undivided
by public thoroughfares or water distribution mains of the city and where all
parts of the premises are operated under the same management and for the same
purposes.
   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: All pipes, structures, and plumbing appurtenances not
part of a public water supply through which potable water is obtained and
distributed.
   PROCESS FLUID: Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the
public or a consumer's potable water system. "Process fluid" includes, but is
not limited to:
      (A)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (B)   Process waters;
      (C)   Used water originating from the water supply system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (D)   Cooling waters;
      (E)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
      (F)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
      (G)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   PROTECTIVE DEVICE: Any of the following devices:
      (A)   Air gap separation device;
      (B)   Approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device;
      (C)   Approved double check valve assembly;
      (D)   Antisiphon vacuum breaker;
      (E)   Approved double detector check valve assembly.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ) PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: An assembly which
includes two (2) in-line independently acting spring loaded check valves, one
differential pressure relief valve vented to atmosphere plus four (4) test
cocks and two (2) resilient seated valves with full ports. The RPZ assembly is
also available with a detector check which measures water usage for use in fire
safety systems and is referenced as an RPDC assembly.
   REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW DEVICE: A device which includes two
(2) in line independently acting spring loaded check valves, one differential
pressure relief valve vented to atmosphere plus four (4) test cocks. The RPZ
device is also available with a detector check which measures water usage as an
RPDC device.
   RISERS: The vertical pipes in a sprinkler system. The system riser is the
aboveground supply pipe directly connected to the water supply.
   SERVICE CONNECTION: The terminal end of a service connection from the city
water supply at its point of delivery to the consumer. If a meter is installed
"service connection" means the downstream end of the meter. No unprotected take
offs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow protective device
located at the point of delivery to the consumer shall be permitted.
   SPRINKLER ALARM: An assembly of apparatus approved according to law and
installed so that any flow of water in either direction from a sprinkler system
which is equal to or greater than the flow from a single automatic sprinkler of
the smallest orifice size installed on the system will result in an audible
alarm on the premises and transmission of a signal to an approved fire alarm
receipt point.
   SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water
supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain
water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is
unprotected against backflow.
   SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
   UL: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook, IL
60062.
   USED WATER: Any water supplied by the public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian. (Ord.
21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-2: SCOPE:
This section
8-6-10 shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply
system of the city. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-3: PURPOSE:
   (A)   The purpose of this section
8-6-10 is to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of the city by establishing requirements for cross connection control and
backflow prevention which:
      1.   Protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
      2.   Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety;
      3.   Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   (B)   This section
8-6-10 has been developed in accordance with and as required under the
following state requirements:
      1.   The Illinois state plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code
890.1510 which requires protection of the potable water system from
contamination due to backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants through the
water service connection; and
      2.   The Illinois environmental protection agency regulations, 35
Illinois administrative code 601 et seq., which requires an active program of
cross connection control which will prevent the contamination of all potable
water supply systems. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-4: WATER SYSTEM:
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts:
      1.   The public water supply system; and
      2.   The consumer's water system.
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the superintendent of water up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   (E)   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-5: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND LIABILITIES:
   (A)   The superintendent of water or plumbing inspector shall deny or
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water
service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by this
section
8-6-10 is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable
to the inspector, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has
been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cutoff required by this section
8-6-10 is not installed and maintained in working order.
   (B)   Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected by the
superintendent of water when the inspector is assured that imminent danger of
harmful contamination of the public water system exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification to the consumer of the cause of disconnection.
   (C)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the inspector.
   (D)   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system.
   (E)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this section
8-6-10 shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit, not to exceed fifteen (15) days, for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
   (F)   Any person who shall continue such violation after receipt of a
handwritten notice, as provided above, shall upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code.
(Ord. 24/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (G)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
8-6-10 in addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the city for
any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such
violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice. (Ord. 21/01, 3-
18-2002)
8-6-10-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   This section
8-6-10 shall be administered by the city's water division and enforced by the
inspector. Whenever this section
8-6-10 provides that anything must be done to the approval of, or is subject
to, the direction of the inspector, this shall be construed to give such
inspector only the power to determine whether the provisions and regulations
established by this section
8-6-10 have been complied with, and shall not be construed as giving him
variance powers.
   (B)   The water division with the approval of the city manager shall from
time to time, and as often as necessary, establish reasonable administrative
rules and regulations to implement and carry out this section
8-6-10. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be prepared and made
available to all interested persons without charge.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the inspector to keep a record containing a
full and separate account of all inspections and tests made and to make a
monthly report to the city manager; and such report shall indicate the number
of tests made and the amount of fees collected for such tests. (Ord. 21/01, 3-
18-2002)
8-6-10-7: CITY'S RIGHT OF ENTRY:
For the purpose of making any inspections or discharging the duties imposed by
this section
8-6-10 and the Illinois state plumbing code, the superintendent of water has
the right to enter upon the premises of any consumer. Each consumer as a
condition of the continued delivery to his premises of water from the city
water supply shall be considered as having stated his consent to the entry upon
his premises of the superintendent of water for the purposes stated herein.
(Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-8: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by this section
8-6-10 are installed to have inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in
accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate
a need or are specified in manufacturer's instructions:
      1.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter.
      2.   Double detector check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested
for tightness at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and
required service performed within fifteen (15) days.
      3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer,
and required service performed within five (5) days.
      4.   Alarm valves shall be tested annually using methods described in
NFPA 13, section 3-17.6.3.
      5.   If successive inspections disclose repeated failures in operation of
any backflow prevention device, the superintendent of water may require more
frequent inspections.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as a cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI).
   (C)   The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
   (D)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
   (E)   A maintenance log shall be maintained on the premises and include:
      1.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      3.   Test results;
      4.   Repairs or servicing required;
      5.   Repairs and date completed; and
      6.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (F)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the
expense of the consumer without delay.
   (G)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
superintendent of water.
   (H)   Copies of records of all tests, repairs and overhauls shall be
submitted to the superintendent of water, who shall maintain files for the
backflow prevention devices and make them available for inspection by agency
personnel. The superintendent of water shall have the responsibility of
determining that the inspection and testing required herein are performed
properly. If following the city's written request, the consumer fails to have
any of the inspections and tests made as required herein or to make the above
described records available, the superintendent of water shall have the right
to inspect and test the device; and the consumer shall pay the cost thereof.
The cost of any inspection made by the city's water division shall be billed to
and paid by the consumer.
   (I)   The city's water division has the right to refuse to inspect and test
a backflow prevention device due to safety or sanitary reasons. In those
instances the city shall require the consumer to have it inspected and tested
by a certified cross connection control device inspector. If this is not
accomplished, the procedures under section
8-6-10-5 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-9: SURVEYS; INVESTIGATIONS:
   (A)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross connection control devices within the consumer's
premises.
   (B)   On request by the superintendent of water, the consumer shall furnish
information regarding the piping system or water use within the customer's
premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
superintendent of water for the verification of information submitted by the
consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross connection
inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross connections to his water system. All cross
connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in
accordance with Illinois plumbing license law 1 .
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross connections are removed; or approved cross connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and backsiphonage.
      2.   Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at least
annually by a person approved by the agency as a cross connection control
device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include
physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
      4.   Each device shall be tested at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer. Records submitted to the community public
water supply shall be available for inspection by agency personnel in
accordance with the Environmental Protection Act 2 . Each device shall have a
tag attached listing the date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and
date of repairs. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         (a)   Date of each test;
         (b)   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
         (c)   Test results;
         (d)   Repairs or servicing required;
         (e)   Repairs and date completed; and
         (f)   Service performed and date completed. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq.
2 2. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
8-6-10-10: FEES:
   (A)   Turn On Fee: There shall be a water turn on fee pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code for turning on water after it has been turned
off for subsection
8-6-10-8(I) of this chapter. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (B)   Inspection And Test Required: The cost to make an inspection or test a
backflow prevention device, to include, but not be limited to, labor, benefits,
and overhead expense, will be charged to the consumer, if the consumer is in
violation of subsection
8-6-10-8(H) of this chapter. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-11: GENERAL REQUIREMENT:
The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the
public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or backsiphonage
of contaminants through the customer's water service connection. If in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Water an approved backflow prevention device
is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the
Superintendent of Water shall give notice to the consumer to install such
approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises.
The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his
own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to
install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have
been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing and repair as required in section
8-6-10-8 of this chapter for a period of at least five (5) years. (Ord. 21/01,
3-18-2002)
8-6-10-12: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency.
   (C)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-13: WHERE PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   (A)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Water, actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving any of the following
premises:
      1.   The premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is an approved water supply, is accepted as an additional source by the
superintendent of water and the source is approved by the Illinois
environmental protection agency;
      2.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the superintendent of water;
      3.   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of
the superintendent of water, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross
connections exist;
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey;
      5.   Premises have a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
   (C)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the superintendent of water
determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system
exists:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes, churches;
      2.   Laboratories;
      3.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations;
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants;
      6.   Chemical plants, pesticide, herbicide, or extermination trucks;
      7.   Metal plating industries;
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      10.   Car washes and laundromats;
      11.   Pumps for nonpotable water, chemicals or other substances;
      12.   Potable water connections to boilers;
      13.   Refrigerating unit condensers and cooling jackets;
      14.   Bidets;
      15.   Farm service/fertilizer plants and trucks.
   (D)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each fire
safety systems service line connected to the public water supply. All such
installations shall include a metered detection system to indicate and measure
unauthorized use. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-14: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   (A)   The type of protection required under subsections 8-6-10-13(A), (B)
and (C) of this chapter shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as
follows:
      1.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
      2.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      3.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation, approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device or a double check valve assembly
shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under subsection
8-6-10-13(D) of this chapter shall be an approved fixed proper air gap
separation or an approved reduced principle backflow prevention device, or:
      1.   The type of protection required under subsection
8-6-10-13(D) of this chapter shall be an approved double detector check valve
assembly prevention device; or
      2.   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for
a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall
be installed on fire sprinkler systems connected to the public water supply
when:
         (a)   The sprinkler system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or
other chemicals;
         (b)   Water is pumped and/or flows by gravity into the fire safety
system from a nonpotable source capable of serving the fire system. A
nonpotable source of water shall be considered capable of serving the fire
safety system under the following conditions: It must be capable of year round
use, maintained with not less than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons of usable
water not subject to freezing, accessible to firefighting pumper equipment,
located within one thousand seven hundred feet (1,700') of facility; or
         (c)   There is a permanent or emergency connection whereby water can
be pumped into the fire safety system from any other nonpotable source, such as
a river, lake, lagoon, retention pond or swimming pool.
   (C)   An approved double detector check valve assembly backflow prevention
device shall be installed on all existing fire sprinkler systems whenever
physical space for installation of the device is available except as provided
under subsection (B)2 of this section, or:
      1.   When physical space is not available, existing fire sprinkler
systems which include a single check valve shall be retrofitted by installing a
weighted detector check and an alarm valve approved under UL standard 193 with
alarm accessories approved under UL standard 753. The weighted detector check
shall consist of a single check with a weighted clapper. Alarm valves shall be
equipped with a connection to transmit a signal to a remote monitoring station
which is an approved fire alarm receipt point.
      Sprinkler alarms installed in accordance with this section shall be
installed so that any flow of water in either direction from a sprinkler system
which is equal to or greater than the flow from a single automatic sprinkler of
the smallest orifice size installed on the system will result in an audible
alarm on the premises and transmission of a signal to an approved fire alarm
receipt point. Installation of sprinkler alarm systems shall be in accordance
with NFPA 13, installation of sprinkler systems; or NFPA 71, standard for the
installation, maintenance, and use of signaling systems for central station
service; or NFPA 72B, standard for auxiliary protective signaling systems; or
NFPA 72C standard for remote station protective signaling systems; or NFPA 72D,
standard for proprietary protective signaling systems.
      When an existing fire safety system is expanded to the extent that an
additional riser is required, the entire system must be brought into compliance
with existing regulations and equipped with a backflow protection device
according to subsection (B)1 of this section. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-15: APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the research foundation for cross connection
control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specifications and be in compliance with
the Illinois state plumbing code.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35
Illinois administrative code 608 and 653, and only as specified by the research
foundation for cross connection control of the University of Southern
California or applicable industry specifications and in compliance with the
most recent edition of the Illinois state plumbing code. Maintenance of the
devices shall be performed as recommended by the manufacturer. The
manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on site for each type of
device being utilized. (Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
8-6-10-16: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut off device in proper working order and to certify to the
superintendent of water, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(Ord. 21/01, 3-18-2002)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTRICAL POLES
SECTION:
8-7-1:   Restrictions
8-7-2:   Remove Poles, Wires
8-7-3:   Marks; Brands On Poles
8-7-1: RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any electric light company or corporation, or any
telephone company or corporation, or other company or corporation having,
placing or maintaining any poles or wires upon or along the streets, alleys or
public grounds within the city limits under any ordinance heretofore or
hereafter granted, to allow any poles, wires, guywires, cables, braces or other
material to remain upon such streets, alleys or public grounds within the city
which are not necessary for safe and good construction in the business
conducted by such company within said city limits; and it shall be unlawful for
any such company to place, maintain or allow to remain any pole or other
material now or hereafter placed so as to obstruct any driveway, street or
alleyway within said city. (Ord. -/15, 7-8-1915)
8-7-2: REMOVE POLES, WIRES:
It shall be the duty of any such company to remove from the streets, alleys or
public grounds in the city, all poles and wires whenever the same shall be no
longer necessary for the purposes for which they were permitted to be placed
upon the streets, alleys or public grounds, and it shall further be the duty of
such company to at all times maintain all poles, wires, guywires, cables or
other material in good safe condition. (Ord. -/15, 7-8-1915)
8-7-3: MARKS; BRANDS ON POLES:
Every company having or maintaining any telephone or electric light poles
within the city shall within thirty (30) days from and after the passage of
this chapter, file with the clerk, a mark or brand, unlike any other mark or
brand already on file, with which such company will mark every pole thereafter
erected, within the city, and will, within ten (10) days from such filing,
plainly mark every pole, and maintain such mark on every pole belonging to such
company within the city, and it shall be the duty of the clerk to keep on file
for the inspection of any person, all such marks and brands selected and filed
as herein provided. (Ord. -/15, 7-8-1915)
CHAPTER 8
TREES
SECTION:
8-8-1:   Interference With Poles, Wires
8-8-2:   Permit To Cut Required
8-8-1: INTERFERENCE WITH POLES, WIRES:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the work of erecting, placing,
or moving or removing wires or other appliances used for telephone, electric
lighting, or other purposes, or for any other person whatsoever to permit or
allow fallen trees, or the limbs or branches which he may have lawfully cut or
removed from any tree for the purpose of placing, moving, or removing such
wires, or for the purpose of preventing any tree, limb, or branch from coming
in contact with such wires, or whether for any purpose whatsoever, to be and
remain on any of the streets, alleys or public grounds, or any part thereof or
shall cause the same to be done. This section shall not apply however to any
person who shall lawfully fell any tree, or shall lawfully cut or remove limbs
or branches from any tree growing on or along any of the streets, alleys, or
public grounds of the city, and will immediately remove the same therefrom.
(Ord. 2/99, 6-5-1899)
8-8-2: PERMIT TO CUT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or in any manner injure any tree
growing on any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the city, without
first obtaining a permit to do so from the council, or to trample down or in
any manner injure any young tree or shrub growing on any of said streets,
alleys, or public grounds, by running or driving over the same with any wagon,
carriage, or other vehicle, or by running over them with any horse, cow or
other animal. (Ord. 2/99, 6-5-1899)
CHAPTER 9
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
8-9-1:   Improvements By Owner
8-9-2:   Interference During Construction
8-9-1: IMPROVEMENTS BY OWNER:
Any person being the owner of or having the control or use of any lots in the
corporate limits of the city abutting on any street, may be permitted to
construct or build boulevards or terraces in front of their said property and
to improve the same by curbing with stone or brick tiling and filling in with
dirt the part of the street in front of the respective lots so improved from
the lot lines to the curb line on all streets, as the said curb line is now or
hereafter may be established by any pavement improvement in said city;
provided, on all streets where no curb line is established by the laying of
such pavement, the boulevard or terrace right shall extend for twenty feet
(20') into the street from the lot line; and provided also, that on all streets
the municipal authorities of the city reserve the right to lay or maintain a
sidewalk outside the lot line as heretofore provided. (Ord. 3/94, 5-12-1894;
amd. Ord. 1/13, 5-6-1913)
8-9-2: INTERFERENCE DURING CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, ride or walk, or in any other way
go upon or trespass upon, any part of any newly laid pavement, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks or other street improvements, in the city either while the same are
in course of construction or after completion, until the same have been
regularly opened for traffic by the municipal authorities of the city; nor to
in any manner mark or deface any part of any such improvement at any time. This
section shall not be construed to prohibit any authorized person from doing any
necessary act or thing in connection with the making of any such improvement,
nor to go upon the same with due care, without injuring the same, while such
person may be in the discharge of any duty in connection with the making or
protection of any such improvement. (Ord. 3/12, 6-17-1912)
CHAPTER 10
COMMUNITY MAUSOLEUM
SECTION:
8-10-1:   City Owner Of Crypts
8-10-2:   Sale Of Crypt; Fee
8-10-3:   Cemetery Sexton's Duties
8-10-1: CITY OWNER OF CRYPTS:
The City does hereby and forever reserve unto itself the sole and absolute
ownership of the four (4) crypts in the mausoleum, in row eleven (11) in left
hand side Sections A, B, C and D, which said four (4) crypts were specially
dedicated to the City by the builder of said mausoleum, in exchange for the use
of the site furnished by said City, upon which to erect said mausoleum, the
said four (4) crypts to be forever used as receiving vaults, or for any other
similar public use, by the City. (Ord. 12/12, 2-3-1913)
8-10-2: SALE OF CRYPT; FEE:
The Mayor and Clerk shall upon proper application, and the payment of the fee
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code first being made to the
Cemetery Committee for each crypt sold, and of which transfer is requested,
execute and deliver to the applicant or applicants a certificate of ownership
of the number of crypts in said mausoleum which such applicant or applicants
show themselves by proper evidence to be entitled, which certificate of
ownership shall not be transferable except upon the consent of the said Mayor
and Clerk or their successors in office.
The said Cemetery Committee upon receiving the said fee per crypt sold, in the
mausoleum, shall as soon as practicable thereafter place the entire amount of
said fund at interest, or otherwise safely invest the same, and that the
proceeds and income from said fund shall thereafter be used for perpetual
maintenance and repair of the mausoleum, the principal of said sum at no time
to be used for said purpose except in case of absolute necessity; provided,
however, the said Cemetery Committee, nor the City shall in no event be liable
for the maintenance and repair of said mausoleum, beyond the amount of the said
income from said fund, and the principal of the same. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-10-3: CEMETERY SEXTON'S DUTIES:
The Cemetery Sexton is hereby required at all times hereafter, to keep the said
mausoleum building and grounds cleaned and in a presentable condition,
including the mopping or scrubbing of the halls and chapel therein whenever
necessary, the cleaning up of all refuse after the sealing of any crypt, the
keeping of the grass mowed on the mausoleum grounds and the alleys surrounding
the same, and tending the flowers which may at any time be planted or growing
in the ornamental urns on said mausoleum grounds, and the said Cemetery Sexton,
shall receive no additional compensation for his services in this behalf, but
shall perform the said services as a part of his duties for which he receives
and shall hereafter receive his regular salary. (Ord. 12/12, 2-3-1913)
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-11-1:   Obstructions Prohibited
8-11-2:   Monuments, Markers
8-11-3:   Barricades
8-11-4:   Machinery; Equipment On Public Ways
8-11-5:   Signs; Billboards
8-11-6:   Street Sales
8-11-1: OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or obstruct any street, alley, or
public ground in the city by felling trees, constructing and erecting any
building or fence, or placing any other obstruction on or across the same or to
permit any fence, building, or other obstruction standing on such street,
alley, or public ground to remain thereon after notice by the chief of police
to remove such building, fence or obstruction; provided, this section shall not
apply to any person who shall lawfully fell any tree for use, and will
immediately remove the same, or who may be engaged in the erection of a
building or fence, or improving any lot upon any street but may be permitted to
use so much of the street or sidewalk as shall be necessary for that purpose,
not to exceed one-half (1/2) of the street and one-half (1/2) of the sidewalk;
and provided further, that the street commissioner or chief of police, after
notice given to the owner, or person so obstructing such street, alley, or
public ground, as aforesaid, may remove any such fence, building, or
obstruction, or cause the same to be done and the necessary cost of such
removal may be recovered from such owner or other person so obstructing such
street, alley, or public ground by the city, before any proper court having
jurisdiction. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to rake,
place or mow fallen tree leaves, grass clippings or other yard waste into the
pavement or into the gutter of any public street unless directed by the city of
Aledo. No person shall permit grass clippings from mower swaths to remain upon
city sidewalks, street pavements, gutters of any public street, or on abutting
property not owned or occupied by said person. The penalty for violating this
section shall be as set forth in section
6-11-4 of this code. (Ord. 10/2011, 7-5-2011)
8-11-2: MONUMENTS, MARKERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person whatever or whoever, within the corporate
limits of the city to move, disturb, remove, deface, molest or destroy any
stake, grade, grade stake, monument or marker, set or placed within the city
limits for the purpose of establishing either temporarily or permanently any
street, sidewalk, or improvement grade or level, or other grade or level in the
city, when the same or either of the same may hereafter be placed or designated
by or under the authority or direction of the municipal authorities of the
city, or where the same or either of the same, may now be legally located or
identified or designated by competent legal authority; and it shall further be
unlawful for any person in the city to erase or otherwise obliterate or deface
any chalk or pencil mark, or other mark made for the purpose of indicating the
location of any such grade or level within the city; provided, however that the
city engineer or other proper officer acting under the authority or instruction
of the municipal authorities shall have the right to move or remove any such
monument or marker, providing the same shall be accurately replaced, and its
location correctly noted by any such proper person moving or removing any such
monument or marker. (Ord. 2/12, 6-3-1912)
8-11-3: BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, injure, damage, destroy or
remove any barricade, guard planking, or other protection erected or placed
upon any street or alley in said city to protect any unfinished portion of any
public improvement or work from injury or destruction, or to make any use
whatever of any such barricade, guard planking or other protection, calculated
to injure or destroy the same, or to in anywise injure or damage any unfinished
portion of any such public improvement or work erected or placed within the
city. (Ord. 10/12, 11-4-1912)
8-11-4: MACHINERY; EQUIPMENT ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any way any
street, boulevard or sidewalk along the paved or surfaced part of any street in
the city. Any person placing or allowing to remain upon such boulevards and
sidewalks of any street in the city any vehicle, machinery, articles or matter
of any kind whatsoever shall be deemed to be obstructing the same, within the
meaning of this section, and placing or allowing to remain upon said sidewalks
or boulevards of any vehicle, machinery, articles or matter of any kind shall
be and is hereby deemed a nuisance. (Ord. 8/49, 4-17-1950)
The provisions hereof shall not apply to those boulevards prepared for and
maintained by the city nor to those portions of the street which have been
designated for the express purpose of the temporary parking of motor vehicles
whether the same be now provided for or hereafter established. The term
"temporary parking" is hereby defined to be the parking of a motor vehicle in
the areas referred to for a period not to exceed forty eight (48) consecutive
hours. (Ord. 10/12, 11-4-1912; amd. Ord. 12/64, 5-3-1965)
8-11-5: SIGNS; BILLBOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a city official or employee
conducting city business to place, erect or fasten any billboard or other
placard, sign, notice, or other type of posting (collectively referred to
within this section as "signs") upon public property or property owned by the
city of Aledo, within the public right of way, upon any part of any sidewalk
within the corporate limits of the city; or upon any part of any public street
or alley in the city. It shall further be unlawful to nail, paste or otherwise
fasten to or hang upon any telephone, electric light or telegraph pole within
the corporate limits of the city, any signs of any character or description
whatsoever; or to attach the same to any tree, light post or other object in
any street or alley in the city. This section shall not apply to signs or
advertisements extending out from and supported by buildings abutting upon any
street or sidewalk in the city, which are so placed, hung or erected as to
comply with the present regulations of the city relative to the same; nor apply
to any billposting boards now or hereafter erected with the permission of the
city. Signs erected in violation of this section shall be subject to immediate
abatement upon identification. (Ord. 06/2016, 6-6-2016)
8-11-6: STREET SALES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose to sale, offer to sell, or to
vend or sell any article or articles or any goods, wares or merchandise of any
kind or nature whatever, or to permit any of his agents or employees to expose
to sale, offer to sell or to vend or sell any article or articles or any goods,
wares or merchandise of any kind or nature whatever, from any rack, wagon,
stand, motor truck, pushcart, or other vehicle, whether stationary or movable,
upon the streets, sidewalks and public places within the limits of the city.
However, this section shall not be construed to apply to house to house selling
by a farmer, fruit and vine grower, and gardener, engaged in selling the
produce of his farm, orchard, vineyard or garden, nor shall this section be
construed to prevent the display by any merchant of goods, wares or merchandise
on the sidewalk in front of his regularly established place of business so long
as the same shall be done in conformity with any existing ordinance on that
subject. (Ord. 4/32, 3-20-1933)
CHAPTER 12
EXCAVATIONS 1
SECTION:
8-12-1:   Definitions
8-12-2:   Permit Required
8-12-3:   Application
8-12-4:   Conditions For Granting Permit
8-12-5:   Sale Of Excavated Material
8-12-6:   Prior Notice
8-12-7:   Exceptions
8-12-8:   Performance
8-12-9:   Excavation Clearance
8-12-10:   Plastic Installation
8-12-11:   Backfilling
8-12-12:   Demolition Clearance (Rep. by Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-12-13:   Hazardous And Emergency Procedures
8-12-14:   Standards And Procedures
8-12-15:   Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 16 of this title.
8-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
   BLASTING: The use of an explosive to excavate.
   CONTRACTOR: Any person, including a subcontractor, who contracts with a
utility operator or property owner, public or private, for the purpose of
engaging in at least, excavation of any structure below the existing grade.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works and Utilities of the City of Aledo.
   EMERGENCY: Any condition which may cause an interruption of essential
services resulting from the destruction of, disruption of, or damage to
underground utility lines. ("Emergency" is classified as less severe than
"hazardous".)
   EXCAVATE: The movement or removal of earth, using mechanized equipment or
blasting, and includes augering, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling,
grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling.
   HAZARDOUS: Any condition which may cause an interruption of essential
services and, in addition, may result in death or injury to persons or property
due to destruction of, disruption of, or damage to underground utility lines.
("Hazardous" is classified as more severe than "emergency".)
   MECHANIZED EQUIPMENT: Powered equipment used to excavate, and includes
equipment used for plowing in or pulling in cable or pipe.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, state,
subdivision or instrumentality of a state, or the legal representative thereof.
   PROPERTY OWNER: Any person who owns fee title to or leases a given area of
land, excluding, however, any recorded easement or right-of-way.
   SUPERINTENDENT: The General Superintendent of Public Works and Buildings of
the City.
   UTILITY LINE: Any underground conduit and its related facilities including
pipe or cable, by which a utility furnishes or transports material or services.
   UTILITY OPERATOR: Any person who furnishes or transports any of the
following materials or services by means of a utility line, including the City
of Aledo:
      (A)   Flammable, natural, toxic or corrosive gas.
      (B)   Petroleum, petroleum products and hazardous liquids.
      (C)   Electricity.
      (D)   Sanitary sewer.
      (E)   Storm drains.
      (F)   Communications.
      (G)   Water.
   WORKING DAYS: Monday through Friday, excluding, however, any public and
legal holidays. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975; amd. Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, other than a duly authorized City employee in the course of his
employment, may undertake excavation within the corporate limits of the City
unless such person shall first obtain a permit therefor from the City as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-12-3: APPLICATION:
Any person who proposes to do any work as prohibited in section
8-12-2 of this chapter, shall first file with the Clerk a petition in writing
which shall describe the location and extent of such proposed work, the object
thereof, and the approximate time necessary to complete the same and deposit
with the Clerk the sum pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code.
(Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-12-4: CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING PERMIT:
The City Clerk shall, on receiving petition indicated in section
8-12-3 of this chapter, transmit same to Director for verification of site and
feasibility. The Director, after such verification shall, in writing, approve
said petition and return same to City Clerk who will cause petitioner to be
notified that petition is granted subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   An improved street or sidewalk shall be replaced or reconstructed and
any excavation filled under the direction of the Superintendent so that the
same shall be in as good and serviceable condition as it was prior to being
disturbed. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
   (B)   All repairs in traveled portion of any street and at least three feet
(3') beyond the curb or ditch line shall contain suitable material to within
six inches (6") of the surface and the balance shall consist of the same
material as removed. All materials used in repairing any street or side portion
thereof as provided and required above shall be properly compacted and all
reconstruction and repair work on any street or side portion thereof shall be
done in a workmanlike manner subject to the direction and approval of the
Director of Public Works and Utilities. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975; amd. Ord. 30/
82, 2-7-1983)
   (C)   All such replacement, reconstruction and filling shall be done under
the direction of and subject to the approval of the Director, and the materials
used therein shall be such as said Director shall designate. (Ord. 13/75, 11-
17-1975)
   (D)   Petitioner shall guarantee the entire expense of the replacement,
reconstruction or filling of any work permitted hereunder by depositing with
the Clerk, in cash or its equivalent, any sum required by the Director at the
time such permit is granted, but not less than the sum pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code, and if said Director fails to designate any
amount at the time such permit is acted upon, the deposit made with the Clerk
at the time such petition is filed shall be deemed sufficient. (Ord. 16/2017,
6-5-2017)
   (E)   Upon the completion of the work and the written approval thereof by
the Director, the Clerk shall deduct from the deposited guarantee, the costs
and expenses of the City of such replacement, reconstruction or filling not
otherwise paid by petitioner including an amount for the time spent by the City
employees in inspecting, supervising or working on such proposed work at the
hourly rate then paid such City employees by the City and repay the balance, if
any, to the petitioner. All amounts so deducted for costs and expenses shall be
paid into the General Corporate Fund of the City. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
8-12-5: SALE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL:
No person excavating earth or stone on any public street or ground belonging to
the City or other public place shall, without the permit of the Director, sell
or in any way dispose of the same, and any person violating this provision
shall pay to the City three (3) times the value of such property, to be
recovered by action in debt in favor of the City or withheld from the guarantee
deposited hereunder. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
8-12-6: PRIOR NOTICE:
   (A)   Contractors shall notify all utility operators who maintain
underground utility lines in the area of the proposed excavation or blasting,
at least two (2) working days, but not more than ten (10) working days prior to
commencement of said excavation. This notification shall consist, at least, of
the following: (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
      1.   The contractor's name and telephone number.
      2.   The name of the person for whom the proposed work is being done.
      3.   The date and approximate time work is to commence.
      4.   The location and approximate depth of proposed work.
      5.   The nature of work to be done.
      6.   Any special remarks. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any contractor to commence excavation on any
property without first receiving clearance for excavation from each utility
operator as provided in section
8-12-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975; amd. Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-12-7: EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   The requirements of section
8-12-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any property owner who, without the
aid of a contractor, is performing the work within the boundaries of his
property which does not require the acquisition of any permit issued by the
City of Aledo.
   (B)   The requirements of section
8-12-2 of this chapter shall not apply to a person acting as or for a City
franchised utility operator; provided, however, that this exception shall not
excuse the utility operator making the excavation from any liability for damage
caused by his negligence.
   (C)   The requirements of section
8-12-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any person acting as or for the
utility operator of a damaged line in making repairs to its own underground
facilities or repairs to the streets or alleys themselves in a condition of
emergency when such repairs must be made within a shorter period of time than
that provided for in the ordinance codified herein, provided, however, that
this exemption from obtaining information shall not excuse the person making
the excavation from any liability for damages caused by his negligence. (Ord.
13/75, 11-17-1975)
8-12-8: PERFORMANCE:
   (A)   Verification that site plans indicate finished grade, must be provided
to the utility operator in writing by contractor and property owner before
contractor may commence excavation for the installation of utility lines.
   (B)   When excavation approaches the estimated location of any existing
utility line(s), which shall have been previously located horizontally as
provided in section
8-12-9 of this chapter, the exact location of such existing utility line(s)
must be determined by adequately exposing same by hand digging within the
proposed limits of excavation before excavation may resume. To prevent damage
to such exposed existing utility line(s) or the protective coating thereof,
proper supports shall be provided where required. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
   (C)   The act of obtaining information as required by this chapter shall not
excuse any person making any excavation from doing so in a careful and prudent
manner nor shall it excuse such person from liability for any damage resulting
from his negligence. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-12-9: EXCAVATION CLEARANCE:
   (A)   A utility operator who receives notification of a proposed excavation
pursuant to section
8-12-6 of this chapter and who has received, if applicable, verification of
site grading pursuant to section
8-12-8 of this chapter, shall provide clearance for excavation to the
contractor before such excavation may commence by:
      1.   At least one hour prior to the commencement of the proposed
excavation, horizontally locating its utility lines at the site, and notifying
the contractor that this marking has been accomplished; or
      2.   Notifying the contractor that the proposed excavation will not
affect its existing utility lines.
   (B)   In order to expedite horizontal location of utility lines, each
utility operator shall:
      1.   Provide locating services to mark all facilities affected by the
excavation.
      2.   Provide to designing engineers, horizontal location data on its
utility lines prior to field survey for designing new work so that such
information on existing utility lines may be included in survey notes.
      3.   Have the option to allow the locating crew of another utility
operator to horizontally locate said facilities, provided clearance to do so
has been given in writing. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
8-12-10: PLASTIC INSTALLATION:
When in the installation of a utility line the line is of a nonferrous
material, an effective device shall also be installed such that locating
equipment can readily indicate horizontal location. (Method must be authorized
by utility operator.) (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
8-12-11: BACKFILLING:
When installation or repairs to utility lines has been completed an inspection
must be made by all utility operators concerned and authorization to proceed
with backfilling must precede any coverage of such lines. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-
1975)
8-12-12: DEMOLITION CLEARANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-12-13: HAZARDOUS AND EMERGENCY PROCEDURES:
   (A)   The Contractor:
      1.   When any person damages a utility line, or the protective coating
thereof, or accidently exposes or severs a utility line during excavation, an
emergency condition shall be deemed to exist and the utility operator of such
line shall be directly notified at that time. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
      2.   When any gas or flammable liquid utility line is severed, or damaged
to the extent that there is escapement of its contents, a hazardous condition
shall be deemed to exist and the utility operator of such line shall be
immediately notified.
      3.   Contractors shall display in plain sight on the instrument, or
control panel, or dash of all trucks and mechanized equipment operated by them,
the current telephone number(s) which is to be utilized to serve hazardous
condition notice as required in subsection (A)2 of this section.
      4.   The telephone numbers to be utilized in serving emergency condition
notice as required above shall be located at least on the site.
      5.   It shall be unlawful to backfill around a damaged utility line, as
described in subsections (A)1 and (A)2 of this section until the utility
operator of said line has been notified of such incident and has repaired the
damage and/or has given clearance to backfill in writing.
      6.   During emergency or hazardous conditions, it shall be lawful to
excavate, without using blasting, if notification as required in subsections
(A)1 and (A)2 of this section is given as soon as reasonably possible.
   (B)   The Utility Operator:
      1.   All utility operators shall make available on a twenty four (24)
hour basis, adequate emergency response crew(s) capable of performing all work
tasks necessary to cope with emergency or hazardous situation.
      2.   The decision to shut off a utility line during a hazardous condition
shall be vested in an appropriate representative of the utility company
concerned.
      3.   When adequate utility operator emergency response crews are not
available during a hazardous condition, the utility operator involved shall
employ other personnel to take the necessary action to shut off specific
utility valves or breakers serving the area.
         (a)   In order to facilitate this, the utility operator shall have
knowledge of and access to emergency shut off valves and breakers. In addition,
effective ninety (90) days after the adoption of this chapter, the appropriate
staff of that utility shall be trained in the use of implements employed to
shut off a utility line during a hazardous condition. Information and training
is to be provided by and through the cooperation of utility operator
representatives.
         (b)   Only the appropriate utility line representatives shall be
permitted to reopen any valve or breaker which was closed during such a
hazardous condition and only after a thorough check has indicated that it is
safe to place the affected lines back in service.
         (c)   The provisions of this subsection shall not be mandatory upon
the operators of flammable, natural, toxic or corrosive gas transmission
pipelines during a hazardous condition. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
8-12-14: STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES:
   (A)   The horizontal location of all existing underground utility lines and
those underground utility lines proposed by any utility supplier shall be
indicated on all site plans, subdivision plans, or engineering plans prior to
City approval.
   (B)   Depending upon the size and importance of the utility line to be
affected, the affected utility supplier shall determine whether or not an
inspection by its representatives at the site of excavation is necessary during
the crossing of its utility lines.
   (C)   Preconstruction meetings between contractors and utility operators
should be scheduled prior to all excavation projects. (Ord. 13/75, 11-17-1975)
8-12-15: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with
or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be
subject to a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code.
(Ord. 24/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 13
NATURAL GAS SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-13-1:   Application For Taps And Service Connections
8-13-2:   Cost Of Taps And Connections
8-13-3:   Specifications For Regular Gas Service Connections
8-13-4:   Meters
8-13-5:   Inspections
8-13-6:   Meter Reading Conclusive
8-13-7:   Test Of Meters
8-13-8:   Separate Meters For Each Distinct Premises
8-13-9:   Damage To Equipment
8-13-10:   Parties Liable For Payment For Gas Service; Delinquent Gas Bills To
Be Liens Upon The Real Estate
8-13-11:   Gas Rate Schedule
8-13-12:   Service Discontinued; Renewal
8-13-13:   Interruption In Service Or Supply; City Not Liable
8-13-14:   Connection With Private Lines
8-13-15:   Regulations; Customers
8-13-16:   Rules; Contract
8-13-17:   Extensions
8-13-18:   Tampering With System
8-13-19:   Gas Committee
8-13-20:   Budget Billing Of Natural Gas
8-13-21:   Payment Of Charges
8-13-22:   Delinquent Bills; Payment In Installments
8-13-23:   Delinquent Customers; New Connections
8-13-1: APPLICATION FOR TAPS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Applicant Requirements: Prior to connecting to the City of Aledo
natural gas distribution system the applicant shall complete an application for
gas connection, notice to applicants for natural gas service in the City of
Aledo, easement and excess flow valve request form. Only after completing each
of these documents shall the applicant be considered for City of Aledo natural
gas service.
   (B)   Definition Of Space Heating Customer: For the purpose of permitting
the personnel of the Gas Department to classify the various types of gas
services, only the following type of service shall be considered a space
heating service: any single piece of gas fired equipment having a maximum input
rating of more than seventy five thousand (75,000) BTU per hour. (Ord. 7/01, 7-
16-2001)
8-13-2: COST OF TAPS AND CONNECTIONS:
For all regular three-fourths inch (3/4") taps and service connections the City
will furnish and install a valve, service tee, service pipe, connection
fittings, regulator, meter and necessary stopcocks for all complete connections
made within the City limits and upon payment of the initial application fee
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. The maximum length of
service line to be installed at this cost shall be one hundred feet (100') from
the property line and such additional lengths required are to be paid for by
the customer at a rate pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code.
For all taps in excess of three-fourths inch (3/4") material, the City shall
charge the cost assessed to the City which exceeds that regular three-fourths
inch (3/4") material, meter and installation cost in addition to the initial
application fee. An additional fee shall be paid pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code for each residential three-fourths inch (3/4")
meter in excess of the first meter installed to the same premises. All hardware
furnished and installed by the City, including, without limitation, the valve,
service tee, service pipe, connection fittings, regulator, meter and necessary
stopcocks, shall remain the property of the City.
Where service lines can be installed in a location which will permit the
servicing of two (2) customers, the maximum length to be installed from the
property line shall be one hundred fifty feet (150').
Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing paragraphs pertaining to the
payment by the applicant as to the cost and installation of taps and
connections required to connect to the City natural gas system, any premises
connecting to the City natural gas system which is owned by a governmental unit
shall be subject to the following provision regarding payment and allocation
between the City and the respective governmental unit of the cost and
installation of any taps and service connections required to connect the
premises in question to the natural gas system operated by the City. In such
case, payment and allocation of the cost of taps and connections between the
City and the governmental unit in question incurred in order to connect the
premises to the natural gas system owned by the City shall be made as the
parties may agree before the connection is made.
For business or industrial purposes or for special space heating requirements
requiring larger than three-fourths inch (3/4") service pipe with incidental
larger fittings, stopcocks, regulators and meters, these service connections
shall be made in a like manner and the service line in excess of seventy five
feet (75') from the property line shall be paid for at actual cost to the City,
provided that upon application therefor, special permission may be granted by
the Council authorizing the applicant to make such service connections at their
own expense under the supervision of and subject to such reasonable conditions
and regulations as may be prescribed by such permit, none of these conditions
are to be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
Failure to continue minimum monthly payments for the time specified shall
automatically forfeit the applicant's right for a free service connection.
Any applicant for service for space heating purposes must have his space
heating equipment installed and ready for service by or before September 1,
1958, in order to hold his application. A firm contract for installation of
such space heating equipment shall be considered adequate evidence of good
faith and shall be accepted in lieu of the actual equipment installation date
as specified herein. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-13-3: SPECIFICATIONS FOR REGULAR GAS SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
All gas service connections made to the gas mains of the distribution system of
the City shall be substantially as follows:
   (A)   The connection at the main shall consist of a valved service tee for
three-fourths inch (3/4") ID field pipe. Valve tees shall be welded in a
workmanlike manner to the main. The connection with the service tee shall be
made with a black iron street ell, nipple and insulated union. Service lines
shall consist of three-fourths inch (3/4") black iron pipe, coated and wrapped
to protect it against corrosion, which shall be laid approximately eighteen
inches (18") below the ground surface. Service lines shall be extended above
the ground surface approximately one foot (1') at or near the building to be
serviced and fitted with a three-fourths inch (3/4") black iron stopcock. Prior
to drilling the main for gas service, the aforementioned service line shall be
tested at one hundred (100) pounds' pressure. The regulator and meters shall be
capable of handling a sufficient volume of gas to serve the needs of the
customer. All materials and construction procedure shall conform to the latest
standards of the American Gas Association.
   (B)   Wherever it is necessary for service lines to cross under high type
pavements, the service line shall be installed by boring or jacking the service
line through underneath the pavement from a point six feet (6') outside of the
pavement to six feet (6') beyond the edge of the pavement. Copper pipe Type "K"
shall be used for this installation and shall be joined to standard black iron
service lines by means of dresser couplings and insulating adapter gaskets. The
insulating adapter gaskets shall be "Mueller" Catalog No. H-11499 or approved
equal.
   (C)   All lines and fittings shall be capable of withstanding a working
pressure of not less than one hundred twenty five (125) psi and shall be so
rated by the manufacturer. One fitting of the meter swivel shall be insulated.
   (D)   Service connections, where the gas consumption will be in excess of
the capacity of the above specifications, shall be made in the manner specified
by the engineer or Superintendent of Public Utilities. (Ord. 10/67, 2-5-1968;
amd. Ord. 6/72, 12-4-1972, eff. 1-1-1973; Ord. 6/74, 8-1-1974)
8-13-4: METERS:
   (A)   Size And Installation: All gas service shall be metered with a meter
of adequate size to measure the amount of gas consumed. Meters shall be of the
positive type and shall be American Gas Association approved.
   All meters shall be so placed and installed as to render the same accessible
at all times for the purpose of reading and repairing. All meters shall be set
outside of the buildings wherever practical. Indoor installations must be
vented with an adequate vent extending to the outside. (Ord. 10/67, 2-5-1968;
amd. Ord. 6/72, 12-4-1972, eff. 1-1-1973; Ord. 6/74, 8-1-1974)
   (B)   Meter Deposit Application: In those cases where the applicant
requesting service is a tenant, contract purchaser, or a trustee of an Illinois
land trust, the applicant shall also be required to state the capacity in which
he makes application for such service as a condition of approval of the
application, and in those cases, the landlord, contract seller or each
beneficiary of the land trustee, depending upon whatever the case may be, must
also sign the City's meter deposit application form, indicating not only the
capacity in which he signs such form, but also his correct legal mailing
address, including zip code. The City's meter deposit application form shall
state that the owner or occupant of any service is jointly or severally liable
to pay for all utilities furnished to the premises, and in the event any bill
is not paid within thirty (30) days after its rendition, the delinquent bill
shall constitute a lien against the premises. The City Clerk may record a
notice of lien in the Office of the Mercer County Recorder of Deeds in the
event the outstanding balance on any account that is delinquent by more than
thirty (30) days exceeds two hundred dollars ($200.00), and the City Clerk
shall record a notice of lien in the Office of the Mercer County Recorder of
Deeds in the event the outstanding balance on any account that is delinquent by
more than thirty (30) days exceeds three (3) times the monthly average gas bill
for such account over the preceding twelve (12) month period. In addition to
the meter deposit application form, each applicant who is a tenant, contract
purchaser or a trustee of an Illinois land trust for the premises for which the
application is made shall be required to accompany his application with a
deposit pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code to be known as a
meter deposit fee and the deposit proceeds may be used to pay delinquent gas,
water and sewer or service charges or refunded as provided below.
   The meter deposit fee shall be deposited in the Meter Deposit Fund and in
the event any customer discontinues service and has paid in full all amounts
due for gas, water and sewer and service charges, then the full amount of the
deposit shall be refunded. However, in the event that any amounts are due from
said customer, either for gas, water and sewer or service charges, then such
amounts shall be deducted and paid into the proper fund and the balance shall
be refunded.
   Any tenant, contract purchaser or trustee of an Illinois land trust who has
paid a deposit and later becomes the owner of record of the property served
shall, upon application to the City, be refunded his deposit. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-
5-2017)
8-13-5: INSPECTIONS:
At all reasonable hours, meters, regulators, fittings, fixtures and
appurtenances connected with the system and located on private property shall
be open for inspection by the proper officers and employees of the City. Any
part found to be defective or not in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be immediately repaired or corrected. Service may be discontinued
at any time when conditions of the privately owned facilities create danger or
hazard. (Ord. 10/67, 2-5-1968; amd. Ord. 6/72, 12-4-1972, eff. 1-1-1973; Ord.
6/74, 8-1-1974)
8-13-6: METER READING CONCLUSIVE:
All gas customers shall be liable for the gas consumption as shown by the
meter. Waste, leakage or other causes not the liability of the City shall be
included under said liability. The meter reading shall be conclusive provided
that whenever the City shall find any meter not registering, then an average
bill may be rendered based at the option of the City, on either the nearest
previous three (3) months' average use, when meter was in good order, or based
on the same month or months of the preceding year. Whenever the City shall have
reason to believe that the meter is not registering correctly, then an average
bill as stated above may be rendered and the meter removed for testing. If such
average bill should prove to be incorrectly estimated, either by actual
testing, or by actual gas consumption, after being replaced by a corrected
meter, then such bill shall be compared to the same. (Ord. 10/67, 2-5-1968;
amd. Ord. 6/72, 12-4-1972, eff. 1-1-1973; Ord. 6/74, 8-1-1974)
8-13-7: TEST OF METERS:
Any consumer may request the City to make a test of the accuracy of the meter
then in use on their premises. Prior to conducting the test the consumer shall
be required to deposit with the City a fee pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of
Fees", of this Code for a residential meter testing conducted by the City. In
the event that an independent test is requested or required, the deposit shall
be the amount necessary to cover all expenses associated therewith.
In the event such meter is found by testing to register incorrectly at full
capacity by more than two percent (2%) then another accurate meter shall be
substituted and the test deposit shall be refunded. Past gas bills shall be
adjusted by refund or credit of such percentage of the amount of the gas bills
for a period of not more than two (2) months previous to such test.
In the event that the meter is found to be registering at two percent (2%) or
less error the consumer shall forfeit the test deposit and such funds shall be
deposited in the gas operating funds of the City. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-13-8: SEPARATE METERS FOR EACH DISTINCT PREMISES:
No person shall connect any gas service pipe or transmit gas supplied by the
natural gas system of the City into two (2) distinct premises from one meter.
Apartment buildings having separate dwelling units may be serviced from a
single meter. Duplex dwellings shall be serviced from individual meters. (Ord.
10/67, 2-5-1968; amd. Ord. 6/72, 12-4-1972, eff. 1-1-1973; Ord. 6/74, 8-1-1974)
8-13-9: DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT:
Whenever a meter, regulator or other equipment of a service connection which
has been installed by the City is found to have been damaged for any cause
whatsoever, such damages shall become the liability of the customer who shall
pay the City the actual cost of removal, repairing and/or replacing of such
damaged equipment.
In the event such damage has caused inaccurate metering, then such gas bills
shall be corrected in the manner previously provided for herein to cover such
period that the meter was out of order. (Ord. 10/67, 2-5-1968; amd. Ord. 6/72,
12-4-1972, eff. 1-1-1973; Ord. 6/74, 8-1-1974)
8-13-10: PARTIES LIABLE FOR PAYMENT FOR GAS SERVICE; DELINQUENT GAS BILLS TO BE
LIENS UPON THE REAL ESTATE:
The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the gas service furnished to said premises and the
gas service is furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition
that the owner of the premises and the occupant thereof are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the City. The City reserves the right to stop any
gas service when billings for gas service are delinquent and have not been paid
by said owner or occupant within thirty (30) days of the date of rendition.
Furthermore, all gas bills not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of
rendition, which are deemed to be delinquent as provided below, shall
constitute liens upon the real estate for which such services are supplied, and
the Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing
such delinquencies in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Mercer County,
Illinois, and the filing of such statement(s) shall be deemed notice for the
nonpayment of such charges for such gas service. (Ord. 10/67, 2-5-1968)
8-13-11: GAS RATE SCHEDULE:
All natural gas furnished to any City gas customer shall be subject to a
combination of variable and flat rates. Each gas customer shall pay a meter/
facility fee in the fixed amount of $14.00 per month per meter. Gas rates shall
be based upon a fixed distribution charge of $2.50 per 1,000 cubic feet (or
part thereof) used by each customer, plus 102% of the actual cost incurred by
the city for its purchase of gas, as set forth in title 13, "Schedule Of Fees",
of this Code. Non-residents of the City will be billed a twice the rate of
residents; provided however, that natural gas furnished to a customer for use
on land that is: a) used for farming purposes, b) comprised of ten (10) acres
or more, and c) located outside of the corporate limits of the City shall be
charged the gas rate determined by the City for resident customers. In the
event that such farmland subsequently is subdivided to be comprised of less
than ten (10) acres, the gas rate for non-resident customers shall be
applicable.
The natural gas rate shall be effective with the consumption beginning with
meter readings for January 2020 gas usage, to be billed in February 2020, and
shall continue from month to month until such time that the Corporate
Authorities deem it appropriate to amend the rates by ordinance.
If any statement for natural gas service is not paid by the fifth day of the
month following its date of rendition, the account shall be considered
delinquent and a service charge of three percent (3%) for each month or
fraction of a month shall be assessed on the outstanding amount due at the
close of the fifth day of the month following the month during which the
statement in question was rendered, excluding any service charges previously
assessed thereon.
Any consumer refusing or neglecting to pay his statement for a period of thirty
(30) days subsequent to its rendition shall be deprived of the use of gas and
the City shall stop all gas supply to such consumer until such time that all
past due statements are paid including all penalty charges.
Accounts that remain delinquent for more than sixty (60) days, shall incur an
additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) administrative service fee one the
sixty-first (61st) day following the rendition of the bill for service. (Ord.
18/2018, 12-4-2018; amd. Ord. 50/2019, 1-6-2020; Ord. 08/2024, 4-1-2024)
8-13-12: SERVICE DISCONTINUED; RENEWAL:
The City reserves the right to discontinue gas service to any premises on
account of nonpayment of any charges, or where the owner or tenant of such
premises has been found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter. Where such service is discontinued and the gas is shut off or stopped,
whether by the City or at the request of the property owner, the gas shall not
again be turned on or supplied to such premises until all such delinquent
charges due the City have been paid and there is no existing default or
violation of any of the provisions of the several sections of this chapter. A
written application shall be filed with the Clerk for the renewal of such
service, which application shall be accompanied by a fee pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code to pay for the shutting off and turning on of
the gas service. No customer shall be permitted to use the stopcock of the
service connection for shutting off gas while making extensions, additions, or
repairs to the pipe or equipment on the premises. Such shutoff or
discontinuance or interruption of service will be made only by the City or its
properly authorized employees. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
8-13-13: INTERRUPTION IN SERVICE OR SUPPLY; CITY NOT LIABLE:
The City shall have the right to shut off the supply of gas whenever it is
necessary to make repairs, improvements, enforce rules or for any operating
reason. In all cases, where possible, a reasonable notice of the circumstances
will be given to the customers, but in an emergency the gas may be shut off
without notice. Such necessary repairs or work will be made by the City as
rapidly as may be practical. The City shall not be held responsible or liable
because of any shutoff or discontinuance of service for any direct or resultant
damages to any person, company or customer.
In the event of such discontinuance of gas service, the city will make every
attempt to safeguard the customer and service shall not be renewed until the
city authorities have purged the lines and put into service all automatic
controls and pilots. The cost of purging of lines, relighting pilots, and
checking automatic controls will be borne by the city and the customer will not
be liable for any portion thereof. Where the nature of the customer's
operations are such that an interruption of service might create a hazard or
large economic loss, such customer shall provide facilities for standby service
if desired.
Whenever mains, pipes, service connections or other facilities of the gas
system are taken up, shut off or interfered with by reasons of any city street
improvement, the city will endeavor to maintain service so far as is reasonably
possible, but will not be directly or indirectly liable for any interruption,
poor pressure or damage of any kind either to the customers adjacent or to
other customers affected thereby. Direct damage to property due to such
operations shall be either repaired or replaced by the city without cost to the
customer.
The city expressly stipulates with all customers and other persons who may be
affected by the discontinuance of service that it will neither insure nor be
responsible or liable in any manner for any loss or damages direct or indirect
by any reason of any fire, or any other cause and all gas service furnished
shall also be conditional upon acts of God, inevitable accidents, fire,
strikes, riots, or any other causes. (Ord. 4/56, 3-4-1957)
8-13-14: CONNECTION WITH PRIVATE LINES:
Whenever a connection is made with a private line, such service shall be
metered at the point of such connection and the customer requesting such
service shall provide a satisfactory location for the placing of such metering
devices, regulators and other materials and equipment required. Such private
lines shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city prior to
making the necessary service connections.
The city shall have the right and option to demand charges, removal or
replacement of any pipe, fixtures or apparatus which is considered to be
faulty, inadequate or hazardous; provided, however, that this provision shall
not obligate the city in any way or manner. The city shall have the right to
refuse or to discontinue gas service without notice to its customers if the
city finds any apparatus or appliance in operation which would be detrimental
to the efficient operation of the existing facilities.
All persons are strictly forbidden to attach any electrical ground wire to any
fixture or piping which is or may be connected to any gas service pipe, meter
or main belonging to the city. The city will hold the owner of the premises
responsible and liable for any damage to its property or injury to the
employees of the city caused by such ground wire. Any and all customers shall
remove any existing ground wires immediately and if such ground wires are not
removed after twenty four (24) hours' written notice, the city through its
officials, may enter the property and remove such ground wires and the customer
shall pay all costs. All questions and complaints shall be made to the gas
department of the city who shall be responsible for proper investigation. The
department shall be required to make a full report to the customer in all such
cases, a copy of which shall be filed with the clerk and reported by him to the
council at the next regular meeting. Any disrespectful or unwarranted acts of
the city employees shall be reported immediately. All employees of the city are
strictly forbidden to demand or accept any tips, gratuity, or other personal
compensation for any services whatsoever rendered during working hours. (Ord.
4/56, 3-4-1957)
8-13-15: REGULATIONS; CUSTOMERS:
All house piping shall be of rigid construction. The pipe from the outlet of
the meter shall be of iron pipe of not less than one inch (1") inside diameter
and shall enter the house wall or be securely fastened to the wall by means of
suitable metal strap or clamp at a point not more than eighteen inches (18")
from the outlet connection of the meter, and if extended along the outside wall
shall be fastened to the wall at intervals sufficient to make the piping rigid
throughout. In instances where piping from meter enters the wall, the opposite
end shall be securely fastened so that pipe will not turn when fittings at the
meter are put on. The piping from the meter through or along the wall shall
constitute, and hereinafter be called the "house pipe manifold". The one inch
(1") manifold will be used where the total hourly demand for gas does not
exceed four hundred (400) cubic feet per hour. Where the total hourly demand of
a building or house is in excess of four hundred (400) cubic feet of gas per
hour the city engineering department must be consulted for specifications for
the house pipe manifold.
From any house pipe manifold, pipe to the various appliances shall be of the
same dimensions as the fitting on the appliance where such appliance is
designed and approved for natural gas. Where appliances are to be converted
from liquefied petroleum gas, pipe from the manifold to the appliance shall be
of such size as would be approved by the American Gas Association for natural
gas appliances having the same BTU input rating.
From the house pipe manifold any appliance pipe may be extended a maximum
distance of forty (40) linear feet. For each ninety degree (90°) turn in the
appliance pipe three (3) linear feet shall be deducted from the maximum
distance. Copper pipe may be substituted for iron pipe from the manifold to the
appliance. Copper pipe must have OD dimension equivalent to ID of standard iron
pipe. Only type K copper pipe may be used. All copper fittings must be of flare
type only. When copper tubing is used, insulated copper to iron fittings must
be used at the meter end and appliance end of the tubing.
No connection will be made with any house type manifold that has not been
tested for leakage.
All gas conversion burners to be installed,shall be AGA approved. All designed
heating plants shall be AGA approved and the manufacturer's recommendations for
the installation shall be followed.
No conversion burner shall be installed in an old or inefficient warm air
furnace which is in poor repair or in an old or leaky boiler which is in poor
repair. Test for leakage shall be with oil of wintergreen or smoke bomb on any
warm air heating plant before installing a conversion burner. Furnaces must be
reset if found to be leaking.
Before connecting a flue or vent connector into any chimney, the chimney shall
be examined to ascertain that it is properly constructed, clear, clean and will
freely conduct the products of combustion from the gas heating appliance in
question to the outer air.
All appliances, excepting cook stoves, with over eight thousand (8,000) BTU per
hour input rating must be vented. No unvented appliance excepting cook stoves,
shall be placed in the same room with a gas refrigerator. An approved type vent
pipe and draft diverter shall be installed on all gas burning space heating and
water heating appliances; vent pipe shall be installed with not less than one-
half inch (1/2") rise per foot of horizontal run. General rules for venting as
prescribed by AGA must be followed.
All positive type catches on the firing door shall be eliminated and a hinge
pin and spring be installed.
All heating plants of the down draft type shall be vented by connecting a one
inch (1") black iron pipe from the highest point of the flue passage of the
heating plant to the flue pipe. The one inch (1") iron pipe shall be welded or
screwed into the furnace in a manner to assure no leakage.
A gas shutoff shall be installed in the fuel line directly above the appliance
manifold connection. Said shutoff to be plainly marked. Gas pilot line shall be
connected to fuel line ahead of main shutoff valve.
A high limit control shall be installed on all heating plants. A low water
cutoff control shall be installed on all gas fired steam boilers.
All gas burning appliances shall be installed in a location in which the
facilities for ventilation permit satisfactory combustion of gas and proper
venting under normal conditions of use. The necessary measures shall be taken
to ascertain that the above ventilation conditions are present.
The final tie in of the gas line to the meter shall be made by the city. Before
the final tie is made it shall be the duty of the city gas department to make a
complete inspection. (Ord. 4/56, 3-4-1957)
8-13-16: RULES; CONTRACT:
All the rules and regulations concerning the natural gas system of the city and
the consumption of gas therefrom shall become a part of the contract with every
gas customer, and every gas customer shall be subject thereto and bound
thereby. (Ord. 4/56, 3-4-1957)
8-13-17: EXTENSIONS:
The city shall not be required to extend mains and service within the city
limits, a distance of more than one hundred feet (100') per customer and only
then when sufficient funds are available in excess of those required for the
proper operation of the system. Extension of mains and service outside of the
city limits shall be subject to approval of the council and shall be also
subject to all of the rules and regulations and provisions as provided herein
or as may be amended. (Ord. 4/56, 3-4-1957; amd. Ord. 9/74, 12-2-1974)
Where service is desired when funds for extensions are not available or/and
when the distance is in excess of the one hundred feet (100') per customer
noted above, such extension can be made if the applicant will deposit with the
city the estimated cost of making the extension, less one hundred feet (100')
when funds are available, or the entire amount when funds are not available.
The amounts so deposited shall be refunded to such consumer or consumers at the
rate of fifty percent (50%) of each monthly billing until the total deposited
has been refunded. Such deposit shall be interest free. In the event that the
amount deposited is greater or less than the actual cost of the extension, such
excess or deficiency shall be corrected prior to giving service.
Deposits made under the provisions of this section shall not exempt the
applicant from the payment of all other charges required by this chapter.
Amounts received by the city for such extensions shall be deposited in the
meter deposit fund and payments for refunds shall likewise be paid from the
same fund. (Ord. 4/56, 3-4-1957)
8-13-18: TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to break the seal of any meter or in any
manner to make any alterations, changes or repairs on the same or to open any
mains, laterals, service pipe, stopcocks, valves, or any part thereof or
otherwise tamper with or attempt to do any work on either or any of them
without authority of the city or its properly authorized agent. Any person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this section or who shall wilfully or
maliciously injure or damage any property connected with the gas system of the
city shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter prescribed. (Ord. 4/56, 3-4-
1957)
8-3-19: GAS COMMITTEE:
The mayor shall appoint a committee of four (4) members of the council as a gas
committee, one of whom shall be appointed as chairman. It shall be the gas
committee's duty to confer with the duly authorized agent appointed to operate
and maintain the gas system of the city and to institute such additional rules
and regulations for the operation of the gas department as may be required for
its efficient operation from time to time. All action of the committee shall be
subject to the approval of the council. (Ord. 4/56, 3-4-1957; amd. Ord. 9/74,
12-2-1974)
8-13-20: BUDGET BILLING OF NATURAL GAS:
Notwithstanding the billing procedures for natural gas based on actual usage
set forth in section
8-13-11 of this chapter, customers of the natural gas utility operated by the
city of Aledo shall have the right to elect budget billing of natural gas,
which will equalize each monthly bill for said gas usage as nearly as is
possible under the circumstances, provided that said budget billing shall be
offered by the city to all its customers upon the terms and conditions as
hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   Each customer electing the benefits of budget billing shall execute a
written contract incorporating all the terms and conditions for budget billing
as set forth in the ordinance codified herein. In the event there is more than
one owner or occupant of the premises on which budget billing is elected, then
all owners or all tenants of the premises in question must execute the written
contract required in this section before the benefits of budget billing shall
be made available to anyone requesting said billing method for natural gas.
   (B)   Each customer electing budget billing shall indicate to the city clerk
whether a fiscal budget year beginning May 1 or June 1 is desired, which
election once made is binding upon the customer for that respective fiscal
budget year. The city clerk shall have the right to assume that the customer
desires the same fiscal budget year for all subsequent periods during which
budget billing is in effect unless the customer notifies the city clerk in
writing thirty five (35) days before the last day of the then current fiscal
budget year in question that a new fiscal budget year as defined herein is
desired by the customer.
   (C)   Subject to the right of the city to adjust the monthly budget bill as
provided in subsection (G) of this section, the city clerk and the director of
public works and utilities shall cooperate in computing the monthly budget bill
for the customer and shall use the following formula in computing the monthly
budget bill: 1) the actual use of natural gas by the premises in question for
the most recent eleven (11) consecutive billing periods prior to the first day
of the fiscal budget year in question for said customer shall be totaled and
then divided by eleven (11); 2) the then current gas rate for natural gas for
said type of customer as of the first day of the fiscal budget year in question
for said customer shall be multiplied by one hundred ten percent (110%); and 3)
the quotient computed in part 1) of this subsection shall be multiplied by the
product computed in part 2) of this subsection, which product shall be equal to
the monthly budget bill.
   Subject to the provisions of subsection (G) of this section, the customer
will be billed in eleven (11) equal monthly installments, said billing period
to begin on May 1 or June 1 of the fiscal budget year in question, with the
first budget bill to be rendered during June or July of the fiscal budget year
in question, said month depending upon the fiscal budget year last elected by
the customer. In the month of April or May, following, depending upon whatever
the case may be, the customer will be billed for actual gas used in that
billing period plus any amount necessary to bring total payments in balance
with the total use for the twelve (12) month period ending on the last day of
the last regular billing period for the fiscal budget year in question for said
customer. If the customer's total payments exceed the total gas usage, a refund
will be made by the city within a reasonable time, but not to exceed forty five
(45) days after the last day of the particular fiscal budget year last elected
by the customer.
   (D)   Each monthly budget statement will show the consumption of natural gas
for the billing period, the cost thereof, the budget balance existing on the
last day of the billing period, and the amount of the normal monthly budget
payment due.
   (E)   All budget statements not paid by the fifth day of the month following
the month of rendition of such statement are subject to an additional ten
percent (10%) charge on the amount of the monthly budget bill to cover the cost
of administration and if not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of
rendition, the account shall be considered delinquent on said date with the
following consequences:
      1.   The privilege of budget billing for said customer shall be
immediately revoked;
      2.   The customer shall not have the right to elect again budget billing
for the fiscal year in question;
      3.   The city shall have the right to terminate its gas service to the
customer as soon as the customer's credit balance, if any, for purchases of
natural gas has been depleted; and
      4.   If the customer owes the city for natural gas purchased, the city
may institute suit against the customer for the delinquent amount owed,
including penalty charges, plus an assessment of reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the city in instituting said suit and postjudgment proceedings, if
necessary.
   (F)   Anyone desiring to elect the benefit of budget billing must meet the
following requirements:
   The premises using the city's natural gas service must have been hooked up
to the city's natural gas system for at least eleven (11) consecutive months
prior to the beginning of the fiscal budget year selected by the customer for
budget billing.
   In addition, budget billing shall be available only to a customer who
executes an agreement and begins making the agreed monthly budget payments in
June or July as provided in said agreement, except a customer who executes an
agreement after the beginning of his selected fiscal budget year may still
elect the benefits of budget billing upon condition that the customer pays, if
necessary, in one lump sum, a sufficient amount so that the customer shall have
paid to the city the sum of all monthly budget bills due beginning with the
first month of the fiscal year selected through the end of the month during
which the agreement was executed. Failure by the customer to make said lump sum
payment, if required, on or before the fifth day of the month following the
month of rendition of a statement for said amount, shall result in the customer
being subject to those provisions set forth in subsection (E) of this section.
   (G)   There are many factors that affect the cost and usage of natural gas
supplied to any particular premises, including, but not limited to, an increase
in the cost of natural gas purchased by the city from its supplier,
installation of additional appliances or equipment in the premises that use
natural gas, and/or abnormal changes in normal expected weather conditions. Due
to said factors, the city hereby reserves the right to revise the monthly
budget bill from time to time to adjust for such factors when said change in
rates or usage variations from the estimated quantities are substantial. The
director of public works and utilities and the city clerk may adopt reasonable
rules and regulations required for determining the standards when said monthly
budget bills may be revised pursuant to the provisions of this section.
Furthermore, the city clerk and the director of public works and utilities
shall have the right to consult with and rely upon the opinion of outside
engineers or other qualified experts recognized in the field of natural gas
usage and cost thereof in determining when and to what extent monthly budget
bills need to be adjusted.
   (H)   Any agreement, once signed, shall automatically renew itself for an
additional identical budget fiscal year last elected by the customer unless
either party to the written agreement notifies the other in writing thirty five
(35) days before the last day of the fiscal budget year in question that said
party desires to terminate the agreement providing for budget billing.
   (I)   The written agreement shall be binding on all successors and assigns
of each party to said agreement, subject to the limited exception set forth in
subsection (J) of this section.
   (J)   If a customer electing budget billing sells the premises in question,
or if the customer is a tenant under a lease, then budget billing for natural
gas shall cease as of the date the customer relinquishes possession of the
premises. The customer shall have the responsibility of notifying the city not
less than five (5) days prior to the date that possession will be relinquished.
Failure to notify shall result in the city having the right to base its
settlement as hereinafter defined as of a normal working day not more than
seven (7) days after notice is finally given to the city by the customer.
Settlement under this subsection shall be made on the basis of the customer
being billed for the actual gas used during the regular billing period in
question when possession will be relinquished from the first day of said
regular billing period through the date possession is relinquished (or a date
not more than 7 days after notice is finally given the City by the customer of
a sale or the termination of a lease in the event the customer fails to give
notice thereof to the City 5 days before the date that possession will be
relinquished). In addition, the customer shall be billed an amount necessary to
bring the total payments in balance with the total actual use for the regular
billing periods from the first day of the fiscal budget year in question
through the last day of the regular billing period prior to the billing period
in which notice is finally given by the customer to the City that a sale or
lease terminating either will or has occurred and either a relinquishment of
possession will occur on a given date or has occurred as of a certain date. If
the customer's total payments exceed the total gas usage for the entire period
defined in the previous two (2) sentences, a refund will be made by the City
within a reasonable time, but not to exceed forty five (45) days after the date
that the customer finally gives notice to the City under the provisions of this
subsection.
   Termination under this subsection shall not release the customer of any
liabilities created by reason of the written agreement. Furthermore, in case of
the death or incompetency of the customer, the customer's duly authorized
personal representative shall have the obligation of carrying out the terms and
provisions of not only this subsection, but the entire ordinance, including,
but not limited to, any notice requirements provided for herein.
   (K)   The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized on behalf of the
City to sign each agreement, incorporating the terms and conditions of the
ordinance codified herein, under which budget billing shall be made available
to any customer requesting said billing method for natural gas service. (Ord.
7/77, 7-18-1977)
8-13-21: PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
   (A)   Notwithstanding the payment provisions of sections
8-13-11 and
8-13-20 of this chapter, any customer of the City natural gas system during
calendar years 1979-1980 who is eligible for assistance in payment of natural
gas used as primary heating source of his or her individual residence,
depending upon whatever the case may be, shall be deemed to be a member of a
special class of customer of the natural gas system owner and operated by the
City and accordingly, said customer shall be subject to those rules of payment
for the use of natural gas during those periods of time as hereinafter set
forth.
   (B)   In lieu of only direct payments for use of natural gas by customers
eligible for assistance under the 1979-1980 federally funded Energy Crisis
Assistance Program, the City hereby agrees to accept payment from the agency
administering assistance payments under the 1979-1980 Energy Crisis Assistance
Program to be applied first against any existing indebtedness owed by such
customers for the use of natural gas as of December 1, 1979, if any, and then
said assistance payments shall be then applied against any charges for natural
gas used and consumed by such customers for that period of time beginning on
December 1, 1979, and ending on September 30, 1980, unless said period is ended
sooner due to termination of the election to receive benefits under the Energy
Crisis Assistance Program by the City or the agency in question terminates
benefits under said program by proper notice to the City or the customer
discontinues the natural gas service provided by the City. (Ord. 29/79, 1-7-
1980)
   (C)   Any assistance payments received from the agency administering the
Energy Crisis Assistance Program shall not be used to pay for any reconnection
charge levied against any such customer eligible for benefits under said Act,
said reconnection fees being authorized and permitted pursuant to title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code, nor shall such assistance payments under the
aforesaid Act be used to pay for any security deposit, if any, that may be
imposed by the City and required to be paid by any customer who has either
elected or will be electing to connect to the natural gas service owned and
operated by the City. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (D)   The City hereby agrees to credit all assistance payments received by
it as directed by the agency administering all of the benefits to be paid under
the 1979-1980 Energy Crisis Assistance Program, including, but not limited to,
the requirement that only one maximum allowable payment under said Act be
applied to the account of each such eligible person.
   (E)   The City hereby agrees to release any and all information that may be
required by the administering agency of the 1979-1980 Energy Crisis Assistance
Program in order to determine any particular customer's eligibility for
benefits under said Act, provided that said customer agrees and authorizes the
release of said information.
   (F)   The City may terminate its election to receive benefits under the
Energy Crisis Assistance Program upon giving a thirty (30) day written notice
thereof to the agency administering benefits under said Act.
   (G)   In the event an eligible customer owes any further balance due for
natural gas used as of the date of his or her application after applying the
maximum benefit due under the Energy Crisis Assistance Program, the City shall
then offer to the customer for that amount due and owing a deferred payment
arrangement or a level payment plan that is deemed reasonable and acceptable by
both the City and the customer, said plan to include payment of any
reconnection fee or security deposit.
   (H)   Any other provision in conflict herewith shall not be deemed to apply
to those customers of the natural gas system owned and operated by the City who
are eligible for assistance under the 1979-1980 Energy Crisis Assistance
Program.
   (I)   The Mayor, City Clerk, and/or the Director of Public Works and
Utilities are hereby authorized to execute and deliver with the City Seal
impressed thereon any and all documents that may be required in order for the
City to elect to receive all those benefits that it may be entitled to receive
under the provisions of the 1979-1980 Federal Energy Assistance Program. (Ord.
29/79, 1-7-1980)
8-13-22: DELINQUENT BILLS; PAYMENT IN INSTALLMENTS:
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
8-13-11 of this chapter, any gas customer of the City who has a delinquent gas
bill under the provisions of the foregoing section shall have the right to
enter into a written contract with the City providing for the payment of the
delinquent bill in three (3) equal installments thirty (30) days apart.
Moreover, the right of the customer to elect to enter into a written contract
with the City to pay any delinquent gas bill in three (3) equal installments
thirty (30) days apart shall include the obligation of the customer to pay all
current gas bills rendered by the City to the customer during the term of the
written contract in a timely manner as specified in section
8-13-11 of this chapter. If the customer shall fail to pay any equal
installment payment on or before the due date as herein provided or shall fail
to pay any current gas bill on or before due date as required pursuant to
section
8-13-11 of this chapter during the term of the written contract for the payment
of the delinquent bill, then the City shall have the right to terminate the gas
service to the customer instanter without any further notice to the customer.
   (B)   The right of any customer to pay any delinquent gas bill to the City
in the manner specified in subsection (A) of this section shall be limited to
two (2) times during any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 3/82, 6-21-1982)
   (C)   If any customer of the City gas system executes an appropriate
delinquent gas bill payment contract, then the City shall not terminate such
natural gas service to said customer during the term of the delinquent gas bill
payment contract provided that the customer complies with all terms and
conditions of the aforesaid contract. However, if natural gas service has been
terminated to the customer at the time he executes an appropriate delinquent
gas bill payment contract, then the customer shall have the right to have the
natural gas service renewed and the fee for renewal as provided in title 13,
"Schedule Of Fees", of this Code, shall be added to the delinquent gas bill and
paid off in three (3) equal installments thirty (30) days apart notwithstanding
the provisions of section
8-13-12 of this chapter, which requires that the renewal fee be paid in full
before restoration of gas service. (Ord. 16/2017, 6-5-2017)
   (D)   The written contract providing for the payment of a delinquent gas
bill in three (3) equal installments thirty (30) days apart shall require that
the first equal installment be paid in full at the time the written contract is
signed by the customer. The second equal installment shall then be paid in full
on or before thirty (30) days after the date of the written contract, and the
final equal installment shall then be paid on or before sixty (60) days after
the date of the written contract.
   (E)   In addition to the right of the customer to elect only twice within a
twelve (12) month period the right to pay any delinquent gas bill in three (3)
equal installments thirty (30) days apart, no customer shall have the right to
elect such option during the term of a written contract which is in default by
reason of the customer having failed to comply with the terms and provisions
thereof. Moreover, such customer shall be required to pay in full any such
delinquency for which he has signed a written contract before he can sign
another written contract to pay off any delinquent gas bill.
   (F)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to execute and deliver on behalf
of the City the requisite written contract providing for the payment of
delinquent gas bill(s) in three (3) equal installments thirty (30) days apart
which shall be signed by the customer electing such option.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, in any case where the
gas customer of the City is a tenant or lessee of a landowner(s), then such
right of the customer to elect to pay a delinquent gas bill in three (3) equal
installments by signing an appropriate delinquent gas bill payment contract
shall require the consent of the landowner(s).
   If the landowner(s) of any tenant or lessee desiring to elect to pay any
delinquent gas bill in three (3) equal installments refuses to sign the
delinquent gas bill payment contract, then such tenant or lessee shall not be
eligible to elect the benefits of deferred payment as herein provided. (Ord. 3/
82, 6-21-1982)
8-13-23: DELINQUENT CUSTOMERS; NEW CONNECTIONS:
No City gas customer who has a delinquent gas account shall be permitted to
secure either a new and/or additional gas service connection(s) to the City
natural gas service until all delinquent accounts of any such gas customer have
been paid in full. This prohibition shall also extend to any City gas customer
who may have elected to pay a delinquent account in three (3) equal monthly
installments as provided under section
8-13-22 of this chapter. It shall be no defense to this prohibition against new
or additional connections to the City natural gas system while an applicant has
a delinquent gas account with the City that such applicant has a contract in
good standing under the terms of section
8-13-22 of this chapter.
The term "City gas customer" whenever used herein shall include any person,
partnership, corporation or any other entity that has applied for and is
connected to the City natural gas system. It shall also include any of the
foregoing whether acting as owner, lessor, lessee or in any other capacity if
such person, partnership, corporation or other type of entity may be liable for
the payment of such delinquent gas accounts albeit that the foregoing class
description may not have been the actual applicant or the user of the gas
service that created the delinquency. (Ord. 29/82, 2-7-1983)
CHAPTER 14
ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
8-14-1:   Definitions
8-14-2:   Encroachment Unlawful
8-14-3:   Project Right Of Way Lines
8-14-4:   Permissible Encroachment
8-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA: That area lying between the project right of way
limits and the platted street limits within which the city, by concurrence in
the establishment of the project right of way lines, will permit the state to
enter to perform all necessary construction operations.
   ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained in, on, under, or over any portion of the right
of way or the roadway right of way where no project right of way line has been
established.
   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT: Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to
the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway; the permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be
constructed outside the project right of way line and not confined by adjacent
buildings.
   PROJECT RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas within the project right of way lines
established jointly by the city, state and the United States bureau of public
roads which will be free of encroachments except as hereinafter defined.
   ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect. (Ord. 2/70, 6-1-1970)
8-14-2: ENCROACHMENT UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or cause to
be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any "encroachment" (hereinabove
defined), except as provided in section
8-14-3 of this chapter, within the limits of the project right of way or
roadway right of way where no project right of way lines have been established.
(Ord. 2/70, 6-1-1970)
8-14-3: PROJECT RIGHT OF WAY LINES:
Project right of way lines have been established at the following locations:
   (A)   Along the south side of SW 3rd Street, thirty six feet (36') from the
centerline of the proposed improvement between 10th and 11th Avenues.
   (B)   Along the north side of SW 3rd Street, twenty six feet (26') north of
the centerline of the proposed improvement between College and SW Second
Avenues. (Ord. 2/70, 6-1-1970)
8-14-4: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT:
Revocable permits have been issued by the city for temporary retention of the
following permissible encroachment:
   TEEM LAUNDROMAT sign on front of building on the south side of SW 3rd Street
between SW 6th and SW 7th Avenues. (Ord. 2/70, 6-1-1970)
CHAPTER 15
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE CODE
SECTION:
8-15-1:   Title
8-15-2:   Purpose
8-15-3:   Definitions
8-15-4:   Franchise Required
8-15-5:   Grant Of Nonexclusive Authority
8-15-6:   Rules Of Grantee
8-15-7:   Franchise Territory
8-15-8:   Construction Standards
8-15-9:   Undergrounding Or Aerial Constructing Of Cable
8-15-10:   Technical Standards
8-15-11:   Lockout System
8-15-12:   Subscriber Customer Services
8-15-13:   Public Benefit Obligation
8-15-14:   Franchise Fees
8-15-15:   Insurance And Indemnification
8-15-16:   Unauthorized Connections And Modifications
8-15-17:   State Franchise Holder
8-15-18:   Penalties
8-15-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF ALEDO CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
FRANCHISE CODE. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-2: PURPOSE:
The City of Aledo finds that the development of cable television and
communications systems greatly benefit and impact the residents, commercial
activities, and businesses of the City. The City intends, by the adoption of
this chapter, to bring about the consistent development of cable television and
communications systems within the City, along with the continued operation of
such systems in such a manner that such systems are up-to-date and meet the
technological demands of its users. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words in singular form include the plural form. The word "shall" is
always mandatory. The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not
mandatory.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise
agreement to be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as defined
herein shall not be inconsistent with 47 USC section 543.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A provision of television reception,
communications and/or entertainment services distributed over a cable
communications system. This definition shall not include telecommunications
services regulated pursuant to Federal and State law as may be amended from
time to time, such as telephone communications systems.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: A system of antennas, cables, wires,
lines, towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, equipment, or
facilities used for distributing video programming to subscribers located in
City, and for producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying, storing,
processing, or distributing audio, video, digital, or other forms of electronic
signals within the City. System as defined herein shall not be inconsistent
with the definition as set forth in 47 USC section 522.
   CABLE SERVICE:
      (A)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:
         1.   Video, audio, digital and other programming services, or
         2.   Other programming service; and
      (B)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service.
   DROP: Cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber's residence to
the nearest feeder cable of the system.
   FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued by the City,
whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the
construction or operation of a system.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise award or a contractual agreement,
containing the specific provisions of a franchise granted, including referenced
specifications, franchise applications, franchise requirements, ordinances and
other related materials.
   GRANTEE: Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to a franchise agreement
with the City and in compliance with this chapter, and its agents and
employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees.
   GROSS REVENUES: All revenue received from cable service directly by the
grantee from the operation of its system within City. The term gross revenues
shall not include any fees itemized and passed through as a result of franchise
imposed requirements or any taxes or franchise fees imposed on services
furnished by grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any
municipality, state, or other governmental unit and collected by grantee for
such governmental unit. For a State franchise holder, "gross revenues" shall be
defined as provided under the State Franchise Law.
   LOCKOUT SYSTEM: An optional video programming system or an electrical or
mechanical accessory to a subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing of a
specific programming or specific channels provided by way of the cable
communication system, which includes the ability to provide parental control
over access to specific programming or specific channels.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization, or other legal entity.
   STATE FRANCHISE HOLDER: A holder of a franchise issued by the State of
Illinois to a cable and video provider pursuant to the State Franchise Law.
   STATE FRANCHISE LAW: Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 1 , as may be
amended from time to time.
   STREET: The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street,
road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive,
or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by City.
   SUBSCRIBER: Any person who lawfully receives cable service. In the case of
multiple office buildings or multiple dwelling units, the "subscriber" means
the lessee, tenant or occupant. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/21-101, et seq.
8-15-4: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a cable
communications system in the City, unless such person shall have first obtained
and shall currently hold a valid franchise from the City pursuant to a
franchise agreement or is a State franchise holder. It shall also be unlawful
for any person to provide cable service in City unless such person shall have
first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise or is a State
franchise holder. All franchises granted by City shall contain the same
substantive terms and conditions. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-5: GRANT OF NONEXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY:
   (A)   The grantee shall be permitted to construct, erect, operate and
maintain poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other
television, video, and cable conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the City of the grantee's cable communications
system in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under any street, public way,
and public place now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and
additions thereto in the City.
   (B)   The grantee's franchise shall be nonexclusive, and the City shall
reserve the right to grant a similar use of said streets, public ways, and
public places to any person at any time during the period of grantee's
franchise, provided, however, that any additional franchises granted shall
contain the same substantive terms and conditions as grantee's franchise. (Ord.
23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-6: RULES OF GRANTEE:
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable said grantee to exercise its rights and perform
its obligation under a franchise. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-7: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
   (A)   A franchise shall be granted for the corporate boundaries of City, as
it exists from time to time. In the event of annexation by City, or as
development occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area covered by
the franchise, provided, however, that grantee shall not be required to extend
service beyond its present system boundaries unless there is a request for
service extension by the owner of a residence outside the system boundaries and
such extension would require no more than a one hundred foot (100') aerial drop
line. Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential
residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the
area in which such group resides.
   (B)   Grantee is not required to construct and activate cable service to
newly developed areas unless or until a density of at least eighty (80)
residences per standard mile or trunk line exist, and fifty percent (50%) of
the residences to be served have agreed to subscribe to the cable service.
Grantee may, in its discretion, construct and activate cable service to newly
developed areas that do not have at least eighty (80) residences per standard
mile or trunk line exists, or less than fifty percent (50%) of the residences
to be served have agreed to subscribe to the cable service. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-
19-2017)
8-15-8: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Construction Codes And Permits:
      1.   Grantee shall obtain all necessary permits and easements from the
City before commencing any construction upgrade or extension of the system,
including the opening or disturbance of any street or public property within
City.
      2.   The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of a franchise agreement
and to make such tests at its own expense as it shall find necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of the franchise agreement and applicable provisions
of local, State and Federal law.
   (B)   Repair Of Streets And Property: Any and all streets or public property
or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, upgrade, or
reconstruction of the system, shall be promptly and fully restored by grantee,
at its expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to grantee's
work.
   (C)   Safety Requirements: When constructing, installing, maintaining,
repairing, extending, or upgrading its cable communications system, the grantee
shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and
maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or
nuisances to the public. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-9: UNDERGROUNDING OR AERIAL CONSTRUCTING OF CABLE:
   (A)   Undergrounding: In all areas of City where all other utility lines are
placed underground, grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires and
other facilities underground at grantee's cost.
   (B)   Aerial Installation: In any area of City where one or more public
utilities are aerial, grantee may construct and install its cables, wires and
other facilities from the same pole with the consent of the owner of the pole.
   (C)   New Developments:
      1.   In cases of new construction or property development where utilities
are to be placed underground, upon request by the grantee, the developer or
property owner shall give the grantee reasonable notice of the particular date
on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of
conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at grantee's
expense. The grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching.
      2.   Costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the
development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if
the grantee fails to install its conduits, pedestals and/or vaults, and
laterals within seven (7) working days of the date the trenches are available,
as designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then
should the trenches be closed after the seven-working-day period, the cost of
new trenching shall be borne by the grantee. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-10: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
The technical standards used in the operation of the system shall comply, at
minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the Federal Communications
Commission relating to cable communication systems pursuant to the Federal
Communications Commission rules and regulations, including the provisions found
in 47 CFR section 76.601 to 76.617. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-11: LOCKOUT SYSTEM:
Upon the request of a subscriber, grantee shall provide lockout system as part
of the cable service or by sale or lease. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-12: SUBSCRIBER CUSTOMER SERVICES:
   (A)   Subscriber Inquiries: Grantee shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be operated so as to receive subscriber complaints and
requests on a twenty four (24) hour-a- day, seven (7) days-a-week basis.
   (B)   Refund Policy: In the event a subscriber established or terminates
service and receives less than a full month's service, grantee shall prorate
the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in the period for which
service was rendered to the number of days in the billing.
   (C)   Protection Of Subscriber Privacy Rights: Grantee shall comply with the
terms of 47 USC section 551 relating to the protection of subscriber privacy.
(Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-13: PUBLIC BENEFIT OBLIGATION:
Grantee shall provide installation of one cable drop, one cable outlet, and
monthly basic cable service without charge to all current and future public
buildings within the City. The City shall bear the costs of any inside wiring
or video equipment costs not ordinarily provided as part of the grantee's basic
cable service offering. Grantee shall have six (6) months from the opening date
of any additional institution(s) or public buildings to complete construction
of the drop and outlet. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
8-15-14: FRANCHISE FEES:
   (A)   Fee Amount: Grantee shall pay to City a franchise fee in an annual
amount equal to five percent (5%) of its annual gross revenues.
   (B)   Fee Payment: Grantee shall make payments of the franchise fee to the
City on a quarterly basis, making such quarterly payments no later than forty
five (45) days after the close of the respective calendar quarter.
   (C)   Audit: Grantee shall comply with any audit requirements imposed under
the applicable franchise agreement. If no audit provisions are set forth in the
franchise agreement, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the City
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act 1 . No
acceptance of amounts remitted by a grantee shall be construed as an accord
that the amounts are correct. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid by the grantee within thirty (30) days after the City's invoice for the
sum. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
8-15-15: INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   (A)   Grantee shall provide the City with grantee's acceptance of a
franchise, and at all times thereafter during the applicable term of the
franchise agreement, maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, a
comprehensive general liability insurance policy coverage naming the City as an
additional insured as provided herein. Grantee's insurance coverage shall be in
the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury or death of any one person, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
personal injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, and
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one
act or occurrence.
   (B)   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by grantee in
full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each policy of
insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not
cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of
premium or otherwise, and whether at the request of grantee or for other
reasons, except after thirty (30) days' advance written notice has been
provided to the City.
   (C)   The grantee, on behalf of itself, its successors, assigns, employees
and agents, shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers,
boards, commissions, agents and employees and each of them, against and from
any and all claims, demands, suits, actions, liabilities, costs, expenses and
judgments of every kind and nature regardless of the merits of the same,
arising out of or through the exercise or enjoyment of the franchise granted to
the grantee pursuant to this chapter and under a franchise agreement, including
cost of litigation, attorneys' fees and court costs in defense of any action,
to the extent that such claims or demands are alleged to be the result of any
error, omission, intentional act, reckless act or negligent act of the grantee
or any employee, servant or agent of the grantee including, but not limited to,
all claims arising in tort, contracts, infringement of copyright, violation of
statutes, ordinances, regulations or the failure to comply with any obligation
or duty imposed by this chapter or a franchise agreement. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-
2017)
8-15-16: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Unauthorized Connections Or Modifications Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful for any person, without the express consent of the grantee, to make or
possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension,
or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or
otherwise, with or to any segment of the system.
   (B)   Removal Or Destruction Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof,
any part or segment of the system for any purpose whatsoever. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-
19-2017)
8-15-17: STATE FRANCHISE HOLDER:
   (A)   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed: As provided under the State
Franchise Law, the City imposes a fee upon a State franchise holder providing
cable and video services within the City in the amount of five percent (5%) of
the State franchise holder's gross revenues from providing such services within
the City.
   (B)   Notice To City: The State franchise holder shall notify the City at
least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the State franchise holder
begins to offer cable service or video service in the City.
   (C)   Payment Of Provider Fee: The State franchise holder shall be liable
for and pay the service provider fee to the City. The State franchise holder's
liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month
following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter
by the State franchise holder, which shall be sent to the State franchise
holder by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the State franchise
holder's application notice sent to the City pursuant to State Franchise Law.
   (D)   Payment Date: The State franchise holder shall make payments of the
service provider fee to the City on a quarterly basis, making such quarterly
payments no later than forty five (45) days after the close of the respective
calendar quarter. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis
for the State franchise holder's calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit For Other Payment: A franchise holder that elects to terminate
an existing franchise agreement pursuant to the State Franchise Law with credit
for paid franchise fees under a franchise agreement with the City may deduct
the amount of such credit from the service provider fee that service provider
owes the City upon becoming a State franchise holder.
   (F)   Construction Standards: A State franchise holder shall comply with all
provisions in sections
8-15-8 and
8-15-9 of this chapter regarding construction standards and underground
cabling.
   (G)   Telephone Service: A State franchise holder shall continue to comply
with the City's Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax and any other tax
as it applies to any telephone service provided by the State franchise holder.
Also, a State franchise holder shall continue to be obligated for payment of
any local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
   (H)   Public Benefit Obligation: A State franchise holder shall provide a
free service line drop and free basic service to all current and future public
buildings within their service territory within the City. The City shall bear
the costs of any inside wiring or video equipment costs not ordinarily provided
as part of the State franchise holder basic offering.
   (I)   Audit Requirement: A State franchise holder shall comply with the same
requirements imposed by the City on other cable service or video service
providers that are providing such services within the City to audit the State
franchise holder's books and records and to recalculate any amounts determined
to be payable to the City. Before conducting an audit, the City will notify the
State franchise holder of the requirements imposed on other cable service or
video service providers to submit to an audit of the service provider's books
and records. If the City has no local franchises, the audit requirements shall
be those adopted by the City pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill
of Rights Act 1 . No acceptance of amounts remitted by a State franchise holder
shall be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. Any additional
amount due after an audit shall be paid by the State franchise holder within
thirty (30) days after the City's invoice for the sum. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-
2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
8-15-18: PENALTIES:
Any person or grantee found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code.
However, if a grantee is in violation of any terms of a franchise agreement
that simultaneously violate a provision of this chapter, the terms of the
franchise agreement shall govern any notice or correction periods before the
grantee shall be subject to a penalty under this section. The State Franchise
Law shall govern the non- compliance of a State license holder of any payments
due the City under this chapter, and to the extent that the State Franchise Law
does not provide enforcement measures for non-payment, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply. (Ord. 23/2017, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 16
JOINT UTILITY LOCATING INFORMATION FOR EXCAVATORS SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-16-1:   Notification Required
8-16-2:   Definitions
8-16-3:   Penalty
8-16-4:   Notification Prior To Emergency Work
8-16-1: NOTIFICATION REQUIRED:
No person performing any nonemergency construction or maintenance work
involving excavation on any real estate in the city shall begin such work until
he first calls the JULIE system in Illinois at least forty eight (48) hours in
advance of such work (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) and gives the
following information:
   (A)   The location and description of the excavation;
   (B)   The date and time the excavation is to begin;
   (C)   The name of the person or company doing the excavation; and
   (D)   The name and telephone number of the persons to be contacted about the
excavation.
In the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it shall be presumed that any
excavation work performed in the city was done so under "nonemergency"
conditions. (Ord. 8/86, 11-17-1986)
8-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
Each of the following respective words when used in this chapter shall be
defined as follows:
   CITY: Within the corporate limits of the city of Aledo, Illinois.
   EXCAVATION: Any digging or blasting work. It also includes any other type of
activity that causes or could cause interference or damage to any underground
public utility system in the city.
   NONEMERGENCY: All construction or maintenance work that is performed in the
city in the absence of imminent peril to the public health and safety of the
city's citizens if not immediately undertaken.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, or any other type of
association. (Ord. 8/86, 11-17-1986)
8-16-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine pursuant to
title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. This is a malum prohibitum offense
and the city is not required to prove the defendant's mental state as an
element of its case. (Ord. 24/2016, 1-3-2017)
8-16-4: NOTIFICATION PRIOR TO EMERGENCY WORK:
In the case of any emergency construction or maintenance work involving
excavation on any real estate in the city, no person shall begin such work
until he first calls the JULIE system in Illinois and furnishes the same
information as is required when nonemergency construction or maintenance work
involving excavation is concerned. (Ord. 18/86, 2-2-1987)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
SECTION:
9-1-1:   Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted
9-1-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
The Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 as passed, approved
and amended is hereby adopted by the city of Aledo as if fully set out herein;
the provisions shall therefore be controlling within the corporate limits of
the city of Aledo 1 . Any person convicted of violating this title shall pay a
fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. (Ord. 25/2016, 1-
3-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/20-204.
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-2-1:   Authority Of Department Officials
9-2-2:   Obedience To Regulations
9-2-3:   Obedience To Department Officials
9-2-4:   Pushcarts; Animals
9-2-1: AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic
laws of the state and city.
   (B)   Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to
expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department
may direct traffic as conditions may require.
   (C)   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. (1969 Code)
9-2-2: OBEDIENCE TO REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required herein. (1969 Code)
9-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official.
(1969 Code)
9-2-4: PUSHCARTS; ANIMALS:
Every person propelling any pushcart or driving any animal drawn vehicle or
riding an animal upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this
title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which by
their own nature can have no application. (1969 Code)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
9-3-1:   Authority To Install
9-3-2:   Specifications
9-3-3:   Unauthorized Signs, Signals Or Markings
9-3-4:   Crosswalks And Safety Zones
9-3-5:   Traffic Lanes
9-3-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
The director of public works shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic regulations of the
city to make effective the provisions of said regulations, and may place and
maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary and
subject to the approval of the council. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-3-2: SPECIFICATIONS:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the approved
specifications. All signs and signals, required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location
throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this title shall be official traffic
control devices. (1969 Code)
9-3-3: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS:
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (D)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-3-4: CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES:
The director of public works is hereby authorized:
   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such
other places as he may deem necessary.
   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (Ord. 26/
2016, 1-3-2017)
9-3-5: TRAFFIC LANES:
The director of public works is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon
the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 4
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION:
9-4-1:   Basic Rule; Speed Limits
9-4-1: BASIC RULE; SPEED LIMITS:
   (A)   Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with this title the speed of any vehicle shall not exceed twenty
five (25) miles per hour.
   (B)   Upon proper action by the council, the speed limits on any
thoroughfare within the city may be raised or lowered by posting signs to that
effect. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 5
RULES OF THE ROAD
SECTION:
9-5-1:   One-Way Streets And Alleys
9-5-2:   Turning At Intersections
9-5-3:   Approaching Or Entering Intersection
9-5-4:   Private Road Or Driveway
9-5-5:   Safety Zones
9-5-6:   Excessive Engine Braking Noise
9-5-1: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The director of public works may designate any street or alley under his
jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof.
   (A)   One-Way Alley Designated:
      1.   The alley located on the south side of East Main Street in the 100
block of East Main Street in the city is hereby designated as a one-way alley
upon which all vehicular traffic shall proceed at all times in a southerly
direction.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle in the alley located
in the 100 block of East Main Street in the city in any direction other than
the designated one-way southerly direction. It shall also be unlawful to park
any motor vehicle in such alley without a driver in attendance of any such
vehicle at all times. It shall also be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in
such alley in such a manner so as to obstruct or thwart the southward movement
of vehicular traffic, except that any person operating a motor vehicle in such
alley may stop such vehicle as may be necessary from time to time in order to
pick up any products from a service window located in the said alley. Finally,
with respect to entering said alley, any motor vehicle shall enter from the
north end, and it shall be unlawful to enter said alley from the south end
where it intersects with Southeast Second Street.
      3.   The term "motor vehicle" shall include any automobile, truck,
trailer, motorcycle, bicycle or any other vehicle that may lawfully be operated
upon a public highway.
      4.   The director of public works for the city is authorized to post such
signs as may be necessary in order to designate such alley as a one-way roadway
upon which all vehicular traffic shall proceed in a southerly direction.
   (B)   One-Way Street Designated:
      1.   Southwest Twelfth Street between South College Avenue and Southwest
Second Avenue in the city, is hereby designated as a one-way street upon which
all vehicular traffic shall proceed in a westerly direction at all times.
      2.   The director of public works for the city is hereby authorized and
directed to post all necessary official traffic control devices in conformity
with the state manual and specifications in order to indicate to the public
that Southwest Twelfth Street between South College Avenue and Southwest Second
Avenue has been designated as a one-way street upon which all vehicular traffic
shall proceed in a westerly direction at all times.
      3.   A vehicle shall be driven only in a westerly direction at all times
when traveling on that part of Southwest Twelfth Street between South College
Avenue and Southwest Second Avenue in the city.
      4.   The term "vehicle" when used in this subsection shall include any
automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or any other vehicle that is lawfully
upon any city street in the city. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-5-2: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
The director of public works is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. When authorized
markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, it shall be
unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to disobey the directions of such
indications. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-5-3: APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
street.
   (B)   When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets at
approximately the same time the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
   (C)   The right of way rules declared in subsections (A) and (B) of this
section are modified at through streets and otherwise as hereinafter stated in
this title. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-5-4: PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The city council may designate such private roads or driveways from which a
vehicle must make a right turn only. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-5-5: SAFETY ZONES:
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
(1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-5-6: EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING NOISE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any commercial vehicle, as
defined in Section 1-111.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-111.8),
to operate or actuate any engine braking system that emits excessive noise,
which shall include but not be limited to the use of engine compression brakes
(commonly referred to as “Jake Brakes”), on any street, highway, or road within
the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the use of an engine braking system
that has an adequate sound muffling system in proper working order that
prevents excessive noise. Furthermore, this section shall not apply if the
driver uses an engine braking system that emits excessive noise in an emergency
to avoid a collision with a person or another vehicle.
   (C)   A violation of this section is an equipment violation punishable by a
fine of $75.
(Ord. 14/2025, 6-2-2025)
CHAPTER 6
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
9-6-1:   Stopping, Standing Or Parking
9-6-2:   Illegally Stopped Vehicles
9-6-3:   Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited
9-6-4:   Additional Parking Regulations
9-6-5:   Unattended Vehicle
9-6-6:   Parking In Alleys
9-6-7:   All Night Parking
9-6-8:   Parking Of Trucks In Business District
9-6-9:   Parking For Certain Purposes
9-6-10:   Parking Adjacent To Schools
9-6-11:   Parking On Narrow Streets
9-6-12:   Parking Near Congested Places
9-6-13:   Curb Loading Zones
9-6-14:   Loading Zones
9-6-15:   Freight Curb Loading Zone
9-6-16:   Parking Signs Required
9-6-17:   Parking Near Fire Hydrants
9-6-18:   Parking On Certain Streets
9-6-19:   Parking Of Semitractors, Trailers, Or Semitrailers
9-6-20:   Penalty For Illegal Parking
9-6-1: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING:
   (A)   Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district, no
person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the highway when it is
practical to stop, park, or so leave such vehicle off such part of said
highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a
standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a
clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of two
hundred feet (200') in each direction upon such highway.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a highway in such
manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (1969 Code; amd.
Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-2: ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES:
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street in violation
of any of the provisions of this title, such officer is hereby authorized to
move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main traveled part of
such street. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-3: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk.
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      3.   Within an intersection.
      4.   Within twenty feet (20') of a fire hydrant.
      5.   On a crosswalk.
      6.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      7.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings.
      9.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      10.   Within twenty feet (20') of a driveway entrance to any fire
station, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station,
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted.
      11.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      12.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      13.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
      14.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (1969
Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-4: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb.
   (B)   The council may permit parking of vehicles with the left hand wheels
adjacent to and within eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb of a one-way
roadway. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (C)   Parking of vehicles along either side of Southwest 3rd Street from the
intersection thereof with Southwest 3rd Avenue and westward shall be by parking
parallel to the curb or right of way line only.
Appropriate signs designating the aforesaid areas as parallel parking areas
shall be erected forthwith, or as soon as the same is practical after
contemplated construction is completed. (Ord. 3, 6-1-1970; amd. Ord. 26/2016,
1-3-2017)
9-6-5: UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key, and effectively setting the brake thereon, and when standing upon any
grade turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway. (1969 Code;
amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-6: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10')
of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and it
shall be unlawful for a person to stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley
in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
It shall be unlawful for the owner, driver, operator, or person or persons in
charge of any motor vehicle, motor truck, or other vehicle, exceeding seven
feet three inches (7'3") in width, at any part thereof, to drive or operate, or
to attempt to drive or operate, such vehicle, on or over the west fifty five
feet (55') of the alley running east and west through block 27 in the original
town, now city, of Aledo, Illinois. (Ord. 3/48, 7-6-1948; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-
3-2017)
9-6-7: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within the business
district between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls.
Any person owning a vehicle who violates this section or any person driving or
operating a vehicle who violates this section shall be subject to a fine
pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this code. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-
2017)
9-6-8: PARKING OF TRUCKS IN BUSINESS DISTRICT:
Parking of trucks and/or truck trailers of more than three- fourths (3/4) ton
capacity is hereby prohibited within the business district. (1969 Code; amd.
Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-9: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-10: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
   (A)   The director of public works is hereby authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any
school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic
or create a hazardous situation. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (B)   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side
of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1969
Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-11: PARKING ON NARROW STREETS:
   (A)   The director of public works, acting upon the authority of the
council, is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20') or upon
one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway
does not exceed thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (B)   When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow
streets as authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. (1969 Code; amd.
Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-12: PARKING NEAR CONGESTED PLACES:
   (A)   The director of public works, acting upon the authority of the
council, is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs,
places not exceeding one hundred feet (100') in length in which the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition
or would cause unusual delay in traffic. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (B)   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized herein it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a
vehicle in any such designated place. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-13: CURB LOADING ZONES:
Following proper designation by the council, the director of public works is
hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb
loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
name and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are
applicable. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-14: LOADING ZONES:
The city council may designate loading zones as they deem necessary. The
director of public works shall assure the proper placement of curb markings and
loading zone signs for any zones so designated. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-15: FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle for any
purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery
or pick up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb
loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in
effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed
thirty (30) minutes. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-16: PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED:
Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on
designated streets, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to
erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and such regulations shall not be
effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged
offense. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-17: PARKING NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or driving any automobile, motor
bicycle, motor truck, or other motor vehicle, within the corporate limits of
the city to stop, park or leave standing such motor vehicle within twenty feet
(20') of any fireplug. (Ord. 2/21, 8-1-1921; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-18: PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any
automobile, truck, motor bicycle or any kind of motor vehicle on the north side
of Southeast Third Street and between the west side of Southeast Second Avenue
and the east side of South College Avenue in said city; and also on the south
side of Southeast Third Street and between the east side of Southeast Second
Avenue and the west side of Southeast Fourth Avenue; and also on the north side
of Southeast Third Street and between the west side of Southeast Sixth Avenue
and the east side of Southeast Eighth Avenue in the city. (Ord. 4/34, 3-19-
1935; amd. Ord. 4/63, 8-5-1963; Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (B)   All motor vehicles parked on or along any paved portion of Third
Street in the city shall be parked parallel with the curb or street line, and
within one foot (1') of the curb in all portions of said street where a curb is
now or shall be hereafter laid or constructed. (Ord. 5/59, 9-21-1959; amd. Ord.
4/63, 8-5-1963; Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle along the west side of
Southeast Fifth Avenue between Southeast Third Street and Southeast Seventh
Street, and such parking is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 2/60, 6-20-1960; amd. Ord.
4/63, 8-5-1963; Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (D)   Parking of vehicles along either side of Southwest 3rd Street from the
west intersection thereof with College Avenue to the intersection of the said
Southwest 3rd Street with Southwest 3rd Avenue, be and the same is hereby
prohibited. (Ord. 11, 3-16-1970; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle along the west side of
Southeast Second Avenue between Southeast Third Street and Southeast Fourth
Street for more than two (2) continuous hours in that restricted off street
parking area which would serve as a parking area for twelve (12) vehicles, all
of which are to park in a perpendicular manner, the location and designated
parking lanes of said restricted parking area to be designated by the director
of public works and utilities of the city with appropriate signs to be erected
and installed, all as provided in section 9-6-16 of this chapter. (Ord. 17/75,
1-19-1976; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (F)   All motor vehicles, including, but not limited to, motorcycles and
bicycles, parked on or along the north side of said portion of West Main Street
in the city between Northwest Second Avenue and Northwest Third Avenue located
in the city, shall be parked parallel with the curb or street line located on
the north side of said portion of West Main Street, said vehicles to be parked
within one foot (1') of the north curb existing from time to time in said
portion of West Main Street, and the location and designated parking lanes for
said parallel parking on the north side of that portion of West Main Street
shall be designated by the director of public works and utilities of the city,
along with any appropriate signs, if any, pertaining to said parallel parking
for said portion of West Main Street, to be erected and installed pursuant to
the order and direction by the said director. (Ord. 13/77, 10-3-1977; amd. Ord.
26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle along the east side of
Southwest Third Avenue between the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks and
Southwest Third Street, and on Southwest Third Street between Southwest Third
Avenue and Southwest Fourth Avenue, and appropriate signs prohibiting parking
in said areas shall be erected and installed as determined and designated by
the director of public works and utilities of the city. (Ord. 3/78, 7-3-1978;
amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (H)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle including, but not
limited to, trucks, motorcycles, boats, trailers, bicycles, or any other
vehicles, along either side of that part of Southwest Ninth Avenue beginning
with its intersection with Southwest Third Street and continuing north on
Southwest Ninth Avenue to its intersection with West Main Street and thereafter
continuing north on Northwest Ninth Avenue to its intersection with Northwest
Sixth Street. (Ord. 11/82, 8-2-1982; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (I)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, including, but not
limited to, trucks, motorcycles, boats, trailers, bicycles or any other
vehicles, along either side of that part of Southeast Third Street (also known
as Illinois Route 17) between its intersection with Southeast Eleventh Avenue
and the eastern city limit boundary line. (Ord. 5/84, 6-4-1984; amd. Ord. 26/
2016, 1-3-2017)
   (J)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, including, but not
limited to, trucks, motorcycles, boats, trailers, bicycles or any other
vehicles, along the east side of that part of South College Avenue (also known
as Illinois Route 94) between its intersection with Southeast Third Street and
Southeast Fourth Street. (Ord. 11/84, 12-3-1984; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (K)   It shall be unlawful to park or cause to be parked any vehicle along
Illinois Route 94 from S.E. 11th Street to the southern corporate limits of the
city. (Ord. 4/88, 6-20-1988; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (L)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on either side of that
part of S.E. 19th Avenue in the city, between its intersection with S.E. 3rd
Street and its intersection with a point located two hundred fifty feet (250')
south of the intersection of S.E. 6th Street with the said S.E. 19th Avenue.
      The term “motor vehicle” shall include any automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, bicycle, or any other vehicle that is lawfully upon such public
avenue.
      The director of public works for the city is authorized to post such
signs as may be necessary in order to notify the public that parking is
prohibited along either side of that portion of S.E. 19th Avenue described
above.
      Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a fine
pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this code. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-
2017)
   (M)   All parking on the south side of Northeast Fourth Street between North
College Avenue and Northeast Second Avenue in the city, shall be restricted to
parallel parking only. (Ord. 7/92, 9-21-1992; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (N)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on either side of that
part of S.W. 2nd Avenue in the city, between its intersection with S.W. 4th
Street and S.W. 5th Street. (Ord. 12/92, 12-21-1992; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-
2017)
   (O)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the west side of S.E. 4th
Avenue between its intersection with S.E. 3rd Street and S.E. 4th Street in the
city. (Ord. 2/93, 5-3-1993; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (P)   1.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the south side of
Southeast Third Street anywhere between that point located two hundred feet
(200') west of the intersection of the centerline of Southeast Fifteenth Avenue
with the south right of way line for the said Southeast Third Street and that
point located six hundred feet (600') east of the intersection of the
centerline of Southeast Fifteenth Avenue with the south right of way line for
the said Southeast Third Street, in the city.
      2.   The director of public works for the city is hereby directed and
authorized to post such no parking signs as may be required to conform with the
state manual and specifications for no parking zones in order to inform the
public that parking of all vehicles is prohibited along the south side of that
portion of Southeast Third Street described above.
      3.   The term “vehicle” shall include any automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, bicycle or any other vehicle that is lawfully upon any street or
avenue in the city.
      4.   Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a fine
pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this code.
   (Q)   1. All parking on the west side of South College Avenue between its
intersections with Southwest Third Street and Southwest Fourth Street,
respectively, shall be limited to parallel parking only with no vehicle to be
continuously parked in any parallel parking space so designated on the west
side of that portion of South College Avenue designated above for a period of
time exceeding two (2) hours in duration.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle other than parallel within
the appropriate spaces as designated for such parallel parking on the west side
of South College Avenue between its intersections with Southwest Third Street
and Southwest Fourth Street, respectively, in the city.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within any parallel parking
space designated for such parallel parking on the west side of South College
Avenue between its intersections with Southwest Third Street and Southwest
Fourth Street, respectively, for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours.
      4.   The director of public works for the city is hereby directed and
authorized to apply such lines and markings and post such signs as may be
necessary in order to designate the west side of South College Avenue between
its intersections with Southwest Third Street and Southwest Fourth Street,
respectively, as being limited to parallel parking only, which parking shall
not exceed two (2) hours in duration. All such lines, markings and signs shall
conform with the state manual and specifications for such parallel parking
limited to two (2) hours of parking time.
      5.   The term “vehicle” shall include any automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, bicycle or any other vehicle that is lawfully upon any street or
avenue in the city.
      6.   Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a fine
pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this code. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-
2017)
   (R)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on either side of Southeast
Fifteenth Avenue from the respective points on each side thereof determined
where the respective right of way lines for Southeast Fifteenth Avenue
intersect with the south right of way line for Southeast Third Street, and then
continuing due south from each respective point for two hundred thirty feet
(230') on each side of Southeast Fifteenth Avenue, in the city. (Ord. 6/95, 10-
2-1995; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (S)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the south side of
Southeast Third Street anywhere between that point located two hundred feet
(200') west of the intersection of the centerline of Southeast Fifteenth Avenue
with the south right of way line for the said Southeast Third Street and that
other point located four hundred fifteen feet (415') west of the intersection
of the centerline of Southeast Fifteenth Avenue with the south right of way
line for the said Southeast Third Street, in the city. (Ord. 7/95, 10-2-1995;
amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (T)   1. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within the west seventy
five feet (75') and the east seventy five feet (75') of the south side of the
east 100 block of S.E. 3rd Street and either side of S.E. 3rd Street between
its intersection with S.E. 2nd Avenue and its intersection with S.E. 11th
Avenue in the city. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
      2.   The seventy five foot (75') measurements for prohibited parking on
the south side of the east 100 block of S.E. 3rd Street shall be measured from
the following respective points:
         (a)   With respect to the west seventy five feet (75') of prohibited
parking, the measuring point shall run from the point where the east right of
way line for College Avenue and the south right of way line for S.E. 3rd Street
intersect (or intersect at that point where such lines would intersect if
extended in straight lines in the event they do not intersect as platted) to a
point seventy five feet (75') directly east of the foregoing point; and
         (b)   With respect to the east seventy five feet (75') of prohibited
parking, the measuring point shall run from the point where the west right of
way line for S.E. 2nd Avenue and the south right of way line for S.E. 3rd
Street intersect (or intersect at that point where such lines would intersect
if extended in straight lines in the event they do not intersect as platted) to
a point seventy five feet (75') directly west of the foregoing point.
      3.   The prohibited parking on either side of S.E. 3rd Street from its
intersection with S.E. 2nd Avenue and its intersection with S.E. 11th Avenue
shall run from the following points:
         (a)   With respect to S.E. 2nd Avenue, the respective points shall be
at those points where the east right of way line for S.E. 2nd Avenue intersects
with the southerly and northerly right of way lines for S.E. 3rd Street; and
         (b)   With respect to S.E. 11th Avenue, the respective points shall be
at those points where the west right of way line for S.E. 11th Avenue
intersects with the southerly and northerly right of way lines for S.E. 3rd
Street.
      In the event any right of way lines described above do not intersect as
platted, then such point for prohibited parking shall be determined with
reference to that point at which such right of way lines in question would
intersect if extended in straight lines. (Ord. 14/96, 1-7-1997; amd. Ord. 26/
2016, 1-3-2017)
      4.   Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a fine
pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this code.
   (U)   1.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on a school day on the
east side of South College Avenue between its intersection with S.E. 13th
Street and S.E. 14th Street in Aledo, Illinois. It shall also be unlawful to
park any vehicle on a school day on the north side of the west one hundred
fifty feet (150') of S.W. 14th Street from its intersection with South College
Avenue in the city. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
      2.   The one hundred fifty foot (150') measurement of prohibited parking
on a school day on S.E. 14th Street shall be measured from the following point,
described as follows: the measuring point shall begin at the point where the
east right of way line for South College Avenue intersects with the north right
of way line of S.E. 14th Street, and continues thereafter to a point directly
east of the foregoing point.
      3.   For the purpose of this subsection (U), the term “school” shall mean
a public secondary school and the term “school day” shall be defined as
beginning at seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and shall conclude at four o’clock (4:
00) P.M. (Ord. 6/97, 10-20-1997; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
      4.   The director of public works for the city is hereby directed and
authorized to post such no parking signs on a school day as may be required to
conform with the state manual and specifications for no parking zones on a
school day in order to inform the public that parking of all vehicles is
prohibited on school days along that portion of the respective sides of South
College Avenue and S.E. 14th Street as described above.
      5.   The term “vehicle” shall include any automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, bicycle, or any other vehicle that is lawfully upon any street or
avenue in the city.
      6.   Any person who violates this subsection (U) shall be subject to a
fine pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this code.
   (V)   1.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on either side of S.E.
3rd Street between its intersection with College Avenue and its intersection
with S.W. 12th Avenue in the city.
         (a)   With respect to College Avenue, the respective points shall be
at those points where the west right of way line for College Avenue intersects
with the southerly and northerly right of way lines for S.W. 3rd Street; and
         (b)   With respect to S.W. 12th Avenue, the respective points shall be
at those points where the west right of way line for S.W. 12th Avenue
intersects with the southerly and northerly right of way lines for S.W. 3rd
Street.
      In the event any right of way lines described above do not intersect as
platted, then such point for prohibited parking shall be deemed with reference
to that point at which such right of way lines in question would intersect if
extended in straight lines.
      2.   The director of public works for the city is hereby directed and
authorized to post such no parking signs as may be required to conform with the
state manual and specifications for no parking zones in order to inform the
public that parking of all vehicles is prohibited along that portion of the
respective sides of S.W. 3rd Street as described above.
      3.   The term “vehicle” shall include any automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, bicycle, or any other vehicle that is lawfully upon any street or
avenue in the city of Aledo.
      4.   Any person who violates this subsection (V) shall be subject to a
fine pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this code.
   (W)   1. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the west side of SE 3rd
Avenue between the point that is one hundred fifty feet (150') south of the
centerline of SE 3rd Street, on the north, and the intersection of SE 3rd
Avenue and SE 4th Street, on the south.
      2.   The director of public works for the city of Aledo is hereby
directed and authorized to post such no parking signs as may be required to
conform with the state manual and specifications for no parking zones in order
to inform the public that parking of all vehicles is prohibited alongside that
portion of SE 3rd Avenue described above.
      3.   The term “vehicle” shall include any automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, bicycle, or any other vehicle that is lawfully upon any street or
avenue in the city of Aledo, Illinois.
      4.   Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a fine
pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this code. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-
2017)
   (X)   1.   Following any snowfall that exceeds two inches (2"), and until
such time as the snowfall has stopped and the city of Aledo has completed
plowing and salting operations, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on
either side of the following streets: (Ord. 14/2014, 10-6-2014; amd. Ord. 26/
2016, 1-3-2017)
         (a)   North College Avenue between its intersection with NW/NE 2nd
Street and its intersection with NW/NE 7th Street.
         (b)   SE 2nd Avenue between its intersection with SE 4th Street and
its intersection with SE 15th Street.
         (c)   South College Avenue (Illinois Route 94) from the north right-
of-way line of SE/SW 3rd Street to the south right-of-way line of SE/SW 12th
Street.
         (d)   SE/NE 3rd Avenue from the north right-of-way line of SE 3rd
Street to the south right-of-way line of Mercer Township Road 141 (100th
Avenue). (Ord. 24/2010, 12-20-2010; amd. Ord. 14/2014, 10-6-2014; Ord. 26/2016,
1-3-2017)
      2.   The Director of Public Works for the City of Aledo is hereby
directed and authorized to post signs reading “Snow Route No Parking When Snow
Exceeds 2 Inches” as may be required to conform with the State manual and
specifications for no parking zones in order to inform the public that parking
of all vehicles is prohibited alongside the foregoing portions of the streets
and avenues as described above.
      3.   The term “vehicle” shall include any automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, bicycle, or any other vehicle that is lawfully upon any street or
avenue in the City of Aledo, Illinois.
      4.   Any person who violates this subsection (X) shall be subject to a
fine pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this Code. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-
3-2017)
   (Y)   1.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on SE 2nd Street from
the east right-of-way line of South College Avenue to the west right-of-way
line of SE 2nd Avenue in the City of Aledo each day from three o’clock (3:00)
A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 15/2014, 10-6-2014; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-
3-2017)
      2.   The Director of Public Works for the City of Aledo is hereby
directed and authorized to post such no parking signs as may be required to
conform with the State manual and specifications for no parking zones each day
during the time specified above in order to inform the public that parking of
all vehicles is prohibited along SE 2nd Street from the east right-of-way line
of South College Avenue to the west right-of-way line of SE 2nd Avenue in the
City of Aledo each day from three o’clock (3:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00)
A.M.
      3.   The term “vehicle” shall include any automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, bicycle, or any other vehicle that is lawfully upon any street or
avenue in the City of Aledo, Illinois.
      4.   Any person who violates this subsection (Y) shall be subject to a
fine pursuant to title 12, “Schedule Of Fines”, of this Code.
   (Z)   1.   The provisions of this division (Z) shall be applicable to all
parking spaces not to exceed ten (10) in number located on the West side of
North College
      Avenue, in Aledo, Illinois, between its intersection with Main Street and
Northwest Second Street, and on the south side of Northwest Second Street, in
Aledo, Illinois, between its intersection with Northwest Second Avenue and
North College Avenue.
      2.   The designated diagonal and straight-in parking spaces, not to
exceed ten (10) in number, located on each respective side of each respective
avenue and street named above in the City of Aledo, Illinois, shall be
restricted to ten (10) minute parking. No motor vehicle or motorcycle shall be
parked in any designated diagonal or straight-in parking space located on each,
respective side, of each respective avenue and street named above, in, the City
of Aledo, Illinois, for more than ten (10) continuous minutes. The term
“designated diagonal and straight-in parking spaces” shall mean those parking
spaces in question that are posted by the Chief of Police for the City of
Aledo, Illinois, as provided herein, restricting parking therein to not more
than ten (10) continuous minutes.
      3.   The provisions of this division (Z) shall be enforced by the City of
Aledo Police department.
      4.   The Chief of Police for the City of Aledo shall have the authority
and responsibility for erecting and maintaining appropriate signs or poles
indicating that parking in such parking areas, not to exceed ten (10) in number
and located as described above, is restricted to ten (10) continuous minutes.
In addition, he shall also have the authority and responsibility for painting
and maintaining appropriate lines or signs delineating the diagonal parking
spaces or straight-in parking spaces, depending upon whatever the case may be,
located on each respective side of each respective avenue and street named
above.
      5.   All motor vehicles or motorcycles must be parked either within the
appropriate lines indicating a parking space on each respective side of each
avenue and street named above or in compliance with any sign posted for parking
in any parking space located on each respective side of each avenue and street
named above.
      6.   The terms “motor vehicle” and “motorcycle” shall be defined in the
same manner as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code (Chapter 95 1/2, Sections
1-146 and 1-147, Illinois Revised Statutes).
      7.   It shall be a violation of this division (Z) for any motor vehicle
or motorcycle to park in violation of any provision of this division (Z). Any
violation of this division (Z) shall be punishable by a fine of $5.00.
      8.   This is a malum prohibitum offense and lack of knowledge by any
owner or violator shall not be a defense to any violation of this division (Z).
(Ord. 20/1987, 3-28-1988; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-19: PARKING OF SEMITRACTORS, TRAILERS, OR SEMITRAILERS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to park any
semitractor, trailer, or semitrailer in any of the following parking lots
described below that are owned by the City, such parking lots being described
as follows:
      1.   Parking lot located in the 100 block of NE 2nd Avenue (east of the
Aledo City Hall);
      2.   Parking lot located in the 200 block of South College Avenue (north
of Central Park); and
      3.   Parking lot located in the 200 block of SW 2nd Street (south of VFW
Building). (Ord. 20/01, 2-4-2002; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (B)   The Director of Public Works for the City of Aledo is hereby directed
and authorized to post such no parking signs as may be required to conform with
the State manual and specifications for no parking by any semitractor, trailer,
and/or semitrailer in the City's Municipal owned parking lots described above.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section either as an owner or operator of
a semitractor, trailer, or semitrailer shall be subject to a fine pursuant to
title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-6-20: PENALTY FOR ILLEGAL PARKING:
   (A)   Any person who violates any parking ordinance in this chapter shall be
subject to a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter and the
operator or registered owner of the vehicle is not present, the Chief of Police
or any member of the City of Aledo Police Department observing such violation
may issue a citation and leave a copy thereof on the vehicle.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or any member of the City of Aledo Police
Department is authorized, in his or her discretion, to remove or cause the
removal of any vehicle that is parked in violation of this chapter at the
registered owner's expense, if one or more of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The vehicle remains parked in violation of this chapter for more
than two (2) consecutive hours following the issuance of a citation for
violation of subsection
9-6-18(X)1 of this chapter;
      2.   The vehicle has been issued three (3) or more citations for a
violation of this chapter that remain unpaid at the time of the violation at
issue; or
      3.   The vehicle has been issued three (3) or more citations for a
violation of this chapter within a thirty (30) day period prior to the
violation at issue.
   (D)   The Police Department shall keep a record of each vehicle removed in
accordance with this section. The record shall include a description of the
vehicle, its license plate number, date and time of its removal, where it was
removed from, the location where it was removed to, and the name and address of
its owner or operator, if known.
   (E)   Within twenty four (24) hours after a vehicle is removed pursuant to
this section, the City shall notify the owner of record at his or her last
known address (as indicated by the vehicle's registration) by certified mail,
return receipt requested, advising the owner of his or her right to request a
hearing before a Hearing Officer that will be conducted to determine whether
the subject vehicle is eligible for removal pursuant to this section. However,
no such notice need be sent to the owner of record if the owner is personally
served with the notice within twenty four (24) hours after the vehicle is
removed and the owner acknowledges receipt of the notice in writing. The
written notice shall state the penalties that may be imposed if no hearing is
requested, including that a vehicle not released by payment of a fine plus any
and all towing and storage fees may be sold or disposed of by the City in
accordance with applicable law.
   (F)   Any vehicle removed under this section shall be released prior to a
hearing to any person entitled to lawful possession of said vehicle upon
payment of a fine plus any and all towing and storage fees. If a person
entitled to lawful possession of said vehicle does not pay the applicable fine
plus any and all towing and storage fees within thirty (30) days after the
vehicle is removed or after the Hearing Officer's written determination,
whichever is later, then such vehicle may be disposed of in accordance with the
procedure set forth for disposal of unclaimed or abandoned vehicles as provided
by law.
   (G)   The owner of record seeking a hearing under this section must file a
written request for a hearing with the Chief of Police at the Aledo City Hall,
120 North College Avenue, Aledo, Illinois, no later than fifteen (15) days
after the notice was mailed or otherwise given under this section. A hearing
shall be scheduled and held, unless continued for good cause by order of the
Hearing Officer, no later than thirty (30) days after the request for a hearing
has been filed. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to be heard at the hearing. At the hearing, the formal rules of evidence shall
not apply, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the
Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle
was used in violation of this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order
requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner pays the
applicable fine plus any and all towing and storage fees. If the Hearing
Officer determines that the vehicle was not in violation of this chapter, he or
she shall order the return of the vehicle to the owner of record. For the
purposes of this section, the Hearing Officer shall be a licensed attorney who
is not an employee of the City. (Ord. 03/2018, 3-5-2018)
CHAPTER 7
UNUSED AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-7-1:   Policy
9-7-2:   Definitions
9-7-3:   Vehicles Exempt
9-7-4:   Presumption
9-7-5:   Removal Of Unused And Inoperable Motor Vehicles
9-7-6:   Application To Court For Warrant To Remove
9-7-7:   Reclaimed Vehicles; Expenses
9-7-8:   Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicles; Disposition Of Proceeds
9-7-9:   Remedy Not Exclusive
9-7-10:   Liability
9-7-1: POLICY:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person to cause, permit or allow the existence of any inoperable motor vehicle,
any motor vehicle not regularly used, or any parts thereof to exist or be
stored upon any public or private property in view of the general public. (Ord.
18/2017, 6-5-2017)
9-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or
on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the motor vehicle is incapable of being driven under
its own motor power. However, such term shall not include a motor vehicle which
has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor
power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but is not limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers.
   MOTOR VEHICLE NOT REGULARLY USED: Any motor vehicle which: a) has not been
driven off the premises where it is parked or stored under its own motor power
for a period longer than three (3) months; b) is not registered, licensed, or
properly displaying registration plates or stickers as required by the Illinois
Vehicle Code; or c) exhibits damaged parts or appears to be in a state of
disrepair, including, but not limited to, broken and missing windows, body
panels with holes, and fluid leaks which pose an open threat of injury or
contamination for a period of longer than fourteen (14) days. (Ord. 18/2017, 6-
5-2017)
9-7-3: VEHICLES EXEMPT:
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to: a) a motor vehicle kept within
an enclosed building when not in use, b) historic motor vehicles over twenty
five (25) years of age and in an operable condition, c) motor vehicles owned
and operated by the City of Aledo, Mercer County, the State of Illinois or of
the United States government, d) a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles, or e) a motor
vehicle on any premises zoned Class C, Light Industrial District, and the
business located thereon is engaged in either a full time towing and automotive
body repair service or in the sale of used car parts under license duly issued
by the Secretary of State's Office for that purpose. (Ord. 18/2017, 6-5-2017)
9-7-4: PRESUMPTION:
A person shall be deemed to cause, permit or allow such a nuisance to exist if
such person:
   (A)   Has an ownership interest in or is in control of the inoperable motor
vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used;
   (B)   Causes the inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly
used to be deposited at the site in question;
   (C)   Has an ownership interest in the real estate upon which the inoperable
motor vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used is located;
   (D)   Has an ownership interest in or operates a business which causes,
permits or allows such a nuisance to exist on the real estate upon which the
business is operated or on adjacent real estate which is under the control of
the business owner or operator; or
   (E)   Has an ownership interest in real estate upon which a business is
being operated and the operator or owner of said business causes, permits or
allows such a nuisance to exist on the real estate upon which the business is
being operated or on adjacent real estate which is under the control of the
person having an ownership interest in real estate upon which said business is
being operated. (Ord. 18/2017, 6-5-2017)
9-7-5: REMOVAL OF UNUSED AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
   (A)   Public Property: Whenever any person causes, permits, or allows a
nuisance under this chapter to exist or be stored on public property, the Chief
of the Police Department shall have the right to authorize removal of the motor
vehicle in accordance with chapter 4, article 2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 1
.
   (B)   Private Property: Whenever any person causes, permits or allows a
nuisance under this chapter to exist or be stored on private property, the
Chief of the Police Department or the Director of Public Works shall have the
right to authorize removal of the motor vehicle. Before a motor vehicle can be
removed from private property, the Chief of the Police Department or the
Director of Public Works shall serve a written notice to abate upon the person
who is causing, permitting or allowing the nuisance to exist or be stored on
private property and in accordance with the following procedure:
      1.   Notice:
         (a)   Notice shall be served either personally or by certified mail
upon the person who is causing, permitting or allowing the nuisance to exist or
be stored on private property. Personal service shall be by any person
authorized by law to make personal service.
         (b)   The notice shall describe the motor vehicle to be removed and
give the person served seven (7) days from the date of service of the notice to
either abate the nuisance or request a hearing on the question of whether the
vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used.
      2.   Opportunity For Hearing: The person who is causing, permitting or
allowing the nuisance to exist or be stored on private property shall have
seven (7) days from the date of service of the notice to submit a written
request for a hearing on the question of whether the described motor vehicle is
an inoperable motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle not regularly used within the
meaning of this chapter with the City Clerk. If the recipient of the notice
does not file a written request for hearing within the seven (7) day period,
any hearing rights under this section will be deemed waived, and the City may,
at its option, cause the abatement of the nuisance in accordance with section
9-7-6 of this chapter. Hearings shall be held by the Circuit Court of Mercer
County.
      3.   Scheduling Of Hearings: If a hearing is requested within the seven
(7) day period, the hearing shall be scheduled to occur within thirty (30) days
after the request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk. The person
making the request for a hearing shall be provided with reasonable notice of
the hearing date and time in person or by first-class mail.
      4.   Nature Of Hearing: The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any nuisance citation issued to the person who is causing,
permitting or allowing the nuisance to exist or be stored on private property.
After receiving all relevant evidence, the court shall make a written decision
based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether the motor vehicle
constitutes an inoperable motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle not regularly used
within the meaning of this chapter.
      5.   Hearing Decision: The person who requested the hearing shall be
provided a copy of the hearing decision within seven (7) days of the decision
in person or by first-class mail. If the court determines that the motor
vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle not regularly used,
then the notice to abate shall become effective from and after the date such
determination is served on the person who requested the hearing, and the City
may, at its option, cause the removal of the motor vehicle in accordance with
chapter 4, article 2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 2 . The person shall be
responsible for all costs related to the towing, storage, disposal, and
processing of the motor vehicle. (Ord. 18/2017, 6-5-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
2 1. 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
9-7-6: APPLICATION TO COURT FOR WARRANT TO REMOVE:
Unless otherwise authorized by court order pursuant to subsection
9-7-5(B) of this chapter, in order to remove a motor vehicle from private
property, the City shall apply to the Circuit Court of Mercer County for a
determination that the motor vehicle is inoperable or not regularly used, and
request the Circuit Court to issue a warrant for the removal of the motor
vehicle.
If the court issues a warrant to remove the motor vehicle, the City shall
thereafter proceed in accordance with this chapter and chapter 4, article 2 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code 1 . (Ord. 18/2017, 6-5-2017)
 
Notes
1 2. 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
9-7-7: RECLAIMED VEHICLES; EXPENSES:
Any time before a motor vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as
provided in this chapter, the owner, lienholder or other person legally
entitled to its possession may reclaim the motor vehicle by presenting to the
Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
motor vehicle. No motor vehicle shall be released to the owner, lienholder, or
other person under this section until all towing, storage, and processing
charges have been paid. (Ord. 18/2017, 6-5-2017)
9-7-8: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
Following the removal of any motor vehicle as provided in this chapter, the
disposal of any unclaimed motor vehicle and the disposition of any proceeds
thereof shall be in accordance with chapter 4, article 2 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code 1 . (Ord. 18/2017, 6-5-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
9-7-9: REMEDY NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing upon the City, a duty to
abate the nuisance as specified in this chapter. The action authorized by this
chapter shall be in addition to and without waiver of any other remedies. (Ord.
18/2017, 6-5-2017)
9-7-10: LIABILITY:
Any police officer, the Police Department, the Department of Public Works or
its officers or employees, or a towing service owner, operator or employee
shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by
the registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative,
lienholder or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor
vehicle when the motor vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as
provided by this chapter. (Ord. 18/2017, 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 8
RECORDS
SECTION:
9-8-1:   Traffic Citations; Form
9-8-2:   Traffic Citations; Disposition And Records
9-8-3:   Cancellation Of Citation
9-8-1: TRAFFIC CITATIONS; FORM:
   (A)   The police department shall provide in appropriate form traffic
citations containing notices to appear which shall be issued in books with
citations in quadruplicate.
   (B)   The chief of police shall be responsible for the issuance of such
books and shall maintain a record of every such book and each citation
contained therein issued to individual members of the police department and
shall require and retain a receipt for every book so issued. (1969 Code; amd.
Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-8-2: TRAFFIC CITATIONS; DISPOSITION AND RECORDS:
   (A)   Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of this title shall deposit the original or a copy of
such traffic citation with the court having jurisdiction over the alleged
offense.
   (B)   Upon the deposit of the original or a copy of such traffic citation
with the court, said original or copy of such traffic citation may be disposed
of only by trial in said court or other official action by the judge of said
court, including a forfeiture of bail or by the deposit of sufficient bail with
or payment of a fine to the court by the person to whom such traffic citation
has been issued by a police officer.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any police officer to dispose of a traffic
citation or copies thereof or of the record of the issuance of the same in a
manner other than as required herein.
   (D)   The chief of police shall require the return to him of a copy of every
traffic citation issued by an officer under his supervision to an alleged
violator of any traffic law and of all copies of every traffic citation which
has been spoiled or upon which any entry has been made and not issued to an
alleged violator.
   (E)   The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in
connection with every traffic citation issued by an officer under his
supervision a record of the disposition of the charge by the court in which the
original or copy was deposited. (1969 Code; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-8-3: CANCELLATION OF CITATION:
   (A)   Any person who cancels or solicits the cancellation of any traffic
citation, in any manner other than as provided in this title, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Every record of traffic citations required in this chapter shall be
audited at least biannually and a summary of all traffic violation notices
issued shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. (1969 Code;
amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 9
HANDICAPPED PARKING
SECTION:
9-9-1:   Reserved Parking
9-9-2:   Authority To Designate Additional Parking Spaces
9-9-3:   Installation Of Necessary Signs
9-9-4:   Registration For Parking
9-9-5:   Parking Space Used Only By Disabled Person
9-9-6:   Violation Of Chapter
9-9-1: RESERVED PARKING:
The north and south parking spaces respectively located on the east side of
that portion of Northwest Second Avenue, Aledo, Illinois, lying adjacent to the
building owned by Mercer County, Mercer Township, and the City, and currently
leased to the Mercer County Chapter 652 of American Association of Retired
Persons, Inc., an Illinois general not for profit corporation, are hereby
designated as being reserved for the parking of vehicles either owned,
operated, or under the direction of a disabled person while he or she is
present in the immediate surrounding area. (Ord. 18/80, 4-6-1981; amd. Ord. 26/
2016, 1-3-2017)
9-9-2: AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE ADDITIONAL PARKING SPACES:
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate such additional parking
spaces for the handicapped within the City as may be necessary subject to the
prior approval of the Council. Moreover, the authority of the Chief of Police
to designate such additional parking spaces as may be required for the
handicapped shall also include the right to designate limitations on the times
during which such parking spaces shall be reserved for the parking of vehicles
either owned, operated, or under the direction of a disabled person while he or
she is present in the immediate surrounding area subject to prior Council
approval as to any such time limitations. (Ord. 18/80, 4-6-1981; amd. Ord. 26/
2016, 1-3-2017)
9-9-3: INSTALLATION OF NECESSARY SIGNS:
After the Chief of Police designates a particular parking space to be reserved
for the handicapped subject to any time limitations as may be imposed and the
Council has approved same, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
designate and maintain any such parking space reserved for the handicapped by
installing all necessary and appropriate signs and devices required to
designate same, including, but not limited to, authority to paint such marks or
lines upon the surface of any such parking space, in order to notify the public
that parking therein is restricted to the handicapped. (Ord. 18/80, 4-6-1981;
amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-9-4: REGISTRATION FOR PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-616, or to a disabled veteran, pursuant to 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-609, or not bearing such decals or devices as
the City Clerk shall issue to a handicapped person or disabled veteran upon
request, in parking places specifically reserved for handicapped persons by the
posting of an official sign or any painted mark or line designating any parking
space as being reserved for the handicapped. However, notwithstanding the
foregoing prohibition, any owner or operator of a vehicle not bearing
registration plates or decals or devices as provided in the foregoing sentence
which is parked in a space reserved for the handicapped, shall not be guilty of
any violation under the provisions of this chapter if he or she proves by a
preponderance of the evidence that any such vehicle allegedly parked in
violation of this chapter was at the time either operated by a disabled person
or was being used under the direction of a disabled person while he or she was
present in the immediate surrounding area. (Ord. 18/80, 4-6-1981; amd. Ord. 26/
2016, 1-3-2017)
9-9-5: PARKING SPACE USED ONLY BY DISABLED PERSON:
It is hereby unlawful to park any motor vehicle bearing a decal or devices
signifying handicapped status in a place designated for handicapped persons if
the vehicle at the time is not being used under the direction of a disabled
person while he or she is present in the immediate surrounding area. (Ord. 18/
80, 4-6-1981; amd. Ord. 26/2016, 1-3-2017)
9-9-6: VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
Any person who violates any of the aforesaid sections of this chapter shall be
fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of this Code. (Ord. 24/2017,
6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 10
GOLF CARTS AND NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-10-1:   Definitions
9-10-2:   Permits
9-10-3:   Required Equipment
9-10-4:   Rules And Regulations
9-10-5:   Enforcement
9-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CITY STREETS: Any of the streets within the boundaries of the City of Aledo,
Illinois, except for State and County roads.
   GOLF CART: Means a vehicle specifically designed and intended for the
purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or
maintenance equipment while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the
play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or
private golf course.
   NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE (NV): Self-propelled, electronically powered four-
wheeled motor vehicle (or a self-propelled, gasoline powered four-wheeled motor
vehicle) which is capable of attaining a speed of more than twenty (20) miles
per hour, and which conforms to Federal regulations under title 49 CFR part
571.500. (Ord. 35/2017, 12-4-2017)
9-10-2: PERMITS:
   (A)   Permit Required:
      1.   No resident of Aledo shall operate a motorized golf cart or NV
without obtaining a permit from the City of Aledo Police Department as provided
in this section.
      2.   Valid, current permits issued to residents of Mercer County,
Illinois by Mercer County or any other municipality within Mercer County shall
be honored by the City of Aledo and such permit-holders shall not be required
to separately obtain a permit from the City of Aledo; provided, however, that
such non-residents shall at all times have such permit or other evidence
thereof available for presentation upon request by City officials and provided
further that such non-residents shall at all times comply with the provisions
of Title 9, Chapter 10 of the Aledo City Code, except as set forth in this
section.
      3.   Non-residents who do not have a valid, current permit from another
municipality within Mercer County shall not operate a motorized golf cart or NV
without obtaining a permit from the City of Aledo Police Department as provided
in this section.
   (B)   Golf cart or NV owners must complete an original permit application or
renewal permit application, as appropriate, which may be obtained from the City
of Aledo Police Department. The completed forms will be maintained by the City
of Aledo Police Department.
   (C)   The initial cost and the renewal cost of a permit shall be pursuant to
Title 13, "Schedule of Fees", of this Code, to cover the costs of implementing
and maintaining this chapter, and shall be paid to the City of Aledo by the
applicant.
   (D)   All permits expire on December 31 of each year regardless of the date
on which the original permit was issued.
   (E)   After completion of the original permit application and payment of the
requisite original permit fee a permit shall be issued to the applicant which
must be kept on/in the vehicle at all times.
   (F)   The Police Department shall issue a sticker as visible proof of
compliance, which shall be valid until December 31 of the year of registration,
and which must be visibly displayed on the back passenger side or "slow moving"
emblem located at the rear of the golf cart or NV at all times.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, persons who have
obtained permits from Visit MerCo or other municipalities shall be authorized
to operate golf carts or NVs within the City of Aledo in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, provided that all such vehicles are equipped with a
sticker on the rear of the vehicle as visible proof of compliance with Mercer
County or such other municipality's ordinances. (Ord. 35/2017, 12-4-2017; amd.
Ord. 02/2021, 1-19-2021; Ord. 20/2021, 11-1-2021)
9-10-3: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
A golf cart or NV operated on a City of Aledo street shall have the following
equipment in good working condition at all times:
   (A)   Brakes.
   (B)   Steering apparatus.
   (C)   Tires.
   (D)   Rearview mirror.
   (E)   A slow moving emblem as required by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
12-709 attached to the rear.
   (F)   Headlights that emit white light visible from at least five hundred
feet (500') to the front.
   (G)   Taillights that emit red light visible from at least one hundred feet
(100') from the rear.
   (H)   Brake lights on the rear.
   (I)   Turn signals on the front and rear.
   (J)   Seat belts for each passenger.
   (K)   A yellow flashing light visible for at least one hundred feet (100')
from the rear of the vehicle, if operated between one-half (1/2) hour after
sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise. (Ord. 35/2017, 12-4-2017)
9-10-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Golf carts and NVs, may only be operated on streets within the City of Aledo in
accordance with the following rules and regulations:
   (A)   Any person who operates a golf cart or NV in the City of Aledo takes
full responsibility for all liability associated with operating a golf cart or
NV.
   (B)   Any person who operates a golf cart or NV must be at least twenty one
(21) years of age and possess a valid driver's license to operate a motor
vehicle issued by Illinois or any other state.
   (C)   No person shall operate, and no owner shall permit another person to
operate a golf cart or NV on a City of Aledo street unless: the golf cart or NV
is covered by a liability insurance policy as required by section 7-601 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code 1 ; and the operator of the golf cart or NV carries with
him/her proof of liability insurance as required by section 7-602 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code 2 .
   (D)   Golf carts or NVs shall only be allowed to be operated on City of
Aledo streets between one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, and one-half (1/2)
hour after sunset, as established by the National Weather Service; unless the
golf cart or NV is equipped with a yellow flashing light visible for at least
one hundred feet (100') from the rear of the vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall operate a golf cart or NV on a City of Aledo street in
excess of the posted speed limits.
   (F)   Golf carts or NVs may not be operated on State Highway 17 or State
Highway 94 except to cross said highways at intersections, in a path ninety
degrees (90°) or as direct as possible across said highway, to the nearest
intersecting street, inside a crossing zone.
   (G)   Golf carts and NVs shall have their headlights and taillights lighted
at all times when operated on City streets.
   (H)   Golf carts and NVs may not be operated when visibility is impaired by
weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions or at any time when there is
insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a
distance of five hundred feet (500').
   (I)   Golf carts and NVs may not be operated on the sidewalk.
   (J)   Golf cart and NV drivers must yield the right-of-way to overtaking
vehicles at all times.
   (K)   Any person who operates a golf cart or NV on the streets of the City
of Aledo must adhere to all applicable State laws concerning the possession and
use of alcoholic beverages, cannabis, and all illegal drugs, as well as all
other State traffic laws.
   (L)   The operator of a golf cart or NV shall obey all ordinances of the
City of Aledo and all provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended from
time to time. (Ord. 35/2017, 12-4-2017; amd. Ord. 49/2019, 12-16-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/7-601.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/7-602.
9-10-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   The City of Aledo may prosecute violators for any act constituting a
violation of this chapter. Any person who violates any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a City ordinance violation and shall be punished by
a fine as specified in the schedule of fines.
   (B)   The permit to operate a golf cart or NV issued pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended by the Chief of Police, or his designee, if: 1) there
is any material misrepresentation made by the applicant on the application or
2) the required liability insurance is no longer in full force and effect or 3)
there is evidence that the license holder can no longer safely operate the golf
cart or NV or 4) for any reason appropriate to insure the safety and well-being
of the citizens of the City of Aledo.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall issue a notice of
suspension of a license in writing and either hand deliver the notice to the
license holder or send the notice by certified mail to the license holder at
the address on the application. The suspension of a license shall be effective
immediately after personal service, or on the third day after the post mark of
the certified mail receipt.
   (D)   Any person whose permit has been suspended by the Aledo Police
Department may appeal such decision to the City Council of the City of Aledo.
Upon due consideration of the cause(s) of the suspension, the City Council
shall either uphold the suspension of the permit or reverse the suspension of
the permit.
   (E)   Repeat offenders may have the privileges granted by this chapter
revoked by the City Council of the City of Aledo upon recommendation by the
City of Aledo Police Department. (Ord. 35/2017, 12-4-2017)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1:   Definitions Of Words And Terms
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
For the purposes of this title certain terms and words are hereby defined as
follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
number shall include the plural; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not
directory.
   ABUTTING: Having a common property line or district line.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A structure or use that: a) is subordinate to
and serves a principal building or a principal use, except for a drive-in
facility; b) is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal
structure or principal use served; c) contributes to the comfort, convenience,
or necessity of the occupants, business, or industry of the principal structure
or principal use served; and d) is located on the same lot as the principal
structure or principal use served, except as may otherwise be expressly
authorized by the provisions of this title. An accessory structure attached to
a principal building in a substantial manner by a wall or roof shall be
considered part of the principal building.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building or premises used for the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or
oils.
   BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) its height
below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height
regulations if subdivided and used for business or dwelling purposes other than
by a janitor employed on the premises.
   BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or
shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
   BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals
or lodging and meals, are provided for three (3) but not more than twenty (20)
persons.
   BUILDING: A structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, or property. When a structure is
divided into separate parts by unpierced walls extending from the ground up,
each part is deemed a separate building.
   BUILDING AREA: The maximum horizontal projected area of a building and its
accessory buildings, excluding chimneys, open steps, balconies, buttresses,
terraces, open porches, cornices, and other minor ornamental features
projecting from the walls of the building and not supported by the ground.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deckline of a mansard roof, or to
the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which the business of the principal use
of the lot on which the building is located is conducted.
   CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade, a
cellar is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of
height measurement.
   DISTRICT: A section or sections of the city for which the zoning regulations
are uniform.
   DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used for
residential purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied
by more than two (2) families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied by two (2)
families.
   FAMILY: One or more individuals using common cooking facilities and living
and eating together on the same premises as a single housekeeping unit.
   GARBAGE: Any odorous, putrescible or combustible waste materials.
   GRADE: The average level of the ground surface adjacent to the exterior
building walls.
   HOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for
compensation and which is open to transient or permanent guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding house or lodging house.
   IMPROVED SURFACE: An improved surface consisting of not less than four
inches (4") of compacted commercially prepared road gravel or crushed rock.
   LOT: A parcel of land located within a single block which shall be either a
"lot of record" or a "zoning lot" and shall have frontage upon a "street".
   LOT AREA: The area of horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes
through front, side, and rear lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or
more intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of
a single street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty
five degrees (135°).
   LOT COVERAGE, BUILDING: The ratio between the ground floor areas of all
buildings or structures on a lot and the total area of the lot.
   LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
   LOT LINE: A line dividing one lot from another lot or from a street or
alley.
   LOT LINE, FRONT: A lot line that is a street lot line. Any street lot line
of a corner lot may be established by the owner as the front lot line,
provided, a proposed front lot line on a corner lot shall not be permitted if
fifty percent (50%) or more of the buildings on the same street frontage do not
have a front lot line established thereupon.
   LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot that is most distant from and is, or
is approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less
than ten feet (10') in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet (10') in length within the
lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot that is not a front or rear lot line.
On a corner lot, a side lot line may be a street lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Mercer County, or a
parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of said recorder
of deeds prior to the original January 18, 1954, adoption of the zoning
ordinance.
   LOT, THROUGH: A lot with lot lines on two (2) streets, that is not a corner
lot. Either street lot line in this case may be established by the owner as the
front lot line, provided, a proposed front lot line shall not be permitted if
fifty percent (50%) or more of the buildings on the same street frontage do not
have a front lot line established thereupon.
   LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines measured across the rear
of the required front yard.
   LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block that, at
the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may not
coincide with a lot of record.
   NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATION: An agency or organization or activity operating
under the 501(c)(3) regulations of the internal revenue service.
   REAR YARD: An open space on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied
except for accessory buildings, extending the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main building projected to
the side lot lines.
   ROOMING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
three (3) or more but not more than twenty (20) persons.
   SIDE YARD: An open space on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied
except for accessory buildings, situated between the side line of the main
building and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the rear line
of the main building extended to the front line of the main building extended.
   SIGNS: All signs or billboards displayed on a building or separate
structure, but not including names of owners, farm or business names, and signs
on the interior of windows.
   STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
   STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection
of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished off for use. A half-story containing independent apartment or living
quarters shall be counted as a full story.
   STREET LOT LINE: A line forming the boundary of the right of way of an
existing or dedicated street.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground.
   TOURIST CAMP: An area containing one or more structures used for
accommodation of automobile transients.
   TRAILER CAMP: An area containing facilities for and used to accommodate
automobile trailers arranged as dwelling units.
   USED: Shall be deemed to include the words "arranged", "designed", or
"intended to be used".
   WEDDING/EVENT FACILITY: A facility which is utilized by individuals or
groups to accommodate private functions including, but not limited to,
banquets, weddings, celebrations, corporate functions and other like events.
The facility is considered supplemental to the principal residence within
residential districts.
   YARD: An open space on a lot that is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in this title. A
required yard extends along a lot line and at right angles to such line to a
minimum depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in
which such lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full width of a front lot line
between side lot lines and from the front lot line to the front building line
in depth.
   YARD, REAR: The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal
building located between the building and the rear lot line extending for the
full width of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and
rear yards, except that a side yard abutting a street shall be defined as the
yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard and the rear lot
lines. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954; amd. Ord. 11-19-07-3, 12-17-2007; Ord. 12/2014,
6-16-2014; Ord. 09/2015, 9-21-2015)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1:   Short Title
10-2-2:   Scope Of Regulations
10-2-3:   Incidental Uses
10-2-4:   Temporary Uses
10-2-5:   Interpretation And Purpose
10-2-6:   Conflicting Agreements
10-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF ALEDO,
ILLINOIS. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-2-2: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
Except as provided by this title it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To establish any use of a building, structure or land, either by
itself or in addition to another use.
   (B)   To expand, change or reestablish any nonconforming use.
   (C)   To erect a new building or structure or part thereof.
   (D)   To rebuild, structurally alter, add to or relocate any building or
structure or part thereof.
   (E)   To reduce the open space or plot area required for a building or
structure, or to include any part of such open space or plot area as that
required for an adjoining building or structure. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-2-3: INCIDENTAL USES:
Unless otherwise prohibited or restricted, a permitted use also allows uses,
buildings and structures incidental thereto if located on the same site or
building plot. However, such incidental uses, buildings and structures shall
not be established or erected prior to the establishment or construction of the
principal use or building and shall be compatible with the character of the
principal use. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-2-4: TEMPORARY USES:
Permitted anywhere is a temporary yard for a contractor's plant required for
highway construction, if not nearer than eight hundred feet (800') to any
residence other than that of the owner or lessor of the site. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-
1954)
10-2-5: INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSE:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held
to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, comfort and general welfare. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-2-6: CONFLICTING AGREEMENTS:
It is not intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however,
that wherever, this title imposes greater restriction upon the use of
buildings, structures or land, or requires more restrictive building lines,
then the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 3
DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3-1:   Districts Established
10-3-2:   Boundaries
10-3-3:   Map
10-3-4:   Annexations
10-3-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For purposes of this title, the city is hereby divided into districts
designated as follows:
 
R-1 Residential district
R-2 Residential district
R-3 Residential district
B-1 Commercial district
B-2 Commercial district
C   Industrial (light industry) district
D   Industrial (heavy industry) district
 
(Ord. 18/2012, 9-4-2012)
10-3-2: BOUNDARIES:
If uncertainty arises with respect to the boundaries of the various districts
as shown on the zoning maps, the enforcing officer shall determine the
boundaries in accordance with the following rules:
   (A)   District boundaries unless otherwise indicated are the centerlines of
streets, highways, alleys, railroads, or easements, or the boundary lines of
sections, quarter sections, tracts, or lots, or such lines extended.
   (B)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the
regulations of either district may apply to the entire lot but not more than
twenty five feet (25') beyond the boundary line. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-3-3: MAP:
The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the zoning map, which map
is made a part of this title by reference. The said zoning map of Aledo and all
notations, references, and other matter shown thereon shall be as much a part
of this title as if they were fully described herein. The said zoning map of
Aledo shall be on file and available for public reference in the office of the
enforcing officer complete with amendments which are adopted as provided
herein. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-3-4: ANNEXATIONS:
All territory which may hereafter become a part of Aledo or which is not shown
on the maps shall be classed in the R-2 residential district until otherwise
classified by amendment. (Ord. 18/2012, 9-4-2012)
CHAPTER 4
R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-4-1:   Uses
10-4-1-1:    Special Uses
10-4-2:   Lot Size
10-4-3:   Dwelling Size
10-4-4:   Side And Rear Yards
10-4-5:   Building Area
10-4-1: USES:
Buildings and premises shall be used only for the following and other similar
purposes:
   Carnivals and circuses, provided that half the tract upon which said
carnival or circus is located or two (2) acres whichever is greater shall be
provided for customer parking with gravel, crushed rock or other improved
access roads. Such carnivals and circuses shall not operate more than fifteen
(15) consecutive days and they shall be located not closer than one thousand
feet (1,000') to any dwelling except that of the owner or lessor of the site.
   Churches and convents.
   Dwellings (single-family).
   Fire stations.
   Hospitals, sanatoriums, clinics, but not animal hospitals.
   Lakes.
   Landfilling with nonodorous and noncombustible materials.
   Libraries and museums.
   Parks.
   Police stations.
   Professional and home occupations engaged in by the occupants of a dwelling
and not involving the conduct of a retail business, and providing that not more
than one sign with a maximum area of two (2) square feet may be displayed
setting forth such occupation.
   Public utility substations, booster stations, but not including power
generation or gas manufacturing plants.
   Railroad trackage, but not roundhouses and repair shops.
   Schools.
   Signs, not more than twenty (20) square feet in area, pertaining only to the
lease or sale of a building or premises. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-4-1-1: SPECIAL USES:
   Not for profit organizations.
   Wedding/event facility. (Ord. 12/2014, 6-16-2014; amd. Ord. 09/2015, 9-21-
2015)
10-4-2: LOT SIZE:
Every lot or tract of land upon which a single-family dwelling is to be
constructed shall have an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square
feet and a minimum width of fifty feet (50'), except that a smaller lot
officially on record at the time of the passage hereof, may be occupied by a
single-family dwelling. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-4-3: DWELLING SIZE:
One-story dwellings shall be constructed with not less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet of floor area. Dwellings with two (2) or more stories shall
be constructed with not less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square
feet of floor area. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-4-4: SIDE AND REAR YARDS:
Required side yard widths shall be a minimum of six feet (6') between the
primary building and the side property line(s) and a minimum of six feet (6')
between the primary building and the rear property line. Required side yards
for corner lots on the corner side shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') between
the primary building and corner side property line. Required side yard widths
for all accessory structures, including, but not limited to, detached garages,
sheds, gazebos and inground swimming pools and any portion thereof shall be a
minimum of three feet (3') from the structure to the side property line and a
minimum of three feet (3') from the structure to the rear property line. There
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') between an accessory structure and the
primary structure. (Ord. 11-19-07-3, 12-17-2007)
10-4-5: BUILDING AREA:
The building area shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot area. (Ord.
8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 5
R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5-1:   Uses
10-5-1-1:    Special Uses
10-5-2:   Lot Size
10-5-3:   Dwelling Size
10-5-4:   Side And Rear Yards
10-5-5:   Building Area
10-5-1: USES:
Buildings and premises may be used for the same purposes listed in section
10-4-1 of this title and in addition for the following purposes:
   Community civic center constructed or operated under the Illinois
Metropolitan Civic Center support act.
   Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 12/2014, 6-16-2014)
10-5-1-1: SPECIAL USES:
   Not for profit organizations.
   Wedding/event facility. (Ord. 12/2014, 6-16-2014; amd. Ord. 09/2015, 9-21-
2015)
10-5-2: LOT SIZE:
Every lot or tract of land which a single-family dwelling is to be constructed
shall have an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and a
minimum width of forty feet (40'). For two-family dwellings, there shall be an
additional two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet area and a minimum
width of fifty feet (50'), provided, that a smaller lot officially on record at
the time of the passage hereof may be used for a single-family dwelling. (Ord.
8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-5-3: DWELLING SIZE:
One-story dwellings shall be constructed with not less than seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet of floor area. Dwellings with two (2) or more stories shall
be constructed with not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet
of floor area. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-5-4: SIDE AND REAR YARDS:
Required side yard widths for interior parcels shall be a minimum of six feet
(6') between the primary building and the side lot line(s) and a minimum of six
feet (6') between the primary building and the rear property line. Required
side yards for corner lots on the corner side shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10') between the primary building and corner side property line. Required side
yards for corner parcels on the corner side shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10') between the primary building and corner side property line. Required side
yard widths for all accessory structures, including, but not limited to,
detached garages, sheds, gazebos and inground swimming pools and any portion
thereof shall be a minimum of three feet (3') from the structure to the side
property line and a minimum of three feet (3') from the structure to the rear
property line. There shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') between an accessory
structure and the primary structure. (Ord. 11-19-07-3, 12-17-2007)
10-5-5: BUILDING AREA:
The building area shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot area. (Ord.
8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 5.1
R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5.1-1:    Uses
10-5.1-1-1:    Special Uses
10-5.1-2:    Lot Size
10-5.1-3:    Dwelling Size
10-5.1-4:    Side And Rear Yards
10-5.1-5:    Building Area
10-5.1-1: USES:
Buildings and premises may be used for the same purposes listed in sections
10-4-1 and
10-5-1 of this title and in addition for the following purposes:
   Multiple dwellings. (Ord. 12/2014, 6-16-2014)
10-5.1-1-1: SPECIAL USES:
   Not for profit organizations.
   Wedding/event facility. (Ord. 12/2014, 6-16-2014; amd. Ord. 09/2015, 9-21-
2015)
10-5.1-2: LOT SIZE:
Every lot or tract of land upon which a multiple dwelling is to be constructed
shall have an area of not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet. (Ord. 4/70, 8-3-1970)
10-5.1-3: DWELLING SIZE:
One-story multiple-family dwellings shall be constructed with not less than
seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of floor area for each family unit. (Ord.
4/70, 8-3-1970)
10-5.1-4: SIDE AND REAR YARDS:
Required side yard widths shall be a minimum of six feet (6') between the
primary building and the side property line(s) and a minimum of thirty percent
(30%) of the lot depth between the primary building and the rear property line.
Required side yard for accessory structures, including, but not limited to,
detached garages, sheds, gazebos and inground swimming pools and any portion
thereof shall be a minimum of three feet (3') from the structure to the side
property line and a minimum of three feet (3') from the structure to the rear
property line. There shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') between an accessory
structure and the primary structure. (Ord. 11-19-07-3, 12-17-2007)
10-5.1-5: BUILDING AREA:
The building area shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot area. (Ord.
4/70, 8-3-1970)
CHAPTER 6
B-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-6-1:   Uses
10-6-2:   Dwellings
10-6-3:   Extent Industrial Occupancy
10-6-4:   Side And Rear Yards
10-6-5:   Building Area
10-6-1: USES:
Buildings and premises shall be used only for the following and other similar
purposes:
   Advertising signs.
   Airports, provided that a permit for the construction of an airport shall
only be issued by the enforcing officer upon favorable action of the zoning
board after following the procedure and requirements specified under this title
for appeals requiring a public hearing. Airport runways shall terminate not
less than six hundred feet (600') from the airport property line.
   Athletic fields.
   Automobile service stations.
   Bakeries.
   Banks.
   Barbershops.
   Beauty parlors.
   Billboards.
   Bus or truck stations.
   Carnivals and circuses, provided that at least half of the tract upon which
said carnival or circus is located and not less than two (2) acres is provided
for customer parking with gravel, crushed rock or other improved access roads,
provided that such carnivals and circuses shall not operate more than fifteen
(15) consecutive days, and provided that they shall be located not closer than
one thousand feet (1,000') to any single-family dwelling except that of the
owner or lessor of the site.
   Catering establishments.
   Churches and convents.
   Cleaners shop, dyeing or dry cleaning shops.
   Colleges.
   Commercial schools, dancing or music schools.
   Community buildings (grange halls, etc.).
   Domestic appliance repair shops.
   Dwellings (single-family).
   Dwellings (two-family and multiple-family).
   Filling stations.
   Fire stations.
   Flower gardening.
   Food lockers.
   Garage, public, provided that the portions used for storage and repair shall
not be nearer than thirty feet (30') to the front of the building.
   Golf driving ranges.
   Greenhouses.
   Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics but not animal hospitals.
   Hotels.
   Landfilling with nonodorous and noncombustible materials.
   Laundries, provided not more than five (5) persons are employed on the
premises.
   Libraries.
   Lodge halls.
   Messenger or telegraph stations.
   Milk distribution stations.
   Nurseries.
   Offices.
   Orchards.
   Painting or decorating shops.
   Parking lots.
   Parks.
   Photograph galleries.
   Police stations.
   Poster panels.
   Printing shops.
   Private clubs.
   Professional occupations.
   Public utility substations, booster stations, etc., but not including power
generation or gas manufacturing plants.
   Radio stations.
   Railroad trackage and depots, but not roundhouses and repair shops.
   Restaurants.
   Retail business.
   Rooming or boarding houses.
   Sales or show rooms.
   Schools.
   Shoe repair shops.
   Storage warehouses.
   Studio parlors.
   Swimming pools.
   Tailor shops.
   Tinsmithing shops.
   Tire repair shops.
   Tourist camps and motels, provided that camps shall operate under the state
hotel laws, that an area of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet shall be provided for each unit, that gravel or other improved
surface access roads shall be constructed to parking areas, and that parking
area off the public right of way shall be furnished at the rate of one parking
place for each unit.
   Trailer camps, provided that an area of not less than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet shall be allocated to each trailer, that gravel,
crushed rock or other improved surface roadway shall be installed to furnish
access to each trailer site, that parking area off the public right of way
shall be furnished at the rate of one parking place for each unit, and that
sanitary facilities shall be furnished conforming to the requirements of the
county health department and the state department of health.
   Truck gardening.
   Undertaking establishments.
   Used car sales lots.
   Waterworks. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-6-2: DWELLINGS:
Every lot or tract of land upon which a single- or multiple-family dwelling is
to be constructed shall be subject to the restrictions of chapters 4 and 5 of
this title. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-6-3: EXTENT INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCY:
Any building or premises used primarily for any of the above purposes may have
not more than forty percent (40%) of the floor area devoted to industry or
storage purposes incidental to such primary use and provided that no more than
five (5) employees shall be engaged in such industry at any one time. (Ord. 8/
53, 1-18-1954)
10-6-4: SIDE AND REAR YARDS:
A commercial building to be constructed upon a lot or tract shall be restricted
in size so as to occupy no more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot or tract
area. No building shall be erected within five feet (5') of the rear lot line.
Buildings may occupy the full width of the lot or tract excepting on corner
lots where the building setback line is applicable. Adequate provisions shall
be made for the freight delivery off the right of way of public streets or
alleys. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-6-5: BUILDING AREA:
The building area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the lot area. (Ord.
8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 7
B-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7-1:   Uses
10-7-2:   Dwellings
10-7-3:   Extent Industrial Occupancy
10-7-4:   Building Area
10-7-1: USES:
Buildings and premises may be used for the purposes listed in section
10-6-1 of this title and in addition for the following purposes:
   Amusement places.
   Bowling alleys.
   Dance halls.
   Package liquor stores.
   Pool halls.
   Recreation buildings or uses.
   Restaurants serving intoxicating liquors.
   Rollerskating rinks.
   Taverns.
   Retail furniture stripping business.
   No buildings and/or premises used for any of the purposes permitted under a
B-2 commercial district shall be used in such a manner as to be substantially
detrimental to property or to the health, safety, comfort or general welfare of
the public, by reason of waste materials, explosives and/or fire hazards. (Ord.
8/53, 1-18-1954; amd. Ord. 24/79, 11-5-1979)
10-7-2: DWELLINGS:
Every lot or tract of land upon which a single- or multiple- family dwelling is
to be constructed shall be subject to the restrictions of chapters 4 and 5 of
this title. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-7-3: EXTENT INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCY:
Any building or premises used primarily for any of the above purposes may have
not more than forty percent (40%) of the floor area devoted to industry or
storage purposes incidental to such primary use and provided that not more than
five (5) employees shall be engaged in such industry at any one time. (Ord. 8/
53, 1-18-1954)
10-7-4: BUILDING AREA:
A commercial building to be constructed upon a lot or tract shall be restricted
in size so as to occupy not more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot or tract
area. No building shall be erected within five feet (5') of the rear lot line.
Buildings may occupy the full width of the lot or tract excepting on corner
lots where the building setback line is applicable. Adequate provisions shall
be made for freight delivery off the right of way of public streets or alleys.
(Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 8
C INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (LIGHT INDUSTRY)
SECTION:
10-8-1:   Uses
10-8-2:   Percentage Property Occupied
10-8-1: USES:
Buildings and premises may be used for the purposes included in chapters 4, 5,
6, and 7 commercial district regulations of this title and subject to the
restrictions therein, or for the following and other similar light industrial
uses, except that such uses shall not be especially detrimental to property or
to the health, safety, comfort or general welfare of the public, by reason of
gas, fumes, odors, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, waste materials, explosives
or fire hazards and that the uses listed in the D industrial district shall not
be permitted.
   Advertising signs.
   Bakeries.
   Billboards.
   Canning, packing, preserving and bottling of foodstuff and nonalcoholic
beverages.
   Cemetery monument works.
   Clay and glass products.
   Coal and building material yards.
   Concrete products manufacture.
   Electric power plants.
   Highway maintenance yards.
   Ice plants or storage.
   Laundries, cleaning and dyeing establishments.
   Lumberyards.
   Milk bottling and milk distribution stations.
   Mining, storage and processing of sand, gravel, stone, coal or other
minerals, by the open pit or shaft methods. Open pit mining shall not be
performed within a distance of three hundred feet (300') of any existing
structure or building other than the lessor or owner of the site unless written
permission is obtained from the owner of such structure or building. Head
frames, rock crushers or other processing equipment used in connection with
mining operations shall not be located within three hundred feet (300') of any
structure or building unless written permission of the owner of such structure
or building is secured.
   Petroleum products storage and handling.
   Poster panels.
   Printing plants.
   Public garages.
   Sales pavilions.
   Secondhand machinery yards.
   Truck or bus storage yards or terminals.
   Warehouses.
   Waterway terminals. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-8-2: PERCENTAGE PROPERTY OCCUPIED:
No restrictions are made regarding percentage of property which may be occupied
by buildings and structures other than those included in chapters 10 and 11 of
this title. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 9
D INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (HEAVY INDUSTRY)
SECTION:
10-9-1:   Uses
10-9-2:   Special Use Approval
10-9-1: USES:
Buildings and premises may be used for any of the purposes included in chapters
4 through 8 of this title and subject to the restrictions therein or for the
following and other similar heavy industrial uses:
   Acid manufacture.
   Alcohol manufacture.
   Ammonia, chlorine, bleaching powder manufacture.
   Asphalt manufacturing or refining.
   Auto wrecking.
   Bag cleaning.
   Blast furnace.
   Boiler works.
   Breweries.
   Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture.
   Cement, lime or gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture.
   Disinfectants manufacture.
   Distilleries.
   Dyestuff manufacture.
   Fertilizer manufacture.
   Food manufacturing plants.
   Forge plants.
   Gas manufacture and storage.
   Glue, size or gelatine manufacture.
   Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry or fabrication plants.
   Junk, iron or rag storage or baling.
   Oiled rubber goods manufacture.
   Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture.
   Paper or pulp manufacture.
   Planing mills.
   Rock crusher.
   Rolling mills.
   Rubber or guttapercha manufacture or treatment.
   Shoe polish manufacture.
   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores.
   Tar distillation or waterproofing manufacture. (Ord. 9/97, 12-15-1997)
10-9-2: SPECIAL USE APPROVAL:
   (A)   The following uses are declared to be special uses and require special
use approval as provided for in this code. Special uses provided for in other
zoning districts are not permitted in this district unless otherwise listed in
this subsection.
   Adult uses, as defined in title 3, chapter 15 of this code. (Ord. 11-06-06-
3, 12-4-2006)
CHAPTER 10
SETBACK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-10-1:   Front Line
10-10-2:   Built Up Areas
10-10-1: FRONT LINE:
No building, structure, concrete or masonry wall, no fence which cannot be
viewed through, or other improvement shall be erected or structurally altered
so that any part thereof is nearer than eighty five feet (85') to the
centerline of a state highway route, or nearer than seventy five feet (75') to
the centerline of any state aid route, or nearer than seventy five feet (75')
to the centerline of the following named and described roads:
No building, structure, concrete or masonry wall, no fence which can not be
viewed through, or other improvement shall be erected or structurally altered
so that any part thereof is nearer than sixty feet (60') of the centerline of
all other roads and streets or twenty five feet (25') from the right of way
line whichever may be the greater. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-10-2: BUILT UP AREAS:
In areas where seventy five percent (75%) or more of the frontage of the block
has existing buildings not in conformance with the above requirements,
buildings may be constructed at the average setback of existing buildings.
(Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954; amd. Ord. 11-19-07-3, 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 11
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
10-11-1:   Dwellings
10-11-2:   Institutions
10-11-3:   Commercial
10-11-4:   Industrial
10-11-5:   Downtown Business District Exemption
10-11-1: DWELLINGS:
Parking area and access drive of gravel or other improved surface shall be
provided off the public right of way at the rate of one parking place for each
dwelling unit. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-11-2: INSTITUTIONS:
Churches, hospitals, orphanages, colleges, sanatoriums, athletic fields and
like establishments shall provide adequate parking facilities off the public
right of way with gravel or improved surface. The area required shall be
sufficient to provide for the estimated number of vehicles of persons desiring
access to the premises. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-11-3: COMMERCIAL:
Commercial buildings shall provide vehicle parking area with gravel or other
improved surface for customer use at the rate of one parking place for each two
hundred (200) square feet of area in the building used for commercial purposes;
provided, that any establishment whose primary use is to serve meals, lunches,
or drinks to patrons in the building shall provide parking area for customers
at the rate of one parking place for each one hundred (100) square feet of
floor space in the building; that auditoriums, amusement places or theaters
shall provide one parking place for each four (4) seats in the theater; and
that two (2) or more establishments may provide joint parking areas providing
they are within three hundred feet (300') of the establishments. (Ord. 8/53, 1-
18-1954)
10-11-4: INDUSTRIAL:
Industrial buildings shall provide parking area off the public right of way
with gravel or other improved surface for both employees and customers.
There shall be provided off street loading and unloading space as follows:
   (A)   Buildings of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area, one off
street loading space plus one additional off street loading and unloading space
for each additional fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet of area.
   (B)   Each loading space shall be not less than fourteen feet (14') in width
and fifty feet (50') in length. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-11-5: DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT EXEMPTION:
No off street parking need be provided for buildings and uses located within
the boundaries of the downtown area enclosed by NW/SW 3rd Avenue, SW/SE 4th
Street, NE/SE 3rd Avenue, and NW/NE 2nd Street provided they are located within
five hundred feet (500') of a public parking lot or an alternative parking plan
is approved. (Ord. 06/2015, 7-20-2015)
CHAPTER 12
HEIGHT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-12-1:   Dwellings
10-12-2:   Institutions And Business
10-12-3:   Miscellaneous Structures
10-12-1: DWELLINGS:
Single- and two-family dwellings shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-12-2: INSTITUTIONS AND BUSINESS:
Multiple-family dwellings, apartments, hotels, public buildings, schools,
churches, hospitals, industrial and commercial buildings shall not exceed six
(6) stories or seventy five feet (75') in height. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-12-3: MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES:
Chimneys, grain elevators, stacks, fire towers, silos, wireless towers,
elevator bulkheads, scenery lofts, monuments, tanks and water towers may be
erected to any lawful and safe height. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 13
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-13-1:   Continuation
10-13-2:   Expansion
10-13-3:   Discontinuance
10-13-4:   Destruction Or Damage
10-13-5:   Changes
10-13-6:   Repairs
10-13-7:   Records
10-13-1: CONTINUATION:
Any lawful building or structure or lawful use of a building, structure or land
existing at the time of the passage hereof, or of a later amendment which does
not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located or to
other provisions of this title shall be known as nonconforming, and may remain
and the use thereof be continued as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-
1954)
10-13-2: EXPANSION:
A nonconforming use may be extended throughout the building provided no
structural alterations are made therein, except those required by law or
ordinance or such as may be required for safety, or such as may be necessary to
secure or ensure the continued advantageous use of the building during its
natural life, or the erection of its full height as originally planned of a
building with foundations and structural members designed to carry a higher
building. A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded beyond the area
actually so used at the time of the passage of this title or of a later
amendment creating the nonconformance. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-13-3: DISCONTINUANCE:
Any nonconforming use of a building, structure or land which is discontinued
for a period of one year or more shall not be continued again, and any future
use thereof shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 8/
53, 1-18-1954)
10-13-4: DESTRUCTION OR DAMAGE:
Any building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use which may be destroyed
by fire or otherwise to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its value
shall not be repaired or rebuilt, nor shall another building be erected on the
premises except in conformity with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 8/53, 1-
18-1954)
10-13-5: CHANGES:
A nonconforming use may be changed to a more restrictive use or to a conforming
use, but such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use.
For purposes of interpreting this section the various districts shall be
considered as listed below in order from the most restrictive to the least
restrictive classification.
 
R-1 Residential district
R-2 Residential district
R-3 Residential district
B-1 Commercial district
B-2 Commercial district
C   Industrial (light industry) district
D   Industrial (heavy industry) district
 
A nonconforming use may be changed to another use normally permitted in the
same district as the initial use only upon written consent of eighty percent
(80%) of the property owners within three hundred feet (300'). (Ord. 18/2012,
9-4-2012)
10-13-6: REPAIRS:
So long as a building, structure, advertising sign or billboard is used or is
eligible for use in a nonconforming manner, only ordinary repairs and
maintenance, including replacement of roof covering, shall be permitted. In no
case shall such repairs include structural alterations veneering of the outer
walls or other work which will extend appreciably the normal life of the
building, structure, advertising sign or billboard. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-13-7: RECORDS:
The enforcing officer shall make and keep a record, including photographs, of
all buildings, structures, and land uses which do not conform to the use
regulations of the districts in which they are located. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 14
PERMITS
SECTION:
10-14-1:   Permit Required
10-14-2:   Application Form And Information Required
10-14-3:   Drawing And Plans To Accompany Application
10-14-4:   Accessory Buildings
10-14-5:   Expiration And Revocation Of Permit
10-14-6:   Records
10-14-7:   Cost (Rep. by Ord. 19/2017, 6-5-2017)
10-14-8:   Denial Of Permits
10-14-9:   Persons Authorized To Make Application
10-14-10:   Amendments To Application
10-14-11:   Plot Plan
10-14-12:   Action On Application
10-14-13:   Approval Of Permit In Part
10-14-14:   Permit For Removal (Rep. by Ord. 19/2017, 6-5-2017)
10-14-15:   Compliance With Permit
10-14-16:   Reducing Or Diminishing Lot Area
10-14-17:   Signature Required On Permit
10-14-18:   Posting Of Permit
10-14-19:   Commencement Notice To Be Given
10-14-20:   Completion Of Work; Authorization
10-14-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, add to, alter, remove or demolish, or to
commence the construction, addition, alteration, removal or demolition of a
building or structure or install equipment for the operation of a building or
structure without first filing with the enforcing officer an application in
writing and obtaining a formal permit. In addition thereto, it shall be
unlawful to engage in any of the following acts or activities without first
filing with the enforcing officer an application in writing and obtaining a
formal permit:
   (A)   To establish any new use of property;
   (B)   To change the use of any building, structure of land from one
classification to another.
   (C)   To excavate or build any foundation.
   (D)   To erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge or move any building or
structure.
   (E)   In the case of a nonconforming use, to change from one use to another.
   (F)   Concrete, stone, wood, and masonry or fences which cannot be viewed
through shall require a permit; and
   (G)   Governmental bodies, nonprofit organizations, and charitable
organizations shall conform to the provisions of this Code and shall be
required to obtain a permit, except that no permit fee shall be required.
No permit shall be required for any of the following acts or activities:
   (A)   Routine maintenance or repair of buildings, structures, or equipment,
such as repainting or reroofing a building, relining a blast furnace, or
reballasting a railroad track.
   (B)   Construction or alterations costing less than three hundred dollars
($300.00); nevertheless, any said construction or alterations falling within
this subsection shall still comply with any and all provisions of this title or
other ordinances duly enacted by the City.
   (C)   Buildings, structures or land used or to be used for agriculture;
however, in the interest of public health, the water supply and sewage
facilities in connection with an agricultural dwelling use shall not be exempt;
and
   (D)   A permit for construction of service connection to a Municipally owned
and operated utility shall not be required. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-2: APPLICATION FORM AND INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Applications for permits shall be filed in written form with the City Clerk and
shall be referred by him to the enforcing officer for investigation and action.
Such applications shall state legal description of the property, the name and
address of the owner, the applicant and the contractor, the estimated costs,
and shall describe the uses to be established or expanded and shall give such
information as may be required by this title for its proper enforcement. In
addition thereto, such applications for a permit shall be submitted in such
form and shall give such additional information as may be required by the
enforcing officer in order for him to have a thorough understanding of the work
proposed. Furthermore, in case the application is made by an owner or
contractor who is a corporate body, then such application shall also contain
the full name and address of the responsible officer of said corporation who is
submitting such application for consideration. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-3: DRAWING AND PLANS TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION:
All applications for permits shall be accompanied by drawings of the proposed
work, drawn to scale, showing, when necessary, such things as floor plans,
sections, elevations, structural details, lot areas to be used, auto parking
areas, water supply and sewage disposal facilities, and such other information
as may be required by the enforcing officer in order for him to have a thorough
understanding of the work proposed so that a proper determination can be made
whether said proposed plans and/or drawings comply with the provisions of any
applicable ordinances enacted by the City. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Each permit issued for a main building shall also cover any accessory
structures or buildings constructed at the same time on the same premises, and
such permit shall be posted in plain sight on the premises for which it is
issued. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954; amd. 1969 Code)
10-14-5: EXPIRATION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A permit under which no work is commenced within ninety (90) days after
issuance shall expire by limitation and a new permit shall be secured before
work is started. Furthermore, a permit shall be revoked by the enforcing
officer when he shall find from either personal inspection or from other
confident evidence that the rules or regulations under which said permit has
been issued are being violated. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-6: RECORDS:
All applications and copies of all permits issued shall be systematically filed
and kept in the Office of the City Clerk for ready reference. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-
1954; amd. 1969 Code)
10-14-7: COST:
(Rep. by Ord. 19/2017, 6-5-2017)
10-14-8: DENIAL OF PERMITS:
The enforcing officer shall, where such uses would be detrimental to adjacent
property and to the ultimate development, discourage and deny permits for:
   (A)   Unusual locations of buildings and structures such as excessive
setbacks unless justified by topography or other existing features.
   (B)   Dwelling and structures of a temporary or partially completed nature.
   (C)   Dwellings with less than six hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
(Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954; amd. 1969 Code)
10-14-9: PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO MAKE APPLICATION:
Application shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or the
architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the proposed work.
If such application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall
be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner in fee or the person
making the application that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee
and that the person making the application is authorized to make such
application. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-10: AMENDMENTS TO APPLICATION:
Nothing in this title nor any other ordinance enacted by the City shall
prohibit the filing of amendments to an application or to a plan or other
record accompanying same at any time before the completion of the work for
which the permit was issued. Such amendments shall be filed with and be deemed
a part of the original application if approved before the certificate of
occupancy, if required, has been issued, otherwise a new application for the
alteration shall be made and a permit secured. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-11: PLOT PLAN:
When required by the building official, there shall be submitted a plot plan in
a form and size designated by the enforcing officer for filing permanently with
the permit record, drawn to scale, with all dimensions figured, showing
accurately the size and exact location of all proposed new construction and the
relation to other existing or proposed buildings or structures on the same lot
and other buildings or structures on an adjoining property within fifteen feet
(15') of the property lines. In the case of demolition, the plot plan shall
show the buildings or structures to be demolished and the buildings or
structures on the same lot that are to remain. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-12: ACTION ON APPLICATION:
The enforcing officer shall examine applications for permits, within a
reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, he finds no objections to
the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the
laws and ordinances applicable thereto and the proposed construction or work
will be safe, he shall approve such application and issue a permit for the
proposed work as soon as practicable. If his examination reveals otherwise, he
shall reject such application, note his findings in a written report to be
attached to the application and deliver a copy to the applicant. The reasonable
time provision for reviewing an application for permit is hereby deemed to be
absolutely essential in order to give the enforcing officer sufficient time to
determine if the application for permit is in compliance with all of the
ordinances duly enacted by the City. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-13: APPROVAL OF PERMIT IN PART:
Nothing in this title or in any other ordinance enacted by the City shall be
construed to prevent the enforcing officer from issuing a permit for the
construction of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and
detailed statements of said building or structure have been submitted or
approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements had been
submitted for the same and have been found to comply with this title. (Ord. 34/
79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-14: PERMIT FOR REMOVAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 19/2017, 6-5-2017)
10-14-15: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT:
All work performed under a permit issued by the enforcing officer shall conform
to the approved application and plans, and approved amendments thereto. The
location of all new construction as shown on the approved plot plan or an
approved amendment thereto, shall be strictly adhered to. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-
1980)
10-14-16: REDUCING OR DIMINISHING LOT AREA:
It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot or plot of which a
plot plan has been filed and has been used as the basis for a permit, unless a
revised plot plan showing the proposed changes in conditions shall have been
filed and approved; provided that this shall not apply when the lot is reduced
by reason of a street opening or widening or other public improvement. (Ord.
34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-17: SIGNATURE REQUIRED ON PERMIT:
Every permit issued by the enforcing officer under the provisions of this title
shall have his signature affixed thereto; but this shall not prevent him from
authorizing a subordinate or other duly authorized City official to affix the
enforcing officer's signature. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-18: POSTING OF PERMIT:
A copy of the permit shall be kept on the premises for public inspection during
the prosecution of the work and until the completion of the same. The enforcing
officer may require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the
premises at all times from the commencement of the work to the completion
thereof. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-19: COMMENCEMENT NOTICE TO BE GIVEN:
The enforcing officer shall be given at least twenty four (24) hours' notice of
the starting of work under a permit. (Ord. 34/79, 4-30-1980)
10-14-20: COMPLETION OF WORK; AUTHORIZATION:
Nothing in this title shall require changes in the plans, construction or
designated use of a building or structure or portion thereof for which a lawful
permit has been heretofore issued or which has been otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which shall have been actually begun within
ninety (90) days after these zoning ordinance amendments and modifications as
herein set forth become effective and which entire building or structure shall
be completed, as authorized, within two (2) years thereafter. (Ord. 34/79, 4-
30-1980)
CHAPTER 15
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-15-1:   Enforcing Officer
10-15-2:   Actions
10-15-1: ENFORCING OFFICER:
This title shall be administered and enforced by the zoning enforcing officer
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council, who is hereby
designated and herein referred to as the enforcing officer. The term of office
shall be at the pleasure of the mayor and council and the compensation of such
officer shall be as fixed from time to time by the council. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-
1954)
10-15-2: ACTIONS:
Proper authorities of the city or any person affected may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings against a violator as provided by statute.
(Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 16
APPEALS FOR VARIATIONS
SECTION:
10-16-1:   Grounds
10-16-2:   Hearings
10-16-3:   Fee
10-16-4:   Special Use Approval
10-16-1: GROUNDS:
Whenever in a specific case, after an application for a permit has been made,
an appeal is made to the Zoning Board that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any
regulations relating to the use, construction, alteration or location of
buildings or structures or to the use of land, the Zoning Board may determine
and vary their application in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
such regulations, upon such conditions as may be considered appropriate and in
the public interest, and in accordance with the rules herein set forth. (Ord.
8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-16-2: HEARINGS:
No variation shall be made except after a public hearing of which there shall
be at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, said notice to
contain the particular location for which the variation is requested as well as
a brief statement of what the proposed variation consists.
The action of the Zoning Board in granting a variation shall contain or be
accompanied by a finding of fact specifying the reason for making such
variation. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-16-3: FEE:
To partially defray the expense of investigating and considering an appeal for
variation where a public hearing is required, a fee shall be charged to the
appellant and be collected by the City Clerk pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of
Fees", of this Code. (Ord. 19/2017, 6-5-2017)
10-16-4: SPECIAL USE APPROVAL:
   (A)   Overview And Definition: Certain land uses shall be required to obtain
special use approval from the City Council prior to the occupancy, use and
development of property within the corporate limits and as otherwise allowed by
statute. Such uses shall be listed under the category of "special use" as
allowed within each zoning district. Such uses are not allowed into other
zoning districts unless specifically listed within the district. The term
"special use" includes, but is not limited to: 1) public and quasi-public uses
related to the public interest, 2) uses which may have a unique, special, or
unusual impact upon the use or enjoyment of neighboring property, and 3)
planned unit developments. Special uses shall require a special use permit from
the City of Aledo.
   (B)   Hearing And Standards: The City Administrator or his designee shall
determine if a use requires a special use permit, as defined by this section.
Applications for special use shall be forwarded to the Zoning Board of Appeals
to conduct a public hearing. In deciding whether or not to recommend granting
the special use to the City Council, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
determine, based upon the evidence in submission, whether the proposed use:
      1.   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and this section;
      2.   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity;
      3.   Will not change the essential character of the general vicinity;
      4.   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighborhood uses; and
      5.   Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in
the neighborhood in which it is located.
   (C)   Conditions Of Approval: The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and
the City Council may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the property
benefited by the special use as they deem necessary to assure compliance with
other provisions of this Code or to reduce or minimize the effect of such
special use upon other property in the neighborhood or to implement the general
purpose and intent of this Code. Said conditions or restrictions may include
variations from the bulk requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Findings Of Fact, Recommendations, And City Council Approval: Within a
reasonable time after the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall
report its findings of fact and recommendations to the city council in writing.
Upon receipt of the findings of fact and recommendations, the city council, by
ordinance, without further public hearing, may authorize or deny an application
for a special use in accordance with the Illinois statutes and the provisions
of this chapter or it may refer the application back to the zoning board of
appeals for further consideration. (Ord. 11-06-06-2, 12-4-2006)
CHAPTER 17
OTHER APPEALS
SECTION:
10-17-1:   Grounds
10-17-2:   Procedures
10-17-3:   Hearings
10-17-1: GROUNDS:
Any person aggrieved or any officer, department, board or bureau of the county
may appeal to the zoning board to review any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the enforcing officer in connection with the sections
herein pertaining to zoning. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-17-2: PROCEDURES:
Such appeals shall be made within ninety (90) days from the date of the action
appealed from, by filing with the enforcing officer and the zoning board, a
notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The enforcing officer and the
city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board all papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the enforcing officer certifies to the zoning board, after the notice of
the appeal has been filed with him, that by reasons of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the zoning board, or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the enforcing officer and on due cause
shown. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
10-17-3: HEARINGS:
The zoning board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and
give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable
time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by
attorney. The zoning board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made in the premises, and to that and shall have all the powers of
the enforcing officer. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 18
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-18-1:   Zoning Regulations
10-18-1: ZONING REGULATIONS:
No amendment to the zoning regulations of this title shall be made without a
hearing before the zoning board. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation
in the city.
   (A)   If the report of the zoning board does not recommend passage of the
proposed amendment; or
   (B)   If a written protest against the proposed amendment is filed with the
clerk, signed and acknowledged by twenty percent (20%) of the property owners
within one thousand feet (1,000');
Then such amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of at least
three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the council, otherwise a majority
vote of those present shall govern. (Ord. 8/53, 1-18-1954)
CHAPTER 19
FEES
SECTION:
10-19-1:   Fees Charged
10-19-1: FEES CHARGED:
Proposals to rezone or reclassify any property or applications for special use,
and the reasons in support thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk, and
shall be accompanied by a fee pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this
Code to partially defray the expense of investigating and considering the
proposal, and shall then be transmitted to the Zoning Board for its
consideration and report to the Council. (Ord. 19/2017, 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 20
VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES
SECTION:
10-20-1:   Notices Of Violations
10-20-2:   Disregard Of Violation Notices
10-20-3:   Stopping Of Work
10-20-4:   Noncompliance And Penalties
10-20-5:   Abatement
10-20-1: NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS:
Whenever the enforcing officer is satisfied that a building or structure, or
any work in connection therewith, the erection, construction, addition or
alteration, execution of which is regulated, permitted or forbidden by this
zoning ordinance or other applicable ordinances enacted by the city is being
erected, constructed, added to or altered, in violation of the provisions or
requirements of this zoning ordinance or other applicable ordinances enacted by
the city, or in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and
approved thereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, he shall
serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefor directing
discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that
is in violation of the provisions or requirements of this zoning ordinance or
other applicable ordinances enacted by the city. (Ord. 35/79, 4-30-1980)
10-20-2: DISREGARD OF VIOLATION NOTICES:
In case a violation notice or order is not properly complied with, the
enforcing officer shall notify the city attorney of such noncompliance and the
city attorney, upon such notice, shall institute an appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity, to restrain, correct or remove such violation,
or the execution of work thereon, or to restrain or correct the erection or
alteration of, or to require the removal of, or to prevent the occupancy or use
of, the building or structure erected, constructed, added to or altered, in
violation of, or not in compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance
or other applicable ordinances enacted by the city, or with respect to which
the requirements thereof, or of any order or direction made pursuant to
provisions contained herein, shall not have been complied with. (Ord. 35/79, 4-
30-1980)
10-20-3: STOPPING OF WORK:
Whenever in the opinion of the enforcing officer, by reason of defective or
illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this zoning
ordinance or any other applicable law enacted by the city, the continuance of a
building operation, including, but not limited to, the construction of any
structure and/or structural alteration, is contrary to public welfare or in
violation of any of the rules and regulations of the zoning ordinance enacted
by the city, he shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may
require suspension of all work until the condition in said violation has been
corrected. (Ord. 35/79, 4-30-1980)
10-20-4: NONCOMPLIANCE AND PENALTIES:
A person who shall violate a provision of this zoning ordinance or other
applicable ordinances enacted by the city, or fail to comply herewith or with
any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, add to or
alter, move or demolish or has erected, constructed, added to or altered, moved
or demolished a building or structure or portion thereof, in violation of a
detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or of a permit or
certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; also included
is the owner of a building or structure, or portion thereof, or of the premises
where anything in violation of this zoning ordinance or other applicable
ordinances enacted by the city, shall be placed or shall exist, and an
architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed
in connection therewith and who assisted in the commission of such violations.
Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of
this zoning ordinance or other applicable ordinance enacted by the city is
committed or continued and upon conviction of such violation, each such person
shall be punished as hereinafter set forth. Any person who shall violate,
disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with or who resists enforcement of
any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance or other applicable ordinance
enacted by the city, shall be subject to a fine pursuant to title 12, "Schedule
Of Fines", of this code. (Ord. 27/2016, 1-3-2017)
10-20-5: ABATEMENT:
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city
attorney from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, addition, alteration,
conversion, removal, demolition, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or
abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a building or structure or
portion thereof, or of the premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about any premises. Furthermore, it shall be no defense
to any action instituted hereunder that any owner, contractor, architect, or
their duly authorized agents were relying on someone else to file the required
application for permit under the terms and provisions of the zoning ordinance
enacted by the city. (Ord. 35/79, 4-30-1980)
CHAPTER 21
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND EQUIPMENT
SECTION:
10-21-1:   Short Title
10-21-2:   Purpose
10-21-3:   Definitions
10-21-4:   Collocation Requirements
10-21-5:   Tower Siting Preferences And Limitations
10-21-6:   Tower Construction Requirements
10-21-7:   Tower And Antenna Design Requirements
10-21-8:   Tower Setbacks
10-21-9:   Tower Height
10-21-10:   Tower Lighting
10-21-11:   Signs And Advertising
10-21-12:   Accessory Utility Buildings
10-21-13:   Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Portions Of Towers
10-21-14:   Interference With Public Safety Telecommunications
10-21-15:   Application Materials
10-21-16:   Conflict And Severability
10-21-17:   Penalties
10-21-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND EQUIPMENT CODE
OF THE CITY OF ALEDO, ILLINOIS, and may be so cited and pleaded and shall be
referred to herein as this chapter. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-2: PURPOSE:
The primary intent of this chapter is to regulate telecommunications towers and
equipment to be located within the city of Aledo. Therefore, the purpose of
this chapter shall be to:
   (A)   Comply with all federal and state regulations regarding the placement,
use, and maintenance of telecommunications towers and equipment.
   (B)   Encourage the continued improvement of wireless telecommunications
service in the city.
   (C)   Minimize, to the extent permitted by law, the proliferation of
unsightly towers and equipment throughout the city.
   (D)   Promote both proper maintenance and renovation of telecommunications
equipment.
   (E)   Encourage the use of collocation of telecommunications towers by
multiple providers so as to reduce the number of towers needed within the city.
   (F)   Ensure that these regulations are compatible with the zoning
regulations.
   (G)   Recognize the commercial communication requirements of all sectors of
the business and residential community. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   ANTENNA: Any structure or device not exceeding fifteen feet (15') in height
which is used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic
waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels,
microwave dishes, and satellite dishes and omnidirectional antennas, such as
whip antennas; provided, however, that any structure or device that functions
solely to provide television service to a single residential customer, such as
a satellite dish or roof mounted television antenna, shall not be considered an
"antenna" for purposes of this chapter and shall not be subject to the
regulations set forth in this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES: Licensed commercial wireless
telecommunication services, including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio
(ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
   TOWER: Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, antenna, structure, or
combination thereof taller than fifteen feet (15') (excepting ham radio towers
used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting signals originated by
amateur radio operators for noncommercial purposes) including supporting lines,
cables, wires, braces and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting
an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.
   TOWER, MULTIUSER: A tower to which is attached the antennas of more than one
commercial wireless telecommunication service provider or governmental entity.
   TOWER, SINGLE USER: A tower to which is attached only the antennas of a
single user, although the tower may be designed to accommodate the antennas of
multiple users as required in this chapter. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-4: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
All commercial wireless telecommunication towers erected, constructed, or
located within the city shall comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service
tower shall not be approved unless the city council finds that the
telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a one mile
search radius of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of all
existing or approved towers or buildings, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and all of the existing or approved towers
cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate the planned or
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
      2.   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at a tower or building as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
      3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius
cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
      4.   Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
   (B)   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall
be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate
both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2)
additional users if the tower is over one hundred feet (100') in height, or for
at least one additional user if the tower is over sixty feet (60') in height.
Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the
tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-
2016)
10-21-5: TOWER SITING PREFERENCES AND LIMITATIONS:
   (A)   Preferences: The following general preference standards apply to tower
and antenna siting locations within the city:
      1.   Wherever feasible, a distributed antenna system ("DAS") is preferred
to a tower.
      2.   Siting is preferred on city owned property on which towers and
antennas can be unobtrusively located with due regard to visibility, aesthetic
issues, traffic flow, public safety, health and welfare. Such sites may include
locating on existing buildings, collocating on existing towers, screened
rooftop mounts, water towers, billboards, electric substations, or other
camouflaged sites, but shall not include new towers. Barring such a location's
viability, siting is preferred on city owned sites in which the facility is
minimally obtrusive, has a minimal impact on the surrounding area, is an
appropriate distance from residential land uses, and has minimal impact on
residential uses, with due regard being given to the scale of the facility and
the surrounding area and the impact on the location.
      3.   Tower sites are preferred that, in comparison to alternative sites,
use lesser height, greater use of repeaters and incorporate reduced tower
visibility or camouflage technologies.
      4.   Preferable sitings are in the lowest possible areas of population
density and where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, or other
structures provide the greatest amount of screening and have the least long
range visual effect.
      5.   Unless adequate coverage and adequate capacity cannot otherwise be
achieved, siting in high visual impact areas, environmentally sensitive areas,
and scenic or historic areas are not preferred.
   (B)   Limitations:
      1.   No tower shall be located on R-1, R-2, or R-3 residential district
property unless a licensed engineer certifies that the applicant will be
prohibited from providing commercial wireless telecommunication services unless
a tower is constructed in a residential zoning district. Construction,
maintenance, and use of a tower or antenna is otherwise authorized as a special
use for all other nonresidential property within the city.
      2.   No tower may be constructed, repaired, maintained or used on any
property unless first a permit is obtained under this chapter and a special use
permit is issued in compliance with this title. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-6: TOWER CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Permits:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct in a place, place or re-erect, replace or repair any tower without
first making application to the city and securing a permit therefor as
hereinafter provided.
      2.   The applicant shall provide, at the time of application, sufficient
information to indicate that construction, installation and maintenance of the
antenna and tower will not create a safety hazard or damage to the property of
other persons.
      3.   Unless the applicant agrees otherwise, the city shall generally take
action on a request to collocate within ninety (90) days, and within one
hundred fifty (150) days for all other requests.
   (B)   Fee: The applicant shall pay a building permit fee in the amount of
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (C)   Construction Requirements: All antennas and towers erected,
constructed or modified within the city and all wiring therefor, shall comply
with the following requirements:
      1.   All applicable provisions of this code.
      2.   The tower shall be certified by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards and wind
loading requirements of the national building code (BOCA) and the Electronics
Industry Association.
      3.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service
connection lines, no part of any antenna or tower, nor any lines, cable,
equipment or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time extend
across or over any part of the right of way, public street, highway, sidewalk,
or property line.
      4.   Towers and associated antennas shall be designed to conform with
accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the
provisions of the national electrical code.
      5.   All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending
substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower and antenna and a
structure, or between towers, shall be at least eight feet (8') above the
ground at all points unless buried underground.
      6.   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to discourage
climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons.
      7.   All towers shall be constructed to conform with the requirements of
the occupational safety and health administration.
      8.   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive
resistant material. Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot resistant
substances.
   (D)   Existing Antennas And Towers: Antennas and towers in existence as of
the passage of May 9, 2016, which do not conform to or comply with this
chapter, are subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now
existing, but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in
all respects with this chapter.
      2.   If such towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason
or cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use,
location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefor,
but without otherwise complying with this section; provided, however, that if
the cost of repairing the tower to the former use, physical dimensions, and
location would be ten percent (10%) or more of the cost of a new tower of like
kind and quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored, except in
full compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-7: TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following design
requirements:
   (A)   Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment,
except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state
authorities, such as the federal aviation administration. For the purpose of
this subsection, camouflaging architectural treatment shall consist of
disguising the applicable tower as an object which would otherwise be fully
consistent with the surrounding area, such as a tree, church steeple, or
building spire, as appropriate. The camouflaging shall disguise the existence
of the tower, while retaining the natural or improved appearance of the
surrounding area, to the maximum extent possible.
   (B)   Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a
monopole design unless the city council determines that an alternative design
would better blend into the surrounding environment. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-8: TOWER SETBACKS:
Towers shall conform with each of the following minimum setback requirements:
   (A)   Towers shall meet the setback requirements of buildings found in the
underlying zoning district unless otherwise specified herein; provided,
however, no tower shall be set back a distance less than fifty percent (50%) of
its height from the top of tower to existing grade or, if the tower was
originally attached to a building, to the point of attachment. (Ord. 09/2016,
6-20-2016)
10-21-9: TOWER HEIGHT:
Towers shall not exceed one hundred twenty five feet (125') in height from
existing grade or, if attached to an existing building, one hundred fifty feet
(150') less the distance from the existing grade to the point of attachment. A
variation to this height requirement may be granted by the zoning board of
appeals after receiving an application therefor and holding a public hearing at
a regularly scheduled or special meeting. Notice of the time and place of the
hearing, together with a brief description of the subject matter shall be
published one time not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. A
variation from the height requirement in this section shall be granted by the
zoning board of appeals only if the applicant establishes by clear and
convincing evidence that it will be unable to provide wireless communication
services without such a variation. Under no circumstance shall a tower be
erected to a height greater than that required to provide wireless
communication services. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-10: TOWER LIGHTING:
Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display any
strobe or flashing lights unless such lighting is required by the federal
aviation administration or other federal or state authority for a particular
tower. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-11: SIGNS AND ADVERTISING:
Reasonably sized signs displaying warning or equipment information may be
placed on towers. All other signs, including signs used for advertising
purposes, are prohibited. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-12: ACCESSORY UTILITY BUILDINGS:
All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment. Further,
such buildings shall meet minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable
vegetation and/or landscaping, except where a design of nonvegetative screening
better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding
area, in which case, such nonvegetative screening shall be utilized. (Ord. 09/
2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-13: ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS:
Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers shall be removed as follows:
   (A)   All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be
removed within six (6) months of the cessation of operations at a site unless a
time extension is requested, in writing, by the person or entity owning such
tower and/or facility, in which case such person or entity shall be allowed an
additional six (6) months to remove the applicable tower and/or facility. A
copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the applicant to
remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of operations at the
site shall be submitted at the time of application. In the event that a tower
is not removed in a timely manner as provided herein, the tower and associated
facilities may be removed by the city and the cost of removal assessed against
the property.
   (B)   Unused portions of towers above utilized communications or other
electrical equipment shall be removed within six (6) months of the time of
antenna relocation. The replacement of portions of a tower previously removed
requires the issuance of a new building permit and special use permit as
applicable. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-14: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
No new or existing telecommunication service shall interfere with public safety
telecommunications. All applications for new service shall be accompanied by an
intermodulation study which provides a technical evaluation of existing and
proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems.
Before the introduction of new services or changes in existing service,
telecommunication providers shall notify the city at least ten (10) calendar
days in advance of such changes and allow the city to monitor interference
levels during the testing process. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-15: APPLICATION MATERIALS:
Development applications for towers shall include written documentation
evidencing compliance with each provision of this chapter as well as the
applicable zoning regulations in addition to the following supplemental
information:
   (A)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which:
      1.   Describes the tower height and design, including a cross section in
elevation;
      2.   Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas;
      3.   Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate;
      4.   Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference
with established public safety telecommunications;
      5.   Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number;
      6.   Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.
   (B)   Architectural drawings depicting the constructed tower with
camouflaging treatment set in the surrounding area. These drawings shall
include at least one perspective from the north, south, east and west.
   (C)   An overhead map of the city showing the subject tower's location as
well as the location of each of the applicant's existing and planned future
tower sites.
   (D)   For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a letter
of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the
shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
   (E)   Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental
information shall be provided:
      1.   Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered
by the federal aviation administration; and
      2.   Proof that the proposed tower complies with the emission standards
promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission; and
      3.   Report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which
demonstrates the tower's compliance with the aforesaid structural and
electrical standards. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-16: CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY:
   (A)   Conflict: If any portion of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with any other provision of any zoning, building, fire safety, or other
ordinance of this Code, the provision which establishes the higher standard
shall prevail.
   (B)   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase
of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held
invalid by the decision of any court or administrative tribunal of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter, or the application of the
provision to other persons or circumstances is in effect and shall remain in
full force and effect. (Ord. 09/2016, 6-20-2016)
10-21-17: PENALTIES:
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this chapter,
shall, upon conviction, be fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of Fines", of
this Code. (Ord. 25/2017, 6-19-2017)
CHAPTER 22
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-22-1: Purpose
10-22-2: Definitions
10-22-3: Roof Mount SESs
10-22-4: Ground Mount SESs
10-22-5: Requirements For All SESs
10-22-6: Building Integrated Systems
10-22-7: Special Use Requirements
10-22-8: Administration
10-22-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the construction, installation,
and operation of Solar Energy Systems ("SES") in the City of Aledo in a manner
that promotes economic development and ensures the protection of health,
safety, and welfare while also avoiding adverse impacts. It is the intent of
this ordinance to encourage the development of SESs that reduce reliance on
foreign and out-of-state energy resources, and bolster local economic
development and job creation. This ordinance is not intended to abridge safety,
health or environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes,
standards, or ordinances. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. (Ord. 12-2020, 10-5-
2020)
10-22-2: DEFINITIONS:
             As applied to a building, structure, or use, one which is on the same lot
ACCESSORY:   with, incidental to and subordinate to the main or principal structure or
             use and which is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
             principal structure, or the main or principal use.
BUILDING     A solar energy system that consists of integrating photovoltaic modules
INTEGRATED   into the building structure as the roof or façade and which does not alter
SYSTEMS:     the relief of the roof.
GROUND MOUNT A solar energy system that is directly installed into the ground and is not
SOLAR ENERGY attached or affixed to an existing structure.
SYSTEM:
PHOTOVOLTAIC A solar energy system that produces electricity by the use of semiconductor
SYSTEM:      devices calls photovoltaic cells that generate electricity whenever light
             strikes them.
QUALIFIED    A trained and qualified electrical professional who has the skills and
SOLAR        knowledge related to the construction and operation of solar electrical
INSTALLER:   equipment and installations and has received safety training on the hazards
             involved.
             A solar energy system in which solar panels are mounted on top of a
ROOF MOUNT:  building roof as either a flush mounted system or as modules fixed to
             frames which can be tilted toward the south at an optical angle.
SOLAR        Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of
ENERGY:      heat or light by a solar collector.
             The components and subsystems required to convert solar energy into
SOLAR ENERGY electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The area of the system
SYSTEM       includes all the land inside the perimeter of the system, which extends to
("SES"):     any fencing. The term applies, but is not limited to, solar photovoltaic
             systems, solar thermal systems and solar hot water systems. (Ord. 12-2020,
             10-5-2020)
 
10-22-3: ROOF MOUNT SESs:
Roof mount SESs shall be permitted with a building permit in all zoning
districts where there is a principal structure. The building permit application
shall be submitted and shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable zoning
requirements. Building or roof mount SESs shall not exceed the maximum allowed
height for principal structures in any zoning district, and the collector
surface and mounting devices shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of
the building on which the system is mounted or built. (Ord. 12-2020, 10-5-2020)
10-22-4: GROUND MOUNT SESs:
Ground mount solar energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts
only with a special use permit, subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Height: Ground mount SESs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height
when oriented at maximum tilt.
   B.   Residential Zoning Districts: SESs shall not be allowed as the primary
use or the principal structure in any residential zoning district. Ground mount
SESs shall not be allowed in a front yard of any residential zoning district.
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.    Ground mount SESs shall meet the accessory structure setbacks for
the zoning district in which the unit is located, but in no event shall the
setback be less than five feet (5').
      2.    Ground mount SESs shall not extend beyond the side yard or rear
yard setback when oriented at minimum design tilt.
      3.    Ground mount SES installations shall not be located within fifty
feet (50') of any principal structure that is used for residential purposes
unless the owner of the property with the residential structure joins in the
application for special use for the ground mount SES.
   D.   Screening: All ground mount SES installations shall be appropriately
screened as reasonably determined during the special use permit process set
forth in section
10-22-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-2020, 10-5-2020)
10-22-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SESs:
   A.   Reflection Angles: Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be
oriented such that they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
   B.   Visibility: Solar energy systems shall be located in a manner to
reasonably minimize view blockage for surrounding properties and shading of
property to the North while still providing adequate solar access for
collectors.
   C.   Safety: Roof mount SESs, excluding building integrated systems, shall
allow for adequate roof access for firefighting purposes to the south facing or
flat roof upon which the panels are mounted.
   D.   Building Code: All SESs shall meet the requirements of the applicable
City building and property maintenance codes.
   E.   Installation: All SES installations shall be performed by a qualified
solar installer.
   F.   Any connection of an SES to the public utility grid shall be inspected
by the appropriate public utility.
   G.   Approved Solar Components: Electric SES system components shall have a
UL listing or approved equivalent.
   H.   Appearance: Brand labels that are visible from the lot boundary of the
subject property shall be removed. (Ord. 12-2020, 10-5-2020)
10-22-6: BUILDING INTEGRATED SYSTEMS:
Building integrated systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts but
shall meet the requirements of the applicable City building and property
maintenance codes. (Ord. 12-2020, 10-5-2020)
10-22-7: SPECIAL USE REQUIREMENTS:
All ground mount solar energy systems, including those that are the primary use
of the lot or are designed for providing energy to off-site uses or export to
the wholesale market, require a special use permit. The special use permit
application shall include, in addition to all information generally required
for special use applications, all of the following:
   A.   Existing property lines.
   B.   Existing buildings and impervious surfaces.
   C.   A Site Plan of proposed conditions showing the following:
      1.    Location and spacing of the solar panels.
      2.    New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is to be the connection point for the SES.
      3.    Perimeter fencing having a maximum height of eight feet (8') shall
be installed around the boundary of the SES. The fence shall contain
appropriate warning signage that is posted such that it is clearly visible on
the site.
   D.   Manufacturer Specifications: The manufacturer's specifications and
recommended installation methods for all major equipment, including solar
panels, mounting systems and foundations for poles and racks.
   E.   Connection And Interconnection: A description of the method of
connecting the solar array to a building or substation, and utility
interconnection details with a copy of written notification to the utility
company requesting the proposed interconnection.
   F.   Setbacks: Information establishing that the SES is located a minimum of
fifty feet (50') from any principal residential dwelling that is not part the
Special Use permit. (Ord. 12-2020, 10-5-2020)
10-22-8: ADMINISTRATION:
Any person or business entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses
to comply with, or resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this section
shall face fines of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 12-2020, 10-5-2020)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1:   Purpose
11-1-2:   Jurisdiction
11-1-3:   Interpretation
11-1-4:   Disclaimer
11-1-5:   Variances
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
In accordance with state law 1  this title regulates the subdivision and
development of land in order to implement the city of Aledo comprehensive plan
and official map. Thus this title assists in achieving the following specific
objectives:
   (A)   To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare;
   (B)   To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly
layout and use of land; and to create an environment conducive to the
productive development of the city;
   (C)   To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be
properly monumented and recorded;
   (D)   To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and
buildings;
   (E)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible
extent;
   (F)   To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for all residents of new
developments by preventing undue concentration of population;
   (G)   To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution,
flooding, storm water runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
   (H)   To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid
traffic congestion by requiring the proper location, design, and construction
of streets and sidewalks;
   (I)   To reduce the cost of installing and maintaining adequate water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm water sewers, and other utilities and services;
   (J)   To ensure that adequate parks, schools, and similar facilities can be
made available to serve the residents of new developments; and
   (K)   Provide for the acceptance of lands for public rights of way. (Ord. 8/
02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 – 5/11-12-12; 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
11-1-2: JURISDICTION 1 :
This title shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the city of Aledo
and within all unincorporated territory located within one and one-half (1.5)
miles of said limits, provided such territory is not located within the
subdivision jurisdiction for another municipality. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-9.
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
Every provision of this title shall be construed liberally to achieve the
purposes outlined in section
11-1-1 of this chapter.
   (A)   More Restrictive Requirements Apply: Whenever the requirements of this
title differ from those of any statute, lawfully adopted ordinance or
regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction, the more stringent
requirement shall prevail. Thus, in accordance with state law 1 , whenever this
title imposes higher standards than the county subdivision ordinance, said
higher standards shall supersede the county regulations in the unincorporated
territory located within the city of Aledo's subdivision jurisdiction.
   This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, deed
restriction, or any other private agreement or restriction; provided, that,
where the provisions of this title are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, deed restriction, or
other private agreement or restriction, the provisions of this title shall
govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, deed restriction, or
private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more
restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this title or the
determinations of the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this
title, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this title or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and
supplemental to this title and determinations made thereunder. The City does
not purport to enforce any such private provisions not reflected on the plat
and its supporting documents and unless there is expressed in the nature of the
document and the approval process an intent to give the City enforcement rights
over same. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-11.
11-1-4: DISCLAIMER 1 :
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
officer, board member, agent, or employee of the City of Aledo shall render
himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this title.
   (B)   Any suit brought against any office, board member, agent, or employee
of the City of Aledo, as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this title, shall be defended by the City
Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings. (Ord. 8/02, 9-
16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq.
11-1-5: VARIANCES:
When the subdivider can show that a provision of this title, if strictly
adhered to, would cause the unnecessary hardship and when, in the opinion of
the City Planning Commission, because of topographical or other conditions
peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of
such provision, the City Planning Commission may recommend a variance of
modification to the City Council. The subdivider shall apply in writing for
such variance or modification of the action, and be accompanied by a fee
pursuant to title 13, "Schedule Of Fees", of this Code. Any variance or
modification thus authorized shall be attached to and made a part of the final
plat. (Ord. 20/2017, 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1:   Construction Of Terms
11-2-2:   Selected Definitions
11-2-1: CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS:
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this title, the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in section
11-2-2 of this chapter; terms not defined in section
11-2-2 of this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
the zoning ordinance of the city of Aledo; if any term is not defined either in
section
11-2-2 of this chapter or in the zoning ordinance, said term shall have its
standard English dictionary meaning.
   (B)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   (C)   Words used in present tense shall include the future tense.
   (D)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural number the singular.
   (E)   The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary.
   (F)   Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended
merely to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the substantive
application of the provisions set forth thereunder.
   (G)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections
within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only
that subsection.
   (H)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-2-2: SELECTED DEFINITIONS:
   ALLEY: A public right of way, which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby street.
   AMENDMENT: A change in the provisions of this title, properly effected in
accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein.
   AREA, GROSS: The entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed
for subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for
street and alley rights of way and for public uses.
   BLOCK: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or
ways (except alleys, pedestrianways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision
unless exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way) or bounded by a
combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way,
waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
   CENTERLINE OFFSET: The distance between the centerlines of two (2) roughly
parallel streets, measured along the third street with which both said parallel
streets intersect.
   COLLECTOR STREET: A street used primarily to collect limited amounts of
residential traffic and for access to abutting properties, and on which the
speed limit is low and traffic volume is minimal.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the city
council to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the
city of Aledo. The comprehensive plan includes, but is not limited to, plans
and programs regarding the location, character, and extent of highways,
bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial
or industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
   CROSS SLOPE: The degree of inclination measured across a right of way rather
than in the direction traffic moves on said right of way.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and having
the other end permanently terminated by turnaround for vehicles, the term may
also be used to refer solely to said turnaround.
   CURB AND GUTTER, INTEGRAL: The rim forming the edge of a street plus the
channel for leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as a
single facility.
   DEDICATE: To transfer the ownership of a right of way, parcel of land, or
improvement to the city of Aledo or other public entity without compensation.
   DEVELOP: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of
land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES: The official appointed to administer
this land subdivision ordinance, or his duly authorized representative.
   DISTRICT, ZONING: A portion of the territory of the city of Aledo wherein
certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to
structures, lots, and uses under the terms of the zoning ordinance.
   EASEMENT: A right to use a portion of another person's real property for
certain limited purposes.
   EROSION: The wearing away of the land surface by the action of the wind,
water or gravity.
   ESCROW DEPOSIT: A deposit of cash or other approved securities to assure the
completion of improvements within a subdivision.
   FRONTAGE: The boundary of a lot along a public street.
   FRONTAGE ROAD: A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway
(usually a limited access highway), used for access to abutting lots.
   GRADE: The degree of inclination of the site or right of way, expressed as a
percentage. Synonym for "slope".
   IMPROVEMENT PLANS: The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for the structures and facilities to be installed in, or
in conjunction with, a subdivision.
   IMPROVEMENTS: Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer,
catch basin, newly planted tree, off street parking area, or other facility
necessary for the general use of property owners in a subdivision.
   INTERSECTION: The point at which two (2) or more public rights of way
(generally streets) meet.
   LOCAL STREET: A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic, and
used for access to abutting property.
   LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate
or future) of development or transfer of ownership. A "lot" may or may not
coincide with a "lot of record".
   LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and
rear lines of a lot.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for
their full length upon streets.
   LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded with the recorder of deeds of Mercer County, Illinois, in accordance
with state law.
   LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that
abut two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be
deemed front lot lines.
   MAINTENANCE BOND: A surety bond, posted by the developer and approved by the
city of Aledo, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of installed
improvements for the one year period following their dedication.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A local dead end street providing access to ten (10)
or fewer dwelling units.
   MINOR ARTERIAL STREET: A street which carries or is proposed to carry
intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and
which may or may not be continuous.
   OFFICIAL MAP: The official map may show indication of sites for planned
public facilities. Public facility sites which may be indicated on the official
map may include, but are not limited to: sites for new trafficways or widening
of existing trafficways; school sites; public building sites; and sites for
future storm drainage, electrical or other public service or utility easements.
   PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by the
city of Aledo, guaranteeing the installation of required improvements within,
or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
   PLAT, DEDICATION: A plat required for the dedication to the city of all
right of way easements, and public improvements outside of a subdivision plat
or within a special use classification.
   PLAT, FINAL: The subdivider's plan and supporting documentation of the
subdivision which, if approved, may be filed with the Mercer County recorder of
deeds.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY: Preliminary engineering maps, drawings, and supportive
material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
   PREFILING CONFERENCE: A conference held between the developer and
appropriate city staff prior to submission of a preliminary or final plat.
   PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL STREET: A street designed or utilized primarily for high
vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route with
intersections at a grade, and on which traffic control devices are used to
expedite the safe movement of through traffic.
   RESERVE: To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by
the city of Aledo (or other government entity) for public purposes.
   RIGHT OF WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has
dedicated to the city of Aledo or other unit of government for streets, alleys,
and other public improvements.
   SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
or gravity as a product of erosion.
   SETBACK, FRONT: The horizontal distance between the street right of way line
and the building line. Minimum setback requirements are set forth in the zoning
ordinance.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PRIVATE: A sewer system including collection and treatment
facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision in an
outlying area.
   SIDEWALK: A pedestrianway constructed in compliance with the standards of
this title.
   SOIL: All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin
that overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
   STOP ORDER: An order used by the director of public works and utilities to
halt work in progress that is in violation of this title.
   STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street"
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or way for pedestrian use only.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures
but not all structures are buildings.
   STUB STREET: A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned
for future continuation.
   SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate
or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land in a manner that constitutes a "subdivision" as defined in this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION: Any division of land into two (2) or more lots, any of which is
less than five (5) acres, or any transfer involving an easement of ingress or
egress, except as set forth in the plat act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes
205/1.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A division of land into two (2) but not more than five
(5) lots, all of which front upon an existing street, and not involving any new
streets, other rights of way, easements, improvements, or other provisions for
public areas and facilities.
   TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
   UTILITY: A business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the
public with some commodity or service which is of consequence and need and
which has a duty to serve without discrimination all within its service area. A
utility can be publicly or privately owned and includes, without limitation,
the following services or commodities:
      (A)   Electricity;
      (B)   Gas, oil, or steam;
      (C)   Water;
      (D)   Sanitary sewerage;
      (E)   Storm sewerage;
      (F)   Telephone or telegraph;
      (G)   Cable television and other communication lines;
      (H)   Transportation lines, such as fixed rail, but only if expressly
stated.
   VACATE: To terminate the legal existence of a right of way or subdivision or
portion thereof, and to so note on the final plat recorded with the Mercer
County recorder of deeds 1 .
   VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION: A relaxation in the strict application of the design
and improvement standards set forth in this title. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/6 – 205/8.
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1:   Applicability Of Chapter
11-3-2:   Suitability For Subdivision Generally
11-3-3:   Lot Requirements
11-3-4:   Permanent Reference Monuments
11-3-5:   Street Design Standards
11-3-5-1:   Horizontal Curvatures
11-3-5-2:   Through Traffic Discouraged
11-3-5-3:   Limited Access To Arterials
11-3-5-4:   Dead End Streets
11-3-5-5:   Alleys
11-3-5-6:   Intersections
11-3-5-7:   Reverse Curves
11-3-5-8:   Road Dedications And Reservations And Improvements To Streets
11-3-6:   Street Improvements Standards
11-3-6-1:   Curb And Gutter
11-3-6-2:   Pavement
11-3-7:   Blocks
11-3-8:   Sidewalk Construction Standards
11-3-9:   Utilities
11-3-10:   Water Facilities
11-3-11:   Sanitary Sewers
11-3-12:   Easements
11-3-13:   Drainage And Storm Sewers
11-3-14:   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control
11-3-15:   Dedications For Public Use
11-3-16:   Reservations For Public Use
11-3-1: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the city of Aledo, other than
land that is specifically exempted from the requirements of the Illinois plat
act 1 , shall be subdivided or developed except in compliance with the
regulations of this chapter and the applicable provisions of state law 2 . No
lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
   (A)   The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the city
council and recorded in the office of the Mercer County recorder of deeds; and
   (B)   The portion of said subdivision in which the lot is located has been
improved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or until a
performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of
such improvements.
A building permit shall not be issued for any lot conveyed in violation of this
section. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/1(b).
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8; 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
11-3-2: SUITABILITY FOR SUBDIVISION GENERALLY:
Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor drainage, rough
topography, adverse soil conditions, or other features which will be harmful to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the subdivision
and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless the
subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to solve the problems
caused by the adverse land conditions. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-3: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Lot Conformity: All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum
lot area and dimension requirements of the zoning district in which said
subdivision is located; land that is under water or proposed for street
improvements shall not be counted to satisfy these minimum requirements. Every
corner and through lot shall be large enough to permit compliance with the
district's front setback requirements on every side of the lot that faces the
street. All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation
of the unbuildable parcels.
   (B)   Lot Access And Relationship To Street: Land shall be subdivided in
such a way that each lot abuts a street meeting the requirements of section
11-3-5 of this chapter. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street right of way lines or radial to curved street right of way lines except
where a deviation from this rule will provide a better street and lot design.
(Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-4: PERMANENT REFERENCE MONUMENTS:
   (A)   Materials, Size, And Location:
      1.   Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms, not less than four inches
(4") in diameter or square and forty two inches (42") long, shall be set at the
extreme corners of subdivisions.
      2.   Steel pins, not less than one-half (1/2) of an inch in diameter and
thirty inches (30") long, with a survey marker cap showing the land surveyor's
registration number, shall be set at locations in accordance with the plat act.
      3.   The intersection of two (2) right of way lines at corner lots shall
terminate at a tangent to a curve having a minimum radius of fifteen feet
(15').
   (B)   Resetting Monuments: Any monuments disturbed by construction or
grading shall be reset. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-5: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed street
system indicated in the municipal comprehensive plan and official map, and
shall meet the specifications set forth in tabular form below. For divided
boulevards, the developer shall submit an acceptable plan for maintenance to
the city council.
TABLE OF STREET REDESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
Type Of Street Permitted On   Required Right Required Pavement Maximum/ Minimum
               Street Parking Of Way         Width (B-B)       Grades
                Permitted On   Required Right Required        Maximum/ Minimum
Type Of Street  Street Parking Of Way         Pavement Width  Grades
                                              (B-B)
                                                              Maximum: 10
Alley           None           20 feet        18 feet         percent
                                                              Minimum: 0.5
                                                              percent
                                                              Maximum: 10
Marginal access None           80 feet        20 feet         percent
                                                              Minimum: 0.5
                                                              percent
Local street    One side       80 feet        27 feet         Maximum: 10
                                                              percent
                Two side       80 feet        31 feet         Minimum: 0.5
                                                              percent
                                                              Maximum: 10
Collectors      Both sides     80 feet        40 feet         percent
                                                              Minimum: 0.5
                                                              percent
                                                              Maximum: 5
Minor arterials None           80 feet        11 foot lanes   percent
                                                              Minimum: 0.5
                                                              percent
                                                              Maximum: 5
Principal       None           100 feet       12 foot lanes   percent
arterials                                                     Minimum: 0.5
                                                              percent
                                                              Maximum: 10
Divided         None           70 feet        14 feet         percent
boulevard                                                     Minimum: 0.5
                                                              percent
 
(Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-5-1: HORIZONTAL CURVATURES:
All changes in horizontal alignment shall be conducted with a horizontal curve
with the following minimum centerline radius, designated R:
   (A)   For principal, minor and collector streets (design speed = 35 miles
per hour), R shall equal five hundred feet (500');
   (B)   For local streets (design speed = 30 miles per hour), R shall equal
one hundred twenty five feet (125'); and
   (C)   For alleys, R shall equal one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-
2002)
11-3-5-2: THROUGH TRAFFIC DISCOURAGED:
Marginal access and local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage use by
through traffic. The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern should be
avoided, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets
shall be encouraged to effect a more desirable street layout. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-
2002)
11-3-5-3: LIMITED ACCESS TO ARTERIALS:
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street,
access to said arterial may be limited by one of the following means:
   (A)   The subdivision of lots so that they back onto the arterial street and
front onto a parallel local street (double frontage lots), coupled with the
installation of screening in a reserve (access restricting) strip along the
rear lot lines of such lots;
   (B)   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from
and generally at right angles to the arterial street; or
   (C)   A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a planting
strip, but having access thereto at suitable points. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-5-4: DEAD END STREETS:
   (A)   Temporary Stub Streets: Streets shall be so arranged to provide for
the continuation of streets between adjacent properties when such continuation
is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire and police
protection, and efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation
comports with the municipal comprehensive plan. If the adjacent property is
owned by the developer (under the same ownership) and undeveloped and the
street must dead end temporarily, the right of way shall be extended to the
property line, and no strip that would prevent connections with future streets
shall be reserved. A temporary turnaround shall be provided at the terminus of
any temporary dead end street. If the adjacent property is under another
ownership there should be a permanent dead end.
   (B)   Permanent Dead End Streets: Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of
seven hundred fifty feet (750'). A cul-de-sac turnaround, having a minimum
right of way diameter of ninety eight feet (98'), a minimum pavement return
radius of twenty five feet (25'), and a pavement diameter of seventy five feet
(75'), shall be provided at the end of every permanent dead end street. (Ord.
8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-5-5: ALLEYS:
Alleys shall be prohibited in single-family residence districts. Alleys may be
required in multiple-family districts and in commercial/industrial districts
unless other adequate provisions for service access are made. Adequate
vehicular turnaround space shall be provided at the terminus of any dead end
alley. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-5-6: INTERSECTIONS:
   (A)   Only Two Streets: Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any
one point.
   (B)   Right Angles: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles; in no case shall two (2) streets intersect at an
angle of less than eighty degrees (80°) or more than one hundred degrees
(100°). An oblique street shall be curved approaching an intersection and shall
be approximately at right angles with said intersection for at least one
hundred feet (100') therefrom.
   (C)   Alignment: Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing
street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on
the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less
than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall not be permitted, except where
the intersected street has divided lanes without median breaks at either
intersection. Intersections involving collector or arterial streets shall be at
least eight hundred feet (800') apart.
   (D)   Curb Radii: To permit safe vehicular movement at corners, the minimum
curb radius at the intersection of two (2) streets shall be fifteen feet (15')
where both streets are marginal access or local and at other intersections, not
less than twenty five feet (25').
   (E)   Grade: Intersections shall be designed with a minimum grade of 0.5
percent. In hilly terrain, an area having not greater than a two percent (2%)
slope for a distance of sixty feet (60') from the nearest right of way line of
the intersecting street shall be provided at the approach to an intersection.
   (F)   Cross Slope: The cross slopes of all streets, including intersections,
shall not exceed three percent (3%).
   (G)   Adequate Sightlines: Where any street intersection will involve earth
banks or existing vegetation, the developer shall cut such ground and/or
vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right
of way to the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance in accordance
with the following chart:
      30 mph   130 feet each way from intersection
      35 mph   155 feet each way from intersection
For design speeds exceeding thirty five (35) miles per hour, sight distance
will be determined based upon AASHTO criteria. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-5-7: REVERSE CURVES:
A tangent at least fifty feet (50') long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on local streets and one hundred feet (100') long on collector streets.
(Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-5-8: ROAD DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS TO STREETS:
   (A)   New Perimeter Streets: Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half streets. Where an
existing half street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The planning
commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves
and dedicates the entire required street right of way width within his own
subdivision boundaries.
   (B)   Existing Roads: Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or
when the comprehensive plan, official map, or zoning setback regulations
indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of
some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve
and dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such
roads as are specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision and to
reserve for public use any portion of the right of way determined not to be
specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision.
   (C)   Excess Right Of Way: Right of way in excess of the standards set forth
in the "table of street redesign specifications" of this section
11-3-5, shall be required to be dedicated when:
      1.   Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate
earth slopes; or
      2.   Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width is needed
to construct overpasses, underpasses, and approaches thereto.
   (D)   Specifically And Uniquely Attributable Defined: For purposes of this
section, the phrase "specifically and uniquely attributable" shall mean as a
minimum that areas currently zoned or to be zoned single-family for residential
uses in the comprehensive plan shall require marginal access, local, or
collector streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be
zoned for multi-family residential uses in the comprehensive plan shall require
local, boulevard, collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial streets,
depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for commercial
uses in the comprehensive plan shall require local, collector, minor arterial,
or principal arterial streets, depending on whether same is a neighborhood,
community, or regional area; and that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for
industrial uses in the comprehensive plan shall require collector, minor
arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on the size of the
industrial area. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-6: STREET IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS:
All new streets shall be graded, curbed, if applicable, and surfaced in
accordance with the standards of Illinois department of transportation and the
provisions of the sections below. (Ord. 13/2004, 11-1-2004)
11-3-6-1: CURB AND GUTTER:
All streets requiring curbs and gutters for drainage purposes shall be bounded
by concrete curbs and gutters, the specifications of which shall be supplied by
the director of public works and utilities. Rollover curbs may be allowed on
marginal access and local streets pending approval of the director of public
works and utilities. For new street installation in a subdivision that is
adequately designed for appropriate surface water drainage, using the ditch
grade method, a curb and gutter configuration may not be required as determined
by the director of public works and utilities. (Ord. 13/2004, 11-1-2004)
11-3-6-2: PAVEMENT:
All streets and alleys shall be paved in accordance with the minimum standards
as indicated below:
   (A)   Alleys:
      1.   Six inch (6") thick nonreinforced concrete; or
      2.   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Illinois department of
transportation specifications and satisfactorily meeting the specifications of
the director of public works and utilities. (Ord. 13/2004, 11-1-2004)
   (B)   Material Access, Local:
      1.   Six inch (6") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement; or
      2.   Seven inch (7") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
      3.   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting department of transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting director of public works and
utilities service specifications.
   (C)   Collector, Minor Arterial:
      1.   Seven inch (7") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
      2.   Eight inch (8") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
      3.   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting department of transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting director of public works and
utilities specifications.
   (D)   Principal Arterial:
      1.   Eight inch (8") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
      2.   Nine inch (9") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
      3.   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting department of transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting director of public works and
utilities specifications.
   The above thickness requirements shall be increased if traffic volume,
subgrade or other conditions show justifications for increased thickness. A
subbase or base shall be constructed in accordance with the appropriate
articles of the standard specifications when required by the director of public
works and utilities. A subbase or base with an underdrain system may be
required in areas where a combination or proposed street grade and soil type
may lead to subgrade erosion and pavement undermining. The city may require
additional engineering documentation to establish that the above standards are
appropriate for the reasons stated in this paragraph.
   Pavement shall be constructed in accordance with these standard
specifications and in conformity with the lines, dimensions and grades shown on
the plans and to the form and dimensions shown on the detail drawings included
with and being part of these specifications. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-7: BLOCKS:
   (A)   Block Width: Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two (2)
tiers of lots having the minimum depth required by the zoning district
regulations; provided, that this requirement may be waived in blocks adjacent
to local collector or collector streets, railroads, or watercourses.
   (B)   Block Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand feet (1,000')
nor shorter than three hundred feet (300'). (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-8: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Installation: Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all
streets. Sidewalks shall be installed at the time the lot is developed or prior
to issuance of the occupancy permit.
   (B)   Construction Standards:
      1.   Relationship To Curb: Sidewalks shall be located one foot (1')
inside the right of way line or on a line to be given by the city director of
public works and utilities when it is impossible or not feasible to build or
construct the same as aforesaid.
      2.   Width: Sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4') wide.
      3.   Thickness Of Concrete: All sidewalks shall be constructed of
concrete at least four inches (4") thick, except that across driveways the
thickness shall be increased to six inches (6").
      4.   Grade: No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than ten
percent (10%).
      5.   Ramps At Intersections: Curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall be
ramped at all intersections so as to enhance the mobility of handicapped
individuals. Ramps shall equal or exceed the standards of the Illinois capital
development board. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-9: UTILITIES:
All utilities provided as new installations within a subdivision shall be
placed in the right of way or in easements, and shall be provided underground,
unless an exception or exemption has been granted.
   (A)   Responsibility: For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall make
the necessary arrangements with the appropriate utility companies for the
proper installation of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas,
electrical, and communication service.
   (B)   Requirements: All underground electric distribution circuits installed
by the utility company within the city shall be installed in accordance with
the safety rules for the installation and maintenance of electric supply and
communication lines, U.S. department of commerce, national bureau of standards
and general order no. 160, rules for construction of electric power and
communication lines, Illinois commerce commission.
   (C)   Enforcement: The building inspector shall not issue any occupancy
permits until all utilities have been installed in the subdivision.
   (D)   Exceptions: The requirements for underground utilities shall not apply
in the following instances:
      1.   Principal electric distribution feeder circuits and electric
transmission circuits shall not be required to be installed underground.
      2.   Any service which is considered by the utility company to be
unfeasible for undergrounding, due to high voltage or inordinately high and
unjustified cost, may be provided overhead when authorized by the city council.
      3.   When topographic or soil conditions cause the cost of undergrounding
to be extremely and unjustifiably high, services may be provided overhead when
authorized by the city council.
      4.   When a subdivision is developed adjacent to or abutting an existing
development in which the primary feeder lines have been installed overhead, the
new subdivision may use the overhead lines with the following provisions:
         (a)   The service lines to the buildings in the new subdivision shall
be installed underground.
         (b)   All additional necessary feeder lines shall be installed
underground.
      5.   When a building is constructed on a single unoccupied lot in an area
which is fully developed with overhead electric and communication service, the
building may use the overhead service line if it completes the development of
the area.
      6.   Utilities provided as new installations to lots for industrial
purposes may be provided overhead.
   (E)   Exemptions: The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the
requirements of this title:
      1.   Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
      2.   Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures,
authorized by the city council, crossing or entering any portion of a district
from which overhead wires have been prohibited, and originating in an area in
which overhead wires are allowed.
      3.   Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a
bracket or similar device, and extending from one location on the building to
another on the same building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any
public street or right of way.
      4.   Radio antenna and associated structures and equipment used for
furnishing communication service.
      5.   Service terminals and necessary pad mounted electric equipment
installed aboveground, used to distribute communication and electric service in
underground systems. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-10: WATER FACILITIES:
   (A)   Water Distribution: Every subdivision shall be provided with a
complete water distribution system adequate to serve all lots within the
subdivision. The water distribution system shall be designed according to
standard specifications and shall be approved by the director of public works
and utilities and the Illinois environmental protection agency. Whenever a
water main is extended it shall be extended across the entire frontage of the
property being subdivided and it shall be connected to any other mains which
front on or are adjacent to the subdivision to provide for the looping of the
water system.
   (B)   Flow Requirements: The engineer for the subdivider shall calculate the
expected fire flow requirements within the subdivision based upon the intended
zoning and expected land use in accordance with the uniform fire code, latest
adopted edition. Also taken into consideration when determining the size of
pipe to be installed shall be the anticipated demand for water by "downstream"
properties based on anticipated development of such properties based on the
comprehensive plan for such expansion areas.
   (C)   Service Connections: Individual service connections within single-
family residential subdivisions shall be extended from the main to within one
foot (1') of the lot line of each lot with an approved corporation and curb box
and clearly marked with a fence post or similar material to facilitate their
locations.
   (D)   Flow Tests: Upon written request to the director of public works and
utilities, the city will perform fire flow tests on the existing water mains to
be extended and provide the data to the subdivider's engineer.
   (E)   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants of the type approved by the director of
public works and utilities shall be installed according to standard engineering
practices and shall be placed at intervals of not more than four hundred feet
(400') for residential, and not more than the maximum specified for commercial
and industrial use, in accordance with the uniform fire code. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-
2002)
11-3-11: SANITARY SEWERS:
All proposed sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the regulations of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, and must be approved by ACO.
   (A)   When Public System Available:
      1.   Whenever the subdivision, any point of which is within three hundred
feet (300') of an existing publicly owned sewer main or other collection
system, the subdivider has the right to extend public sewer mains or private
sewer laterals from said property to said existing publicly owned sewer main or
other collection system either by way of street, alley, public way, public
easement, or private easement, the subdivider shall construct sewer mains,
where technically feasible, which shall be connected to such public sewer and
shall provide sewer to all lots within the subdivision.
      2.   All sewer main construction shall be done according to standard
engineering practices.
      3.   Whenever a sanitary sewer system is extended it shall be extended
across the entire frontage or frontages of the property to be improved by the
extension unless the city has determined, because of land contours or the
presence of other mains, that no other property can be technically or needs to
be served by such an extension.
   (B)   Interim Disposal Systems: Where a sanitary sewer cannot be extended as
required by subsection (A) of this section, the developer shall construct a
sanitary sewer system to serve all lots within the subdivision and shall
provide sewage treatment by means of an approved sewage treatment plant which
shall be operated and maintained by the developer until such time as the system
can be connected to the publicly owned system. Said system shall be temporarily
capped. Where the land covered by the preliminary plat contains not more than
ten (10) lots, individual sewage disposal systems may be used and must be
installed according to applicable laws and regulations of the appropriate
approving agency. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-12: EASEMENTS:
   (A)   Utility Easements: Easements at least ten feet (10') wide shall be
provided for public and private utilities along the front right of way lines of
the public streets. Easements located elsewhere shall be at least twenty feet
(20') wide and if along lot lines, they shall be centered on the lot lines.
   (B)   Drainage Easements: Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall
be established along any natural drainage channel and in any other locations
where necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm water from streets,
alleys, and all other portions of the subdivision. The precise location and
minimum widths of said easements shall be determined by the director of public
works and utilities. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-13: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS:
   (A)   Drainage Improvements: The planning commission shall not recommend the
approval of plat unless, the director of public works and utilities determines
that the proposed provisions for storm water drainage are adequate within
boundaries of the subdivision. Drainage improvements in the subdivision shall
be coordinated with existing and planned drainage improvements elsewhere so as
to form an integrated city system. The storm water drainage system shall be
separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system and shall meet the
following design criteria:
      1.   Principal And Minor Arterial Streets:
         (a)   Flow from a "10-year storm" shall not inundate the center twenty
feet (20') of the pavement.
         (b)   Flow from a "50-year storm" shall be carried without damage to
any building.
      2.   Collector Streets:
         (a)   Flow from a "10-year storm" shall not inundate the center ten
feet (10') of the pavement.
         (b)   Flow from a "50-year storm" shall be carried without damage to
any building.
      3.   Local Streets:
         (a)   Flow from a "10-year storm" shall not top the curb.
         (b)   Flow from a "50-year storm" shall be carried without damage to
any building.
   (B)   Catch Basins Or Inlets: Catch basins or inlets, if required, shall be
constructed so that the majority of surface water shall be intercepted before
reaching the intersection, and not carried for a distance of more than four
hundred feet (400') of the pavement.
   (C)   Accommodation Of Upstream Drainage Areas: A culvert or other drainage
facility large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the entire drainage
area upstream from the proposed subdivision shall be provided in accordance
with the city's standard specifications. Potential runoff shall be determined
on the basis of the maximum development of the upstream area that is permitted
or to be permitted under the comprehensive plan.
   (D)   Areas Subject To Flooding: Whenever a plat is submitted for an area
that is subject to flooding, the city council may require appropriate
protective measures, including the filling of the flood prone area to a level
equal to the regulatory flood elevation, if any. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-14: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
In the development of any subdivision, the following erosion and sedimentation
control regulation shall be observed:
   (A)   The developer shall protect the development site from soil erosion and
shall protect downstream property from sedimentation deposits during the
construction of the subdivision. Practices contained in "Procedures And
Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" shall
be employed in the preparation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan
which shall be approved by the director of public works and utilities prior to
any earth disturbing activity taking place. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-15: DEDICATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE:
The city council may require the developer to dedicate (i.e., to transfer
without compensation) to the city of Aledo or other appropriate governmental
entity suitable parcels of land within the subdivision for public purposes
provided such facilities are otherwise required by this title. Any such
dedicated area shall be shown on the final plat. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-3-16: RESERVATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE:
Besides requiring the developer to dedicate parcels for public purposes, the
city council may require that he reserve land for parks, playgrounds, schools,
or other public purposes in locations designated in the city's comprehensive
plan. Since public acquisition of reserved land requires compensation, it is
not essential that the need for such land be uniquely and specifically
attributable to the subdivision 1 .
   (A)   Adopted: There is hereby adopted an official map dated, to be
determined, which shall be applicable to all land situated within the city, and
shall also be applicable to contiguous territory within one and one-half (11/2)
miles from the corporate limits of the city and not included within the
corporate limits of any other municipality. The official map shall be filed in
the office of the city clerk and is made part of this title by reference.
   (B)   Planned Public Improvements To Be Shown On Map: The official map may
show indication of sites for planned public facilities. Public facility sites
which may be indicated on the official map may include, but are not limited to:
sites for new trafficways; school sites; recreational sites; public building
sites; and sites for future storm damage, electrical or other public service or
utility easements.
   (C)   Availability Of Sites For Planned Public Improvements:
      1.   Whenever the official map indicates the necessity for providing a
site for a planned public facility, the council may require that the site for
the public use be designated on the subdivision plat before granting approval
to such plat; and, furthermore, that the site be held for that specific public
use for a period of one year from the date of approval of the final plat. When
such designation has been required, the council shall notify the responsible
public agency in writing of the designation within ten (10) days.
      2.   Whenever a site for public use, shown on the official map, has been
required to be indicated on a subdivision plat, the responsible agency having
jurisdiction of such use shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or
commence proceedings to acquire the land by condemnation within one year from
date of final approval of the plat; and, if it does not do so within such
period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners in
any other manner consistent with this title, the zoning ordinance, or any other
provision of this code or other ordinance of the city.
   (D)   Amendments Or Additions To The Official Map: Amendments to the
official map, including the indication of additional public sites to be shown
on the map, shall be considered amendments to this title and therefore shall be
as specified in this title for amendments to this title. Any public agency
requesting the establishment of the official map of a future public site or
easement which is not included in the comprehensive plan shall indicate to the
plan commission the need for the site in the particular location specified. The
plan commission, before making a favorable recommendation for the inclusion on
the official map of such site by the council, shall find that this public site
location is determined to be necessary to provide public service consistent
with the comprehensive plan of the community and shall so indicate in its
minutes. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
CHAPTER 4
PLATS AND PLANS
SECTION:
11-4-1:   Prefiling Conference
11-4-2:   Preliminary Plats
11-4-2-1:   Information Required
11-4-2-2:   Utility Company Notification
11-4-2-3:   Planning Commission Action
11-4-2-4:   Appeals Process
11-4-2-5:   Action By The City Council
11-4-3:   Improvement Plans
11-4-3-1:   Information Required
11-4-3-2:   Inspections Required
11-4-3-3:   Filing "As Built" Records
11-4-3-4:   Privately Developed And Operated Facilities
11-4-4:   Assurance For Completion Of Required Improvements
11-4-4-1:   Forms Of Assurance
11-4-4-2:   Amount Of Bond Or Deposit
11-4-4-3:   Eligible Sureties
11-4-4-4:   Term Of Assurance, Extension
11-4-4-5:   Release Of Bond/Escrow Deposit
11-4-4-6:   Failure To Complete Improvements
11-4-5:   Final Plats
11-4-5-1:   Filing, Time Limits
11-4-5-2:   Information Required
11-4-5-3:   Modifications And Exceptions
11-4-5-4:   Certificates Required
11-4-5-5:   Action By City Council
11-4-6:   Maintenance Of Improvements
11-4-1: PREFILING CONFERENCE:
Prior to the submission of the initial plat, a prefiling conference may be held
between the developer and appropriate city staff. The developer shall present a
concept sketch of the proposed development. City staff shall use a standardized
checklist to review the proposed development for conformance to this title.
(Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
Except as specifically provided below, every person who proposes to subdivide
any land located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the city of Aledo shall
file six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of said subdivision with the
director of public works and utilities at least three (3) weeks prior to a
regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission.
He shall also file one copy of the preliminary plat and supporting data with
the appropriate soil and water conservation district. Said district shall have
not more than thirty (30) days to submit any comments it might wish to make to
the planning commission 1 .
Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and only a portion of that
tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a preliminary plat of the
entire tract shall be submitted.
All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in accordance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8 and the provisions of the sections below.
   (A)   Exception: A preliminary plat shall not be required for:
      1.   Minor subdivisions; or
      2.   Land that is specifically exempted from the Illinois plat act 2  as
now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 70 ILCS 405/22.02a.
2 2. 765 ILCS 205/1(b).
11-4-2-1: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in
Illinois at a scale of one hundred feet (100') or less to the inch provided the
resultant drawing does not exceed thirty six inches by twenty four inches (36"
x 24"). Said preliminary plat, together with the supporting data, shall provide
all of the following information:
   (A)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not owner), and
registered land surveyor;
   (B)   Proposed name of the subdivision and all adjoining subdivisions;
   (C)   Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided and
proposed setbacks;
   (D)   North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map;
   (E)   Dimensions of the tract, and its gross area;
   (F)   Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two foot (2')
contour data for land having slopes of zero – four percent (0 – 4%), five foot
(5') contour data for land having slopes between four – twelve percent (4 –
12%), and ten foot (10') contour data for land having slopes of twelve percent
(12%) or more;
   (G)   Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas, natural
drainageways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools, buildings, areas
subject to flooding, etc.;
   (H)   Locations and right of way widths of all existing and proposed streets
and alleys;
   (I)   Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed
easements;
   (J)   All proposed deed restrictions and covenants;
   (K)   Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers,
water mains, and any appurtenances thereto;
   (L)   Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and
proposed utilities;
   (M)   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or
dedicated for schools, parks/playgrounds, and other public purposes;
   (N)   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots
within the subdivision numbered sequentially;
   (O)   For all contiguous holdings of the owner; including land owned by the
same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated
association or owned by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities,
or unincorporated associations in which a stockholder, partner, or associate,
or a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm,
partnership, entity, or unincorporated association; with an indication of the
portion proposed for subdivision: an affidavit of ownership, which shall
include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with
the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in the
county recorder of deed's office or other official records; the name and
address and telephone number of the legal owner of the property, the
subdivider, if different from the legal owner, the land surveyor and engineer,
and the agents of any of these persons; the name and address and telephone
number of the contract owner, if any, of the property and the date the contract
of sale was executed; and, if any corporations are involved, a complete list of
all directors, officers, and stockholders owning more than five percent (5%) of
any class of stock of each corporation; and, if a trust is involved, a complete
list of the names of the trustees, and the names and addresses and telephone
numbers of all beneficiaries of the trust;
   (P)   The location by township, range, section, or by other legal
description;
   (Q)   A list of requested variances and justifications. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-
2002)
11-4-2-2: UTILITY COMPANY NOTIFICATION:
It is the subdivider's responsibility to notify the appropriate public
utilities. Proof of notification shall be submitted with the preliminary plat
to the city for city approval. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-2-3: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
The planning commission shall either recommend approval, conditional approval,
or disapproval of the application for the preliminary plat within ninety (90)
days from the date of said application or the filing of the last item of
required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless the planning
commission and the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit 1 . If
the planning commission recommends disapproval of the preliminary plat, they
shall furnish to the applicant within the ninety (90) day period a written
statement specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to
this title and/or the official map. If the planning commission recommends
approval of the preliminary plat, it shall promptly so inform the city council.
(Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
11-4-2-4: APPEALS PROCESS:
If the preliminary plat is not approved, the director of public works and
utilities shall write "Not Approved" and the date of the action on the prints,
and shall transmit to the subdivider one print with a letter stating the
reasons for the disapproval. The subdivider may transmit an amended plat to the
planning commission for consideration.
If the subdivider is not satisfied with the decision of the planning
commission, an appeal must be made by letter addressed to the mayor and city
council, stating the reasons for the appeal. The letter of appeal shall be
placed on the next regular city council meeting agenda after it is received by
the director of public works and utilities. The director of public works and
utilities shall also provide to the city council the preliminary plat, any
meeting minutes pertaining to the plat, and the reports and recommendations
made to the planning commission by the director of public works and utilities.
The city council shall have thirty (30) days from the time the appeal is first
placed on its agenda either to: reaffirm the planning commission's decision on
the preliminary plat; to approve the preliminary plat as submitted by the
subdivider; or to approve the preliminary plat with modifications. (Ord. 8/02,
9-16-2002)
11-4-2-5: ACTION BY THE CITY COUNCIL:
If the planning commission recommended approval of preliminary plat, the city
council, by resolution, shall either accept or reject said plat within thirty
(30) days after their next regularly scheduled meeting following the planning
commission's action. If the city council rejects the preliminary plat, their
resolution shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to comply with
this title. The city clerk shall attach a certified copy of the council's
resolution of approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat. One copy of the
resolution and plat shall be retained by the clerk, one copy shall be filed
with the director of public works and utilities, and one copy shall be given to
the subdivider. City council approval shall not qualify a preliminary plat for
recording. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-3: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
After the city council has approved the preliminary plat, but prior to
submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish four (4) copies of
the plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed within or in
conjunction with the proposed subdivision to the director of public works and
utilities' review. These plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by
the registered professional engineer responsible for their preparation. Until
the director of public works and utilities certifies in writing that the
proposed improvements conform to generally accepted engineering practices and
to the standards imposed in this title:
   (A)   The building inspector shall not issue any permit to allow
construction of said improvements; and
   (B)   The city council shall not act upon the application for final plat
approval. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-3-1: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Improvement plans shall consist of black or blue line prints not larger than
thirty six inches by twenty four inches (36" x 24"). These plans and the
related specifications shall provide all of the following information:
   (A)   Topography of the tract, both before and after development at the same
scale as required in the preliminary plat;
   (B)   Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all streets;
   (C)   Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
   (D)   Locations and typical cross sections of street pavements including
curbs/gutters and catch basins;
   (E)   Locations and typical cross section of sidewalks and driveway aprons;
   (F)   Locations, sizes and invert elevations of all existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any
existing or proposed utility systems;
   (G)   Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other utilities;
   (H)   Locate area(s) for removal of trees six inches (6") or larger;
   (I)   All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
   (J)   High water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or within the
tract; and
   (K)   Such other information as director of public works and utilities may
reasonably require to perform their duties under this section. (Ord. 8/02, 9-
16-2002)
11-4-3-2: INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
The subdivider/developer shall notify the director of engineering service of
both the start and completion of construction of approved improvements.
   (A)   The director of public works and utilities shall inspect said
improvements while they are under construction. If he determines that they are
being built in violation of this title, he shall promptly issue a stop order.
All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of this
chapter shall be inspected during the course of construction by the director of
public works and utilities or a duly designated deputy selected and retained by
the subdivider and approved by the city. All fees and costs connected with such
inspection and in reviewing the plan and specifications for such improvements
shall be paid by the subdivider. The fees and costs shall be set at the
prevailing rate.
   (B)   In addition to the detailed requirements listed below, the inspector
shall maintain a daily diary in a standard format acceptable to the director of
public works and utilities. Copies of the daily diary entries shall be provided
to the director of public works and utilities on a weekly basis during
construction.
      1.   Content: The daily entries shall include at least the following
information:
         (a)   Weather conditions.
         (b)   Site conditions.
         (c)   Contractor's working hours.
         (d)   Inspector's hours on the site.
         (e)   An explanation of the actual work performed by the contractor
that day.
         (f)   Specific information about material tests taken.
         (g)   Description of any problems.
      2.   Purpose: The purpose of the diary is to provide backup information
for the developer's engineer and the director of public works and utilities to
recommend acceptance of the improvements by the city council and provide actual
construction records of any problems that may develop.
      3.   Format: The general format of the diary must be approved by the
director of public works and utilities before construction begins.
   (C)   The inspector shall make and document the following inspections:
      1.   Storm And Sanitary Sewer And Water Main Improvements:
         (a)   Inspect all materials and document pertinent items such as pipe
manufacturer, class, and size.
         (b)   Reject any defective material and ensure that it is not used on
the job.
         (c)   Observe the actual pipe laying operation to ensure that all
joints are properly made, the pipes are true to line and grade, and the bedding
and backfill are done according to the specifications.
         (d)   Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions,
location of all service laterals, backfilling, and location of all utilities
installed and encountered. Location measurements shall be of the accuracy and
type required by the director of public works and utilities.
         (e)   Observe and document all final acceptance testing required by
the specifications.
      2.   Street Improvements:
         (a)   Perform and document subgrade, subbase, base, and embankment
compaction tests.
         (b)   Inspect the alignment and condition of the paving forms.
            (1)   Check and document subgrade depth checks.
            (2)   Check and document the paving machine adjustments.
         (c)   Furnish the asphalt or PC concrete mix design to the director of
public works and utilities for approval prior to connecting paving operations.
         (d)   Inspect all concrete pours.
            (1)   Perform and document an appropriate number of air content and
slump measurements.
            (2)   Cast compression cylinders or beams and document the results
of the tests.
         (e)   Inspect the placement of all asphalts.
            (1)   Perform and record asphalt compaction tests.
            (2)   Perform at least one asphalt extraction test and one sieve
analysis from an asphalt sample taken on the job site.
   (D)   The director of public works and utilities shall also inspect required
improvements upon their completion. The city of Aledo shall not accept any
improvement until the director of public works and utilities has certified that
it complies with this title. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-3-3: FILING "AS BUILT" RECORDS:
The improvements will not be recommended for acceptance until the following is
provided for the director of public works and utilities:
   (A)   Copies of all daily diary entries.
   (B)   Copies of all material test results.
   (C)   Detailed reproducible cloth or polyester "as built" improvements
construction plans of all public improvements.
   (D)   Certification by the developer's engineer that all construction was
accomplished within reasonably close conformance to the plans and
specifications and that the "as built" plans accurately reflect actual field
conditions.
   (E)   A labor and material payment and maintenance bond posted prior to
construction by the contractor of a subdivider for the installation of all
public improvements, using forms provided by the director of public works and
utilities.
   (F)   Permanent easements or agreements granted to the city for all public
improvements that are not constructed in dedicated right of way, using forms
provided by the director of public works and utilities.
   (G)   Accurate triangular measurements for sewer and water laterals to
permanent items, e.g., fire hydrants or manholes. The sewer and water services
shall be marked with a four inch by four inch (4" x 4") marking, that stands
five (5) or six feet (6') tall including a curb notch. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-3-4: PRIVATELY DEVELOPED AND OPERATED FACILITIES:
Where the subdivision is to contain sewers, sewage treatment plants, water
supply systems, park areas, or other physical facilities which will not be
maintained by existing public agencies, provision should be made by trust
agreement, which is a part of the deed restrictions and which is acceptable to
the proper public agencies, for jurisdiction over the continuous maintenance,
supervision, operation and reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners
in the subdivision. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-4: ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The city council shall not approve any final plat (and, hence, said final plat
shall not be entitled to recording) until:
   (A)   All improvements required in the approved improvements plan have been
completed by the subdivider/developer at his expense, inspected by the director
of public works and utilities and dedicated to the city of Aledo or other
appropriate entity; or
   (B)   In accordance with the sections below, the subdivider/developer has
provided the city of Aledo with legal assurance to guarantee the satisfactory
completion and dedication of all required improvements; and
   (C)   Necessary title assurances have been given whether subsection (A) or
(B) of this section applies. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-4-1: FORMS OF ASSURANCE:
The required legal assurance may be a performance bond, an escrow deposit or a
letter of credit. Every performance bond shall be approved as to form by the
city attorney, and posted with the city clerk. Any funds held in escrow shall
be deposited with an approved escrow agent. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-4-2: AMOUNT OF BOND OR DEPOSIT:
The amount of the legal assurance shall be equal to the director of public
works and utilities' estimate of the costs of constructing the uncompleted
portion of the required improvements plus all required inspection fees. Any
escrow deposit may be in the form of:
   (A)   An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending
institution guaranteeing to the city of Aledo the availability of the escrow
funds from time to time upon demand; or
   (B)   Interest bearing accounts with a financial institution authorized to
serve as an escrow agent. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-4-3: ELIGIBLE SURETIES:
No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless he has been approved by the
state of Illinois to act as a surety on public works improvements. (Ord. 8/02,
9-16-2002)
11-4-4-4: TERM OF ASSURANCE, EXTENSION:
The initial term of any performance bond or escrow agreement shall not exceed
two (2) years. If all the required improvements have not been completed by the
end of the two (2) year period, the city clerk, with the advice and consent of
the city council may extend said bond/escrow agreement for one year only. (Ord.
8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-4-5: RELEASE OF BOND/ESCROW DEPOSIT:
   (A)   The city clerk may release up to ninety percent (90%) of the amount of
the performance bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written authorization from
the director of public works and utilities. The amount which the director of
public works and utilities authorizes to be released shall be equal to the
value of improvements actually completed in accordance with approved plans.
   (B)   The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit shall
not be released until:
      1.   The director of public works and utilities has certified to the city
clerk in writing that all required improvements have been satisfactorily
completed; and
      2.   Said improvements and corresponding right of way have been accepted
by and dedicated to the city of Aledo or other appropriate entity. (Ord. 8/02,
9-16-2002)
11-4-4-6: FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS:
If all the required improvements have not been completed by the end of the two
(2) year period (or 3 year period, in the case of an extension), the director
of public works and utilities with the assistance of the city attorney, may:
   (A)   Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to the city of
Aledo an equal amount to the cost of completing the required improvements (as
estimated by the director of public works and utilities) or the amount of the
bond not theretofore released, whichever is less; or
   (B)   Order the escrow agent to retain all escrowed funds needed to complete
the required improvements, and to return the balance (if any) of such funds to
the subdivider/developer. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-5: FINAL PLATS:
The Mercer County recorder of deeds shall not record any final plat of a
subdivision located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the city of Aledo
until said final plat has been approved by the city council. The city council
shall not approve any final plat unless they determine that it is in compliance
with all pertinent requirements of this title including those set forth in the
sections below. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-5-1: FILING, TIME LIMITS:
The subdivider of every subdivision, who desires final plat approval shall file
six (6) black or blue prints of the final plat and supporting data with the
director of public works and utilities not later than one year after
preliminary plat approval has been granted. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-5-2: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Every final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor authorized to practice
land surveying in the state of Illinois on new linen tracing cloth or polyester
based film with waterproof black ink at a scale not greater than one hundred
feet equals one inch (100' = 1"), provided that the resultant drawing shall not
be less than eight and one-half by fourteen (81/2 x 14) and shall not exceed
twenty four by thirty six inches (24 x 36") square. The final plat and
supporting data shall portray/provide all of the following information:
   (A)   North arrow, graphic scale, and data;
   (B)   Name of subdivider and subdivision;
   (C)   Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the
tract tied to section or one-quarter (1/4) section corner;
   (D)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not more
than one foot (1') in fifteen thousand feet (15,000') and provide a copy of the
closure calculations;
   (E)   Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land by record name,
plat book, and page number;
   (F)   Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the boundaries
of the subdivision;
   (G)   Right of way lines of all streets, other rights of way, easements,
areas to be reserved, and lot lines with accurate dimensions, angles, or
bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency,
central angles, and accompanying legal descriptions;
   (H)   Name and right of way width of every proposed street;
   (I)   Location, width and purpose of any existing or proposed easement;
   (J)   Number of each lot, lot dimensions, and (in a separate list) lot
areas;
   (K)   Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved;
   (L)   Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;
   (M)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of lots;
   (N)   The names of all legal owners and other parties with an interest,
whether recorded or not, in the property being subdivided, together with formal
irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government
uses, utilities, parks, and easements, signed by all parties of interest or
their authorized agents, in a form approved by the city attorney, if the plat
is proposed for final approval without improvements in place and accepted with
a deed of dedication to the public in fee simple absolute unless otherwise
called for on the plat of such lands; and with a commitment for title insurance
policy or title opinion from a licensed attorney showing that those signing the
plat are necessary and sufficient to create the subdivision and, prior to
signing the plat, a title policy for the local government in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any lands or interests to be dedicated to the
public;
   (O)   Monument identification; and
   (P)   Notification approval of easements by appropriate utilities. This
approval will not be noted in the final plat. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-5-3: MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
If the final plat is under one ownership and is no more than five (5) lots, no
formal commission approval is needed and the plans can go directly to the city
council unless there are new streets, other public improvements, or easements
of egress or ingress. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-4-5-4: CERTIFICATES REQUIRED:
As required by state law 1 , the following certificates shall be accompanied
with the final plat:
   (A)   Owner's Certificate: The following is an example of the owner's
certificate:
   State of Illinois   )
   Mercer County   ) SS.
   City of Aledo   )
    Know all men by these presents, that we/I, (name(s) of owner(s), owner(s)
and proprietor(s) of the land shown on the accompanying plat and described in
the accompanying certificate of the surveyor) do hereby certify that I/we have
caused said survey to be made and acknowledge the said plat as correct, and do
hereby adopt and accept the same and cause it to be known as (name of
subdivision).
Easements are hereby dedicated for the use of the City of Aledo, Illinois and
public facilities franchise to do business within the City of Aledo, Illinois
as indicated on the plat and marked drainage and utility easement to install,
lay, construct, renew, operate and maintain drainage ways, drainage structures,
gas, water, sewer pipes, conduits, cable, poles and wires, overhead and
underground, with all necessary braces, guys, anchors and other appliances for
the purpose of serving the subdivision and other property with gas, water,
sewer, electric and telephone service and to overhang all lots with aerial
service wires to serve adjacent lots, together with the right to enter upon
lots at all times to install, lay, construct, renew, operate and maintain said
gas, water and sewer pipes, conduits, cables, poles, wires, braces, guys,
anchors and other appliances, and to trim and keep trimmed any trees, shrubs or
saplings that interfere or threaten to interfere with said public utility
equipment, but same may be used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other
purposes that do not interfere with the use of said easement for public utility
purposes.
(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions would
be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or the recommendation of the
city plan commission or the council; important provisions are those specifying
the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the
minimum habitable floor area.)
Sidewalks shall be constructed at the time the structure is constructed.
All streets, alleys, and public open spaces shown and not heretofore dedicated,
are hereby dedicated to the public.
    Building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this plat,
between which lines and the property lines of the streets there shall be
erected or maintained no building structure.
    The foregoing covenants (or restrictions) are to run with the land and
shall be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until (25
year period is suggested), at which time said covenants (or restrictions) shall
be automatically extended for successive periods of ten (10) years unless the
vote of a majority of the then owners of the building sites covered by these
covenants (or restrictions), in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of
the foregoing covenants (or restrictions), by judgement or court order, shall
in no way affect any of the other covenants (or restrictions), which shall
remain in full force and effect.
    In witness whereof, we hereunto affix our hands and seals this       day of
                    , A.D. 2002.
                                           (Seal)
                                           (Seal)
   (B)   Irrevocable Offers Of Dedication Forms:
      1.   The following form shall be placed upon a final plat of a
subdivision whenever said plat is approved upon submission of a subdivider's
bond or escrow agreement as provided for in section
11-4-4 of this chapter:
The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocable offers for dedication to
the City of Aledo, in fee simple absolute unless otherwise called for on the
plat all the streets, local government uses, easements, parks, and required
utilities shown within the subdivision plat and construction plans in
accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated
                          and recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Mercer County, Illinois.
By                                         
                                           
   Date                                         
      2.   The following form shall accompany any final plat set forth in
subsection (B)1 of this section and shall be presented for recording
simultaneously with any such plat, but shall be recorded immediately prior to
the recording of the plat.
   OFFER OF IRREVOCABLE DEDICATION
    Agreement made this       day of                     , 2002, by and between
                    ,                     , having                      office
and place of business at                     , hereinafter referred to as
"Developer", and the City of Aledo, a municipal corporation having its
principal office at                     , hereinafter designated as "City;"
WHEREAS, the City is in the process of approving a subdivision plat entitled
                   , dated                     , and made by                 ;
and
WHEREAS, said plat and the construction plans associated therewith designated
certain property interests and public improvements consisting of    
      
      
      
to be dedicated to the City free and clear of all encumbrances and liens,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter            of the            Code of
Ordinances; and
WHEREAS, the Developer, simultaneously with final plat approval or before,
shall post a subdivider's bond with the City for the construction and payment
therefor, maintenance, and dedication of said interests and improvements; and
WHEREAS, the Developer is desirous of offering for dedication the said
improvements and interests in land to the City as more particularly described
in Schedule                      attached hereunto; and
WHEREAS, the Developer has delivered a deed of dedication to the City to be
held in trust by it for said improvements and interests in land as described
herein;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the City's approval of said subdivision
plat, it is mutually agreed as follows:
(a)   The Developer herewith delivers to the City a deed of dedication in fee
simple absolute unless otherwise called for on the plat for the premises and
improvements described in Schedule                      attached hereto,
(b)   Said delivery being a formal offer of dedication to the City to be held
by the City in trust until the acceptance or rejection of such offer of
dedication by the City Council.
(c)   The Developer agrees that said formal offer of dedication is irrevocable
and can be accepted by the local government at any time.
(d)   The Developer agrees to complete the construction and maintenance of the
land and improvements pursuant to the Subdivider's Bond and the provisions of
Chapters       through       of Title 11 of the City Code of the City of Aledo
and any conditions of approval of said subdivision and upon acceptance by the
City of the offer of dedication shall furnish, within thirty (30) days after
written notice from the City of said acceptance of the offer of dedication, to
the City a title insurance policy issued by a licensed title insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois in the amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), certifying that the premises are free and clear
of all liens and encumbrances and that fee simple title or other specific
interest reposes in the City and shall furnish to the City a check for all
necessary fees and taxes to record the deed(s) heretofore delivered.
(e)   That this irrevocable offer of dedication shall run with the land and
shall be binding on all assigns, grantees, successors, or heirs of the
Developer.
         CITY OF    
         (Seal)
                                           
         Mayor
   Attest:                                         
               City Clerk
   Approved as to Form:
                                                    
              City AttorneyDEVELOPER
   Attest:
                                                                                   
                                           
         (Seal)                                           
   (C)   Notary Public's Certificate:
   State of Illinois   )
      ) SS
   County of          )
    I,                          , a Notary Public in and for the County
aforesaid, do hereby certify that                           are personally
known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, and that they appear before me this day in person and acknowledge
that they signed and sealed the same as their free and voluntary act for the
uses and purposes therein set forth, including the release waiver of the right
of homestead.
    Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this       day of                 ,
2002.
                                           
   Notary Public          
   (D)   Surveyor's Certificate: The following surveyor's certificate shall
accompany or be placed on the final plat:
   State of Illinois   )
      ) SS.
   Mercer County   )
    I,                          , an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor, hereby
certify that the annexed plat is a true and correct representation of a survey
made by me or under my direction according to the surveying laws of the State
of Illinois and the                      Subdivision Ordinance, or the
following described property to wit:
 
    Monuments as shown on the plat are set or will be set within 30 days after
completion of the required improvements and their acceptance by the City, and
such monuments are or will be sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced
and will occupy the positions shown thereon.
(1)   (No) part of the property covered by this plat of subdivision is located
within a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
   In witness I hereunto set by hand and seal this                   day of
                    , A.D. 2002.
   (E)   County Clerk's Certificate:
    I,                          , County Clerk of Mercer County, Illinois, do
hereby certify that I find no unpaid or forfeited taxes against any of the real
estate included within this plat.
                                           
   County Clerk          
                                           
   Date              
   (F)   Certificate Of City Council:
    I,                          , Mayor of the City of Aledo, do hereby certify
that the plat shown hereon was duly presented to the City Council and approved
at a meeting of same held on                          .
                                           
   Mayor               
         Attest:                                           
   City Clerk            
   (G)   City Clerk's Certificate: The following form shall be used for
certification by the city clerk:
    I,                          , City Clerk, in and for the said City of
Aledo, do hereby certify that all due assessments have been paid upon the real
estate described on the accompanying plat.
    In witness whereof, I hereunto set by hand and official seal this       day
of                     , A.D. 2002.
                                           
   City Clerk          
   (H)   Director Of Public Works And Utilities Certificate: The following form
shall be used for certification by the director of public works and utilities:
    The design of the accompanying plat has been examined and found to meet the
requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance.
                                                         
   Director of Public Works and Utilities
   (I)   Certificate To Approve Subdivisions Of Five Lots Or Less: The
following form shall be used for the approval of subdivisions of five (5) lots
or less by the ACO's                      in accordance with section
11-4-5-3 of this chapter:
    I, the undersigned Director of Public Works and Utilities, do hereby
certify that the accompanying plat has been examined and found to be in
compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance and recommend
approval of this plat by the City of                     .
 
                                           
   ACO             
                                           
   ACO             
   (J)   Roadway Access And Sewage Disposal Systems:
      1.   The following form shall be required on the face of the plat where
roadway access is to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Illinois
department of transportation or another relevant local highway authority:
This plat approved with respect to roadway access under the provisions of 765
ILCS 205/2.
                                        
   Agency
                                        
   Title
                                           
   Date
      2.   The following form shall be required on the face of the plat where
any part of the platted land will not be served by a public sewer system:
This plat is approved with respect to sewage disposal systems under the
provisions of 765 ILCS 205/2.
                                        
   Agency
                                        
   Title
                                           
   Date
   (K)   Required Disclosures To Be On Face Of Final Plat: The following
disclosures are to be placed on the face of the final plat:
      1.   Either of the following, depending upon which is the most
appropriate, shall be placed upon the face of the final plat by a registered
professional engineer and the owner or his duly authorized attorney:
    To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters both
within and around this subdivision will not be changed by the construction of
same or any part thereof.
(seal)
   
         Registered Professional Engineer
         Registration No.    
   
Owner or Attorney
    To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters
either within or around this subdivision will be changed by the construction of
same or parts thereof but adequate provision has been made to collect and
divert said surface waters to public drains or private drains to which the
owner has legal access and said provisions are such that the capacity of no
natural or man-made drain will be exceeded and no damage to adjoining
properties will incur because of said provisions.
   (seal)
   
Registered Professional Engineer
Registration No.    
   
         Owner or Attorney
      2.   In addition to one of the above, the owner or subdivider shall
disclose on the face of said subdivision final plat the following if a bond or
escrow agreement is provided:
    I hereby disclose and give notice to all that this subdivision has been
approved by the City upon the condition that I post bond or enter into an
escrow agreement to secure installation of all improvements required by said
City. The terms of same allow me a period of two (2) years to install said
improvements or provide the City the right to install same to the extent of
funds provided by such security. City ordinances do not permit, however,
occupancy of any premises until adequate provision for access for water and
sanitary sewerage are made.
                                           
            Owner or Subdivider      
      3.   Also, any disclosure required by state or federal statutes shall be
displayed upon said plat. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
11-4-5-5: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall either approve or disapprove the application for final
plat approval by resolution within sixty (60) days from the date of said
application or the filing of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later, unless the city council and the subdivider mutually
agrees to extend this time limit 1 . The city council shall not approve any
final plat unless:
   (A)   The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat
if required; and
   (B)   The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the design and
improvements standards of this title and the official map; and
   (C)   To the city council's knowledge and belief, the final plat complies
with all pertinent statutory requirements; and
   (D)   Either of the following has been met:
      1.   All required improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted,
and dedicated; or
      2.   The subdivider/developer has posted an acceptable form of assurance
as stated in section
11-4-4-1 of this chapter.
If the city council disapproves the final plat, their resolution shall specify
the aspects in which the plat fails to meet the above conditions for approval.
(Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
11-4-6: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider/developer shall provide all the improvements in the subdivision
for a period of one year and provide a one year maintenance bond prior to
acceptance and dedication to the city of Aledo or other appropriate entity.
Said bond shall be in the amount determined by the ACO                      to
be sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the required
improvements for a period of one year from the date of their acceptance and
dedication. If at any time during the one year period the improvements are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider's/
developer's expense. If the subdivider/developer refuses to pay such costs
within ninety (90) days after demand is made upon him by the ACO
                    , the city of Aledo shall use the maintenance bond to make
necessary repairs/replacement. If the cost of repairs/replacement exceeds the
bond amount, the subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess. At the
end of the one year period, the maintenance bond shall be released. (Ord. 8/02,
9-16-2002)
CHAPTER 5
OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
SECTION:
11-5-1:   Enforcement Officer; Duties
11-5-2:   Amendment Procedure
11-5-3:   Penalties
11-5-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; DUTIES:
The director of public works and utilities is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-5-2: AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Proposal: Amendments to this title may be proposed by any member of
the city council, any planning commission member, or any party in interest.
Every amendment proposal shall be filed on a prescribed form in the city
administrator's office. The director of public works and utilities shall
promptly transmit each proposal, together with any comments or recommendations
he may wish to make, to the city planning commission for a public hearing.
   (B)   Public Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on
every amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said proposal is
submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify,
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the
time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed amendment
shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before
the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
city of Aledo.
   (C)   Advisory Report; Action By City Council: Within a reasonable time
after the public hearing, the planning commission shall submit an advisory
report to the city council. The city council shall act on the proposed
amendment at a regularly scheduled meeting following submission of this report.
Without another public hearing, the city council may either pass, modify or
reject the proposed amendment, or may refer it back to the planning commission
for further consideration. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
11-5-3: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this title shall be
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined pursuant to title 12, "Schedule Of
Fines", of this code. (Ord. 28/2016, 1-3-2017)
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent this municipality from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this title. (Ord. 8/02, 9-16-2002)
TITLE 12
SCHEDULE OF FINES
CHAPTER 1
PENALTY
SECTION:
12-1-1:   General Fine Structure
12-1-2:   Animal Control Fine Structure
12-1-3:   Curfew Fine Structure
12-1-4:   Parking Fine Structure
12-1-1: GENERAL FINE STRUCTURE:
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this code
shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first offense, unless
otherwise specifically enumerated in this chapter.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this code
shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a second
offense, unless otherwise specifically enumerated in this chapter.
   (C)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this code
shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third or subsequent
offense, unless otherwise specifically enumerated in this chapter.
   (D)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
This section shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city to
specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   The judgment of a fine as a penalty for a violation(s) of this code
shall in no way abrogate or impair action or order of restitution for loss or
damage to the city of Aledo, or any third party, caused by the actions of the
party so penalized. (Ord. 16/2016, 1-3-2017; amd. Ord. 22/2023, 11-6-2023)
12-1-2: ANIMAL CONTROL FINE STRUCTURE:
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of title 6,
chapter 2 of this code shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a
first offense, unless otherwise specifically enumerated in this chapter.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of title 6,
chapter 2 of this code shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a
second offense, unless otherwise specifically enumerated in this chapter.
   (C)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of title 6,
chapter 2 of this code shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a
third or subsequent offense, unless otherwise specifically enumerated in this
chapter.
   (D)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
This section shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city to
specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   The judgment of a fine as a penalty for a violation(s) of this code
shall in no way abrogate or impair action or order of restitution for loss or
damage to the city of Aledo, or any third party, caused by the actions of the
party so penalized. (Ord. 16/2016, 1-3-2017)
12-1-3: CURFEW FINE STRUCTURE:
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of title 6,
chapter 12 of this code shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a
first offense.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of title 6,
chapter 12 of this code shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a
second or subsequent offense. (Ord. 16/2016, 1-3-2017)
12-1-4: PARKING FINE STRUCTURE:
   (A)   Any person violating any of the following provisions of sections
9-6-1,
9-6-2,
9-6-3,
9-6-4,
9-6-6,
9-6-7,
9-6-8,
9-6-9,
9-6-10,
9-6-12,
9-6-13,
9-6-14,
9-6-15,
9-6-17,
9-6-18,
9-6-19,
9-9-4, and
9-9-5 of this code shall be subject to a fine as laid out in the table below:
 
Offense                                        Fine Amount
Illegal stopping, standing and parking         $ 5.00
No parking zone                                5.00
All other improper parking violations          5.00
Overnight parking                              10.00
No semitractor, trailer or semitrailer parking 25.00
Handicapped parking                            250.00
 
   (B)   Any person who fails to pay a parking violation, as set forth in
subsection (A) of this section, within ten (10) days after the issuance of the
parking violation shall be subject to an increased fine as laid out in the
table below:
 
Offense                                         Fine Amount
Illegal stopping, standing and parking          $ 10.00
No parking zone                                 10.00
All other improper parking violations           10.00
Overnight parking                               20.00
No semitractor, trailer, or semitrailer parking 50.00
Handicapped parking                             250.00
 
   (C)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
This section shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city to
specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   The judgment of a fine as a penalty for a violation(s) of this code
shall in no way abrogate or impair action or order of restitution for loss or
damage to the city of Aledo, or any third party, caused by the actions of the
party so penalized, including, but not limited to, the removal of improperly
parked vehicles by city of Aledo employees, or towing by towing companies
authorized by the city of Aledo. (Ord. 16/2016, 1-3-2017)
TITLE 13
SCHEDULE OF FEES
CHAPTER 1
FEES
SECTION:
13-1-1: Schedule Of Fees
13-1-1: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
The following fees are hereby established, which shall be charged and collected
by the City:
Section Type Of Fee Fee Scope
Section   Type Of Fee              Fee               Scope
          City Clerk services:                       
          Copies                   $ 0.25            Per page
          Certified copies/records 11.00             For 1st copy
                                   8.00              For each additional copy
          Faxes                    1.00              For 1st page
1-7-2                              0.25              For each additional page
                                   0.00              For 1st two per calendar
          Message board                              year
                                   25.00             For 3rd and subsequent
                                                     per calendar year
          NSF fee                  20.00             Per transaction
          Credit card service fee                   2.5% of charge
          Liquor licenses:                           
3-2-8     Class A liquor license   750.00            Per year, prorated
          Class B, C, D, and E     1,100.00          Per year, prorated
          liquor licenses
3-2-19    Special event liquor     25.00             Per day or part thereof
          license
                                   100.00            Per day or part thereof
          Temporary off premises                     Per day or part thereof
3-2-20    liquor license           10.00             for applicants with
                                                     current, valid liquor
                                                     license
3-2-21    Homebrewer special event 25.00             Per day or part thereof
          license
          Hawker/peddler           50.00             For 1st day
          registration             10.00             For each additional day
          Itinerant vendors and    100.00            Per year
3-4-2-4   transient merchants
                                   25.00             Per day
          Food service carts       100.00
                                   (150.00 effective Per year
                                   January 1, 2026)
3-5-2     Shows and exhibitions    100.00            Per day or part thereof
          permit
3-16-3    Video gaming license     100.00            Per terminal, per year
          General building                           
          permits:
          Construction cost of     10.00              
          $1.00 - $500.00
          Construction cost of     10.00             For 1st $500.00
          $501.00 - $2,000.00      1.50              For every $100.00
                                                     thereafter
          Construction cost of     35.00             For 1st $2,000.00
          $2,001.00 - $25,000.00   7.00              For every $1,000.00
                                                     thereafter
          Construction cost of     200.00            For 1st $25,000.00
          $25,001.00 - $50,000.00  5.00              For every $1,000.00
                                                     thereafter
          Construction cost of     325.00            For 1st $50,000.00
          $50,001.00 - $100,000.00 3.25              For every $1,000.00
                                                     thereafter
          Construction cost of     450.00            For 1st $100,000.00
          $100,001.00 -            1.50              For every $1,000.00
          $500,000.00                                thereafter
          Construction cost of     1,050.00           
          $500,001.00 and up
          Other building permits/                    
          fees:
4-1-8     After hours inspection   50.00             Per inspection
                                   10.00             For residential projects
          Electrical                                 For multi-family,
                                   40.00             commercial and industrial
                                                     projects
                                   10.00             For residential projects
          Plumbing                                   For multi-family,
                                   40.00             commercial and industrial
                                                     projects
          HVAC                     40.00             Minimum
          Decks                    20.00              
          Roofing                  10.00              
          Fences                   20.00              
          Sheds                    10.00              
          Swimming pools           20.00              
          Concrete or asphalt      10.00             Minimum plus 1.25% of
                                                     cost of construction
                                   10.00             Garage
          Demolition               25.00             Dwelling
                                   50.00             Multi-family, commercial,
                                                     and industrial buildings
          House moving             100.00             
          Plan review              25.00             Plus cost of review
          Code appeal              100.00             
          Street opening           100.00             
          Large driveway culverts
4-1-13    and driveway culvert                      At cost
          replacement
6-2-3-2   Animal special           50.00             Per request
          permission request
6-2-9-1   Dangerous dog            200.00            Per dog, per year
          registration
6-9-6     Abatement of weeds       150.00            Per hour
7-1-2     Sewer license            10.00              
7-1-12    Private sewer permit and 25.00              
          inspection
          Public sewer permit and                    
          inspection:
          Single-family
          residential and          100.00            Per building
7-1-13    commercial
          Multi-family residential 100.00            Per dwelling unit
          Industrial               500.00            Per building
          Institutional/           300.00            Per building
          governmental
7-3-4     Commercial tree waste    1,000.00          Per year
          dumping at disposal site
7-3A-4    Residential waste hauler 100.00            Per year
          license
7-3A-13   Scavenger's license      25.00             Per year
          Cemetery lot transfer    23.00             Per transaction
          Grave opening/closing    619.00             
          Infant grave or ashes    264.00             
          opening/closing
          Saturday and holiday     795.00             
          opening/closing
          Saturday and holiday     373.00             
          ashes opening/closing
          Winter grave preparation 179.00             
          surcharge
          Foundation work                           At cost
          Columbarium engraving or 296.00             
8-1-3     initialing
          Columbarium re-engraving 209.00             
          Columbarium opening/     209.00             
          closing
          Temporary crypt holding  5.00               
          Disinterment/reinterment 697.00             
          Saturday and holiday     812.00             
          disinterment/reinterment
          Infant grave or ashes    348.00             
          disinterment/reinterment
          Infant grave or ashes
          Saturday and holiday     407.00             
          disinterment/reinterment
8-1-4     Mausoleum vault or crypt 269.00             
          opening/closing
          Cemetery lot             560.00             
8-1-6     Mausoleum vault or crypt 1000.00           Also see section
                                                     8-10-2 of this Code
          Columbarium niche        1181.00            
          Central Park bandshell   50.00              
          or pavilion use
          Central Park bandshell   50.00             Refundable
          or pavilion deposit
8-3-2     Central Park bandshell
          or pavilion sound system 30.00              
          set-up
          Central Park bandshell
          or pavilion sound system 30.00             Per hour
          operator
          Water permit/connection  100.00             
8-6-3     Nonresident water        2,500.00           
          permit/connection
          Water Lateral Program    25.00              
          application fee
8-6-3-1                            4.00              Per month for owner
          Water Lateral Repair                       occupied property
          Program fee              48.00             Per year for non-owner
                                                     occupied property
          Sewer Lateral Repair     25.00             Also see section
          Program application fee                    7-1-13 of this Code
8-6-3-2                            8.00              Per month for owner
          Sewer Lateral Repair                       occupied property
          Program fee              96.00             Per year for non-owner
                                                     occupied property
                                                     At cost (for each 1/2" or
                                                    3/4" meter and radio-read
          Additional water meter                     head)
                                                    At cost (for each 1/2" or
                                                     3/4" meter only)
          Large volume water meter                  At cost
          Water meter testing      25.00             Per test conducted by
          deposit                                    City
          Water meter deposit for
8-6-7     tenants, contract        200.00             
          purchasers and land
          trustees
          5/8" additional water                     At cost
          meter
          1" additional water                       At cost
          meter
          5/8" water meter                          At cost
          replacement
          1" water meter                            At cost
          replacement
          Water and sewer          50.00             Per service
          reconnection
8-6-8     Night/weekend water and  125.00            Per service
          sewer reconnection
          Bulk water sales         1.75              Per 60 gallons of water
                                                     Following turn off per
8-6-10-10 Water turn on fee        25.00             subsection
                                                     8-6-10-8(I) of this Code
8-12-3    Excavation permit        100.00             
8-12-4    Excavation deposit       100.00             
          Gas connection           500.00            For 3/4" taps
          Additional length for    2.50              Per linear foot
          lines longer than 100'
          Additional gas meter     200.00            For each 3/4" meter
8-13-2    (residential)
                                                     Plus the actual cost
          Large volume gas meter   500.00            which exceeds the 3/4"
                                                     material, meter and
                                                     installation cost
          Gas meter deposit for
8-13-4    tenants, contract        200.00             
          purchasers and land
          trustees
8-13-7    Gas meter testing        25.00             Per test conducted by
          deposit                                    City
          Gas meter/facility fee   14.00             Fixed rate per month per
          (resident)                                 meter
          Gas meter/facility fee   28.00             Fixed rate per month per
          (non-resident)                             meter
8-13-11   Gas distribution fee     2.50              Fixed rate for each 1,000
          (resident)                                 cu. ft. or part thereof
          Gas distribution fee     5.00              Fixed rate for each 1,000
          (non-resident)                             cu. ft. or part thereof
          Gas rates (resident)     Variable          102% of city gas costs
          Gas rates (non-resident) Variable          204% of city gas costs
          Gas reconnection         50.00             Per service
8-13-12   Night/weekend gas        125.00            Per service
          reconnection
          Golf cart and                              Original permits issued
9-10-2    neighborhood vehicle     50.00             on or before June 30. Per
          permit                                     golf cart or NV
                                                     Original permits issued
                                  25.00             on or after July 1. Per
                                                     golf cart or NV
                                                     Permit renewal fee.
                                 50.00             Annual, per golf cart or
                                                     NV
10-16-3   Variance appeal          10.00             Per appeal
          Petition to rezone or    100.00            Per petition
10-19-1   reclassify
          Application for special  100.00            Per application
          use
11-1-5    Application for variance 100.00            Per application
          Culvert replacement                       Actual cost
 
   The City Council may amend such fees as it deems appropriate by Council
ordinance or resolution. Where this schedule conflicts with any other provision
of this Code, this schedule shall prevail.
(Ord. 10/2017, 6-5-2017; amd. Ord. 35/2017, 12-4-2017; Ord. 38/2017, 12-18-
2017; Ord. 02/2018, 2-5-2018; Ord. 07/2018, 5-21-2018; Ord. 09/2018, 6-18-2018;
Ord. 12/2018, 6-18-2018; Ord. 01/2019, 1-22-2019; Ord. 03/2019, 2-4-2019; Ord.
48/2019, 12-16-2019; Ord. 50/2019, 1-6-2020; Ord. 17/2020, 12-21-2020; Ord. 02/
2021, 1-19-2021; Ord. 16/2021, 8-16-2021; Ord. 25/2021, 12-20-2021; Ord. 21/
2022, 11-7-2022; Ord. 22/2022, 12-6-2022; Ord. 23/2023, 11-20-2023; Ord.
28.2023, 12-4-2023; Ord. 05/2024, 4-1-2024; Ord. 08/2024, 4-1-2024; Ord. 11/
2024, 7-1-2024; Ord. 21/2024, 12-16-2024; Ord. 13/2025, 5-19-2025)
