VILLAGE OF ARGENTA, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation passed through October 20, 2025
State legislation current through ILCS Pamphlet 2024 #3
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 10-06-07 Ord. 02
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF ARGENTA, MACON
COUNTY, ILLINOIS.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF
ARGENTA, MACON COUNTY, ILLINOIS, THAT:
   SECTION 1; The following exhibit shall be the "Code of Ordinances" of the
Village of Argenta, Macon County, Illinois shall be as follows:
   [SEE EXHIBIT "A" FOLLOWING]
   SECTION 2: Severability of Provisions. Each section, paragraph, sentence,
clause and provision of this Ordinance is severable, and if any provision is
held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect
the remainder of the Ordinance, nor any part thereof, other than that part
affected by such decision.
   SECTION 3: Effective. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form as provided
by law.
   SECTION 4; Passed this 7th day of June, 2010 by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Argenta, Macon County, Illinois, and deposited and filed in the
office of the Village Clerk in said Village on that date.
                         /S/                         CHERYL QUANDT, VILLAGE
CLERK
                        ARGENTA, ILLINOIS
 
NAME    AYE NAY ABSTAIN ABSENT
Barker  /S/
Boose   /S/
Garrett /S/
Grider  /S/
Rissler /S/
Slemp   /S/
 
   Approved by the Mayor of the Village of Argenta, Macon County, this 7th day
of June, 2010.
                         /S/
                        DEENA BOWMAN, MAYOR
                        ARGENTA, ILLINOIS
ATTEST:
/S/
CHERYL QUANDT, VILLAGE CLERK
ARGENTA, ILLINOIS
(SEAL)
ORDINANCE NO. 11-08-01 Ord-09
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
FOR THE VILLAGE OF ARGENTA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Argenta, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior Code of Ordinances of the Village of Argenta,
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on,
or make reference to, sections of the Illinois Code, and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Illinois, and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate health, safety and general welfare of the
municipality that this ordinance takes effect at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA:
   Section 1.   That the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Argenta as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached herein, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Village
of Argenta is hereby authorized and ordered to issue such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the VILLAGE OF ARGENTA on
this 1st day of August, 2011.
   AYES:      6
   NAYS:   0
   ABSENT:   0
    Deena Bowman /s/
    Mayor
ATTEST:
Cheryl Quandt /s/
Village Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 12-09-04 Ord-5
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
FOR THE VILLAGE OF ARGENTA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the second supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Argenta, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior Code of Ordinances of the Village of Argenta,
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on,
or make reference to, sections of the Illinois Code, and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Illinois, and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate health, safety and general welfare of the
municipality that this ordinance takes effect at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA:
   Section 1.   That the second supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Argenta as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached herein, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Village
of Argenta is hereby authorized and ordered to issue such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
ADOPTED this 4th day of September, 2012, pursuant to a roll call voted as
follows:
   Trustee Rissler      yes      Trustee Barker      yes
   Trustee Boose      yes      Trustee Slemp      absent
   Trustee Hunsley      yes      Trustee Luedke      yes
    Deena Bowman /s/
    Mayor
ATTEST:
   Cheryl Quandt /s/
   Village Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 15-07-20 Ord 08
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF ARGENTA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Argenta, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior Code of Ordinances of the Village of Argenta,
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on,
or make reference to, sections of the Illinois Code, and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Illinois, and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate health, safety and general welfare of the
municipality that this ordinance takes effect at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA:
   Section 1.   That the 2015 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Argenta as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached herein, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Village
of Argenta is hereby authorized and ordered to issue such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
ADOPTED this 20th day of July, 2015, pursuant to a roll call voted as follows:
   Trustee Kaufman   Yes      Trustee Pagel         Yes
   Trustee Boose      Yes      Trustee Barker         Yes
   Trustee Harris      Yes      Trustee Bowman      Yes
                            Cindy Luedke /s/
                            Mayor of the Village of Argenta
ATTEST:
Sherry Koszesza /s/
   Village Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 16-06-20 Ord 04
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF ARGENTA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2016 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Argenta, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior Code of Ordinances of the Village of Argenta,
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on,
or make reference to, sections of the Illinois code, and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Illinois, and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance takes effect
at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA:
   Section 1.   That the 2016 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Argenta is submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached herein, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and the Clerk of the
Village of Argenta is hereby authorized and ordered to issue such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Argenta on this 20th day of June, 2016.
   Trustee Hanna      Absent      Trustee Pagel      Absent
   Trustee Crowder   Yes      Trustee Barker      Absent
   Trustee Harris      Yes      Trustee Bowman   Yes
Cindy Luedke /s/
Cindy Luedke, Mayor
ATTEST:
Sherry Koszesza /s/
Sherry Koszesza, Clerk, Village of Argenta
ORDINANCE NO. 17-11-06 Ord 03
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF ARGENTA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2017 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Argenta, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior Code of Ordinances of the Village of Argenta,
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on,
or make reference to, sections of the Illinois code, and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Illinois, and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance takes effect
at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA:
   Section 1.   That the 2017 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Argenta is submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached herein, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and the Clerk of the
Village of Argenta is hereby authorized and ordered to issue such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Argenta on this 6th day of November, 2017.
   Trustee Bowman      Yes      Trustee Kaufman      yes
   Trustee Barker         Absent      Trustee Hanna         Yes
   Trustee Crowder      Yes      Trustee Pagel         Yes
Cindy Luedke /s/
Cindy Luedke, Mayor
ATTEST:
Sherry Koszesza /s/
Sherry Koszesza, Clerk, Village of Argenta
ORDINANCE NO. 18-11-19 Ord 06
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF ARGENTA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2018 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Argenta, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior Code of Ordinances of the Village of Argenta,
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on,
or make reference to, sections of the Illinois code, and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Illinois, and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance takes effect
at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA:
   Section 1.   That the 2018 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Argenta is submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached herein, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and the Clerk of the
Village of Argenta is hereby authorized and ordered to issue such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Argenta on this 19th day of November, 2018.
   Trustee Logan         Absent         Trustee Kaufman      Yes
   Trustee Barker         Yes         Trustee Hanna         Yes
   Trustee Crowder      Yes         Trustee Pagel         Yes
 
Cindy Luedke /s/
Cindy Luedke, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
Sherry Koszesza /s/
Sherry Koszesza, Clerk, Village of Argenta
ORDINANCE NO. 19-10-21 Ord 07
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE VILLAGE OF ARGENTA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2019 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Argenta, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior Code of Ordinances of the Village of Argenta,
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on,
or make reference to, sections of the Illinois code, and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Illinois, and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance takes effect
at an early date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA:
   Section 1.   That the 2019 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Argenta is submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached herein, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Mayor and Board of Trustees and the Clerk of the
Village of Argenta is hereby authorized and ordered to issue such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Argenta on this 21st day of October, 2019.
   Trustee Pagel      Absent      Trustee Berry         Yes
   Trustee Kaufman      Yes         Trustee Ryan         Yes
   Trustee Mitchell      Yes         Trustee Logan         Yes
Cindy Luedke /s/
Cindy Luedke, Mayor
ATTEST:
Sherry Koszesza /s/
Sherry Koszesza, Clerk, Village of Argenta
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Village of Argenta shall be designated as
the code of Argenta, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the village.
   COUNTY. Macon County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Macon County, Illinois.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.  
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at
any time after that date.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The President of the Village of Argenta.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the Village
of Argenta. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include those persons in the
employ of a village as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, county, state or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof,
or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public
official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Argenta.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or INWRITING. Includes printing, electronic and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law,
except as otherwise provided by law it shall be:
      (1)   The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq.  
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed:
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or
Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context clearly
indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was not
intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. These references
shall also include the designee or agent of the officer or office, unless the
law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to the technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the village. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   An "ILCS" cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1)
   (C)   An "ILCS" cite set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text
of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 1-2-1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   VILLAGE ORGANIZATIONS
         
31.   POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
         
32.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS
         
33.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
         
34.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
35.   TAX AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Management Association
   
30.01   Participation
   
30.02   Contribution
Plan Commission
   
30.15   Established
   
30.16   Membership
   
30.17   Term of office
   
30.18   Procedure
   
30.19   Powers and duties
   
30.20   Land subdivision or re-subdivision; official map
   
30.21   Improvements
   
30.22   Further purposes
   
30.23   Expenditures
MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
§ 30.01 PARTICIPATION.
   The Village Board of Trustees does hereby authorize and approve membership
in the State Municipal League Risk Management Association and directs the Mayor
and Clerk to execute an intergovernmental cooperation contract with the State
Municipal League Risk Management Association for membership for a period of one
year beginning the date the Association commences providing risk coverage to
its members and each year thereafter, unless this subchapter is repealed.
(2001 Code, § 1-4-1)
§ 30.02 CONTRIBUTION.
   Each member hereby agrees to contribute to the Association a sum of money to
be determined by the Association at the time of application based on the needs
of the Association and the loss experience of the member, which sum shall
constitute the cost of the member's first year contribution for membership in
the Association. Membership contributions for second and subsequent years shall
be calculated in accordance with the loss experience of the village, and the
needs of the Association including total losses and expenditures of the Self-
Insured Retention Fund of the Association.
(2001 Code, § 1-4-2)
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 30.15 ESTABLISHED.
   A Plan Commission is hereby created under authority of the ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, §§ 11-12-4 through 11-12-12 et seq.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-1)
§ 30.16 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Plan Commission shall consist of seven members; those members to be
residents of the village or within one and one-half miles of the village,
appointed by the Mayor and the Village Board, on the basis of their particular
fitness for their duty on the Plan Commission and subject to the approval of
the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-2)
§ 30.17 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The members shall serve for a period of five years. Vacancies shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. All members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation, except that if the Board deems it
advisable, they may receive compensation as provided by the Village Board by
appropriation.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-3)
§ 30.18 PROCEDURE.
   The Plan Commission shall elect officers as it may deem necessary and adopt
rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with the village
code and state law. The Commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings. It shall be open at all times for and to the inspection of the
public, and the Commission shall file an annual report with the Mayor and
Village Board, setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-4)
§ 30.19 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board a comprehensive plan for
the present and future development or redevelopment of the village and
contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond
the corporate limits of the village and not included in any other municipality.
The plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional
parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan or
part thereof of the village. The plan shall be advisory, except as to such part
thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly enacted by the Village
Board. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with
the County Recorder of Deeds, and filing of the plan and ordinances with the
Village Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. To provide for the
health, safety, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the village and
contiguous territory, the plan or plans shall establish reasonable standards of
design for subdivisions and for re-subdivisions of unimproved land and of areas
subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined
and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width,
course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage
collection and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall become
regulatory only when adopted by law;
   (B)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the village and the
recommended zoning classification for the land upon annexation;
   (C)   To recommend to the Village Board, from time to time, changes in the
comprehensive plan or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary;
   (D)   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board, from time to time,
plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance to the
official comprehensive plan;
   (E)   To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan or parts
thereof, to further the making of the improvements and generally, to promote
the realization of the official comprehensive plan;
   (F)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding;
   (G)   To cooperate with municipal or regional plan commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local plan program and to assure harmonious
and integrated planning for the area subject to approval of the Village Board;
and
   (H)   To exercise other powers germane to the powers granted under authority
of an act of the General Assembly of the state, as may be conferred by the
Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-5)
§ 30.20 LAND SUBDIVISION OR RE-SUBDIVISION; OFFICIAL MAP.
   (A)   At any time or times before or after the formal adoption of the
official comprehensive plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may
be designated by ordinance, which may consist of the whole area included within
the official comprehensive plan or one or more geographical or functional parts
and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within
one and one-half miles from the corporate limits of the village.
   (B)   All requirements for public hearing, filing notice of adoption with
the County Recorder of Deeds and filing of the plan and ordinances, including
the official map with the Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law.
   (C)   No map or plat of any subdivision or re-subdivision presented for
record affecting land within the corporate limits of the village or within
contiguous territory which is not more than one and one-half miles beyond the
corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design and standards
governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities,
street lights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential
purposes, and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment
in conformity with the applicable requirements of the code, including the
official map.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-6)
§ 30.21 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Village Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration, a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto, if it deems a
report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-7)
§ 30.22 FURTHER PURPOSES.
   The Commission shall recommend the boundaries of districts for land use and
shall recommend regulations to the corporate authorities for the following:
   (A)   To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter to be
erected;
   (B)   To establish, regulate and limit the building or setback lines on or
along the street, traffic way, drive, parkway or storm or flood water runoff
channel or basin;
   (C)   To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas and to
regulate and determine the area of open spaces, within and surrounding the
buildings;
   (D)   To classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings designed for specified industrial,
business, residential and other uses;
   (E)   To divide the entire municipality into districts of the number, shape,
area and of different classes (according to use of land and buildings, height
and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of lot area, area of open spaces or
other classification), as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purpose of
this section;
   (F)   To fix standards to which buildings or structures therein shall
conform;
   (G)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of the districts; and
   (H)   To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this section.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-8)
§ 30.23 EXPENDITURES.
   Expenditures of the Commission shall be at the discretion of the Village
Board and if the Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice
or services, it shall be done upon authority of the Village Board and
appropriations by the Village Board therefor.
(2001 Code, § 4-1-9)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-4 et seq.
CHAPTER 31: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Section
Investment Policy
   
31.01   Policy
   
31.02   Scope
   
31.03   Prudence
   
31.04   Objective
   
31.05   Delegation of authority
   
31.06   Ethics and conflicts of interest
   
31.07   Authorized financial dealers and institutions
   
31.08   Authorized and suitable investments
   
31.09   Collateralization
   
31.10   Safekeeping and custody
   
31.11   Diversification
   
31.12   Maximum maturities
   
31.13   Internal control
   
31.14   Performance standards
   
31.15   Reporting
   
31.16   Marking to market
Ethical Conduct
   
31.30   Prohibited political activities
   
31.31   Gift ban
   
31.32   Exceptions
   
31.33   Disposition of gifts
Freedom of Information Policy
   
31.45   Definitions
   
31.46   Policy
   
31.47   Individual privacy protected
   
31.48   Public records available
   
31.49   Requests to be in writing
   
31.50   Fees
   
31.51   Time limit for compliance with request
   
31.52   Extension of time limit; notice
   
31.53   Unduly burdensome request
   
31.54   Certain information exempt from inspection and copying
   
31.55   Notice of denial of request; appeals
   
31.56   Granting of request; procedure for inspection
   
31.57   Written request not required for certain documents
   
31.58   Dissemination of information about public bodies
   
31.59   List of categories of records
Identity Theft Policy
   
31.75   Background
   
31.76   Purpose
   
31.77   Scope
   
31.78   Sensitive information policy
   
31.79   Additional identity theft prevention program
   
31.80   Responding to red flags
   
31.81   Periodic updates to plan
   
31.82   Program administration
Prevailing Wage Determination
   
31.90   Establishment of prevailing wage rate
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 31.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the village to invest public funds in a manner which
will provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while
meeting the daily cash flow demands of the village and conforming to all state
and local statutes governing the investment of public funds.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-1)
§ 31.02 SCOPE.
   This policy includes all funds governed by the Board of Trustees.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-2)
§ 31.03 PRUDENCE.
   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the
probable income to be derived.
   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in the context of managing
an overall portfolio.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-3)
§ 31.04 OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
      (1)   Legality. Conformance with federal, state and other legal
requirements;
      (2)   Safety. Preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal;
      (3)   Liquidity. Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements; and
      (4)   Yield. Attainment of market rates of return.
   (B)   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the village's needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-4)
§ 31.05 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Treasurer who, under the delegation of the Board of
Trustees, shall establish written procedures for the operation of the
investment program.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-5)
§ 31.06 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-6)
§ 31.07 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services.
   (B)   In addition, a list will also be maintained of approved security
brokers/dealers selected by creditworthiness.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-7)
§ 31.08 AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.
   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in state
statutes regarding the investment of public funds. Investments shall be made
that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund type being invested.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-8)
§ 31.09 COLLATERALIZATION.
   Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit and the like)
in excess of FDIC limits must be secured by some form of collateral, witnessed
by a written agreement and held at an independent third-party institution in
the name of the village.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-9)
§ 31.10 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the village, shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment
(DVP) basis. Securities will be held by an independent third-party custodian
designated by the Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written
custodial agreement.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-10)
§ 31.11 DIVERSIFICATION.
   The village shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based
on the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-11)
§ 31.12 MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   (A)   To the extent possible, the village shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the village will not directly invest in securities maturing
more than one year from the date of purchase.
   (B)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding one year if the
maturity of the investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable with
the expected use of the funds.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-12)
§ 31.13 INTERNAL CONTROL.
   (A)   The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the village
are protected from loss, theft or misuse.
   (B)   The internal control structure shall be designed to provide reasonable
assurance that these objectives are met.
   (C)   The internal controls shall address the following points:
      (1)   Control of collusion;
      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting;
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping; and
      (4)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-13)
§ 31.14 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to benchmarks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as the portfolio.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-14)
§ 31.15 REPORTING.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The
report should be provided to the Board of Trustees and available to the general
public on request.
   (B)   The report should be in a format suitable for review by the general
public. An annual report should also be provided to the Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-15)
§ 31.16 MARKING TO MARKET.
   A statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the
Board of Trustees quarterly.
(2001 Code, § 1-6-16) (Ord. 99-10-18B, passed 10-18-1999)
ETHICAL CONDUCT
§ 31.30 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Village employees shall not intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time (other than vacation, personal
or compensatory time off). Village employees shall not intentionally
misappropriate any village property or resources by engaging in any prohibited
political activity for the benefit of any campaign for elective office or any
political organization.
   (B)   At no time shall any executive or legislative branch constitutional
officer or any official, director, supervisor or village employee intentionally
misappropriate the services of any village employee by requiring that village
employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
      (1)   As part of that employee's village duties;
      (2)   As a condition of village employment; or
      (3)   During any time off that is compensated by the village (such as
vacation, personal or compensatory time off).
   (C)   A village employee shall not be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that village employee
being awarded any additional compensation or employee benefit, in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise.
   (D)   A village employee shall not be awarded any additional compensation or
employee benefit, in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time
off, continued employment or otherwise, in consideration for the village
employee's participation in any prohibited political activity.
   (E)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are otherwise
appropriate for a village employee to engage in as a part of his or her
official village employment duties or activities that are undertaken by a
village employee on a voluntary basis as permitted by law.
   (F)   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment; or in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal
Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-
in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of village employment or tenure
solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of
a political party or of a political organization or club.
(Ord. 04-08-06, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 31.31 GIFT BAN.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no officer, member or
village employee shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any
prohibited source or in violation of any federal or state statute, rule or
regulation or village ordinance.
   (B)   This ban applies to and includes the spouse of and immediate family
living with the officer, member or village employee. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
(Ord. 04-08-06, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 31.32 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The restriction in §
31.31 above does not apply to the following:
      (1)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public;
      (2)   Anything for which the officer, member or village employee pays the
market value;
      (3)   Any: contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or
under this Act; or activities associated with a fundraising event in support of
a political organization or candidate;
      (4)   Educational materials and missions. This exception may be further
defined by rules adopted by the appropriate ethics commission or by the Auditor
General for the Auditor General and employees of the Office of the Auditor
General;
      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss village business. This
exception may be further defined by rules adopted by the appropriate ethics
commission or by the Auditor General for the Auditor General and employees of
the Office of the Auditor General;
      (6)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister and including the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiancé or fiancée;
      (7)   (a)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the member, officer or employee has reason to believe that,
under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position
or employment of the member, officer or employee and not because of the
personal friendship;
         (b)   In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of
personal friendship, the member, officer or employee shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
            1.   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
            2.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the member, officer or
employee the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or
sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
            3.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the member, officer or
employee the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other members, officers or employees.
      (8)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are consumed on the
premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or catered. For the
purposes of this section, CATERED means food or refreshments that are purchased
ready to eat and delivered by any means;
      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from the outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the duties of the officer, member or
employee as an office holder or employee) of the officer, member or employee,
or the spouse of the officer, member or employee, if the benefits have not been
offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the
officer, member or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances;
      (10)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose
of this Act, INTRA-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT is any gift given to a member, officer or
employee of a village agency from another member, officer or employee of the
same village agency; and INTER-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT is any gift given to a member,
officer or employee of a village agency, by a member, officer or employee of
another village agency, of a federal agency, or of any governmental entity;
      (11)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; or
      (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
   (B)   Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive
and independent of one another.
(Ord. 04-08-06, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 31.33 DISPOSITION OF GIFTS.
   A member, officer or employee does not violate this Act if the member,
officer or employee promptly takes reasonable action to return the prohibited
gift to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an
appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(c)
(3) of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered or succeeded.
(Ord. 04-08-06, passed 5-17-2004)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION POLICY
§ 31.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COPYING. The reproduction of any public record by means of any photographic,
electronic, mechanical or other process, device or means.
   FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT. The Illinois Freedom of Information Act, ILCS
Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, organization or
association, acting individually or as a group.
   PUBLIC RECORD. All records, reports, forms, writings, letters, memorandums,
books, papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings,
electronic data processing records, recorded information, and all other
documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having
been or being prepared, used, received, possessed or under control of the
village.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-1)
§ 31.46 POLICY.
   It is declared to be the public policy of the village that all persons are
entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of the village.
The official acts and policies of the public officials and public employees of
the village shall be consistent with the terms of this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-2)
§ 31.47 INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY PROTECTED.
   This subchapter is not intended to be used to violate individual policy, nor
for the purpose of furthering a commercial enterprise, or to disrupt the duly
undertaken work of the village.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-3)
§ 31.48 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Freedom of Information Act.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-4)
§ 31.49 REQUESTS TO BE IN WRITING.
   (A)   All requests for inspection or copying of public records shall be in
writing and shall be addressed to the Clerk.
   (B)   The requestor shall include the following information in any request
for public records:
      (1)   The requestor's full name, mailing address and telephone number at
which the requestor can be reached during normal business hours;
      (2)   A description of the records sought, being as specific as possible;
and
      (3)   A statement as to whether the request is for inspection, copying or
both.
   (C)   The Clerk shall make available a form for use by requesters; however,
no request shall be denied for failure to use the form.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-5)
§ 31.50 FEES.
   (A)   The village hereby establishes and shall charge fees reasonably
calculated to reimburse its actual cost for reproducing and certifying public
records and for the use, by any person, of the equipment of the village to copy
records. Those fees exclude the costs of any search for and review of the
record, and shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction and certification,
unless otherwise provided by state statute. No fee shall be charged for the
first 50 pages of photocopies or computer printouts; the charge for copying
pages in excess of 50 shall be $0.15 per page for photocopies and computer
printouts. In the event materials must be reproduced by a copy service (e.g., a
video or audio tape) or by the Village Engineer (e.g., large plan sheets), the
requestor shall be responsible for the actual charges of reproduction.
   (B)   Documents shall be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge
where the village determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the
public interest because furnishing information can be considered as primarily
benefitting the general public. Waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest if the principal purpose of the request is to access and disseminate
information regarding the health, safety and welfare or the legal rights of the
general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or commercial
benefit. In setting the amount of the waiver or reduction, the village may take
into consideration the amount of materials requested and the cost of copying
them.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-6) (Ord. 2008-11, passed 12- -2008)
§ 31.51 TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUEST.
   The village shall either comply with or deny a request for public records
within seven working days after its receipt. Denials shall be in writing and in
accordance with §
31.55 below.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-7)
§ 31.52 EXTENSION OF TIME LIMIT; NOTICE.
   (A)   The time limit prescribed in §
31.51 above may be extended in each case for not more than seven additional
working days for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The requested records are stored in whole or in part at other
locations other than the office having charge of the requested records;
      (2)   The request requires the collection of a substantial number of
specified records;
      (3)   The request is couched in categorical terms and requires an
extensive search for the records responsive to it;
      (4)   The requested records require examination and evaluation by
personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to determine if they
are exempt from disclosure under the terms of the State Freedom of Information
Act or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions;
      (5)   The request for records cannot be complied with by the village
within the time limits prescribed by division (A)(4) above without unduly
burdening or interfering with the village;
      (6)   The requested records have not been located in the course of
routine search and additional efforts are being made to locate them; or
      (7)   There is a need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all
practicable speed, with another public body or among two or more components of
a public body having a substantial interest in the determination or in the
subject matter of the request.
   (B)   When additional time is required for any of the above reasons, the
Clerk shall notify the person making the request, by letter, within the time
limits specified in this section, of the reasons for the delay and the date by
which the records will be made available or denial will be forthcoming.
      (1)   In no instance may the delay in processing last longer than seven
working days.
      (2)   A failure to render a decision within seven working days shall be
considered a denial of the request.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-8)
§ 31.53 UNDULY BURDENSOME REQUEST.
   (A)   Requests calling for all records falling within a category shall be
complied with unless compliance with the request would be unduly burdensome for
the village, there is no method of narrowing the request, and the burden on the
village strongly outweighs the public interest in the information. If the
village responds to a categorical request by stating that compliance would
unduly burden its operation, it shall do so in a writing signed by the Clerk
specifying the reasons why it would be unduly burdensome and the extent to
which compliance will so burden the operation of the village.
   (B)   After receipt of this response in writing, the person making the
request shall have an opportunity to reduce the request to manageable
proportions. If the person making the request fails to reduce the request to
manageable proportions, the response of the village shall be treated as a
denial of the request information.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-9)
§ 31.54 CERTAIN INFORMATION EXEMPT FROM INSPECTION AND COPYING.
   (A)   Information exempted by §
31.51 above shall be exempt from inspection and copying.
   (B)   If a record contains both exempt and nonexempt information, the exempt
information shall be deleted and the remainder of the record made available for
inspection and copying.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-10)
§ 31.55 NOTICE OF DENIAL OF REQUEST; APPEALS.
   (A)   The Clerk, when denying a request for public record, shall notify the
requestor, by letter, of the decision to deny the information, and the reason
for the denial. Each notice of denial by the Clerk shall inform the person of
his or her right to appeal to the Village President in accordance with §
31.54 above. When a request is denied on the grounds that the records are
exempt under the provisions of this subchapter, the notice of denial shall
specify the exemption claimed to authorize the denial and briefly explain how
the exemption applies to the specified records withheld.
   (B)   A requestor may appeal a denial of a request for public records to the
Village President. All appeals shall be in writing, shall be addressed to the
Village President in an envelope clearly marked "FOIA APPEAL", and shall
include a copy of the original request, a copy of the denial or a statement
that the village failed to respond within seven working days; and a written
statement setting forth the reasons the requestor believes the appeal should be
granted.
   (C)   The Village President shall respond in writing to an appeal within
seven working days of receipt thereof. Failure to respond shall be considered a
denial of the appeal. If the Village President denies an appeal in whole or in
part, the requestor shall be informed of his or her rights to judicial review
under this section.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-11)
§ 31.56 GRANTING OF REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   When a freedom of information request is granted, the documents will
be made available for inspection at the Village Hall during regular business
hours.
   (B)   Copies shall be made upon request as set forth in §
31.50 above.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-12)
§ 31.57 WRITTEN REQUEST NOT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   The following documents shall be made available for inspection and
copying without a written request; however, the requestor shall contact the
Clerk or Deputy Clerk in advance to set a mutually convenient time.
   (B)   These documents, if copied, shall be subject to the copying fee set
forth in §
31.50 above:
      (1)   Ordinances and written resolutions;
      (2)   The journal of the Village Board, not including executive session
minutes; and
      (3)   Any personnel code, building code, other technical code or any
other regulation of the village adopted by the village, whether by ordinance,
resolution or otherwise.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-13)
§ 31.58 DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT PUBLIC BODIES.
   The village shall prominently display at the Village Hall, make available
for inspection and copying without charge, and shall send through the mail if
requested, each of the following:
   (A)   A brief description of itself, which will include, but not be limited
to a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving its functional
subdivisions, the total amount of its operating budget, the number and location
of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and part-time
employees, and the identification and membership of any board, commission,
committee or council which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the
operation of the public body is required to report and be answerable for its
operations; and
   (B)   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating by titles and business
addresses those employees to whom requests for public records should be
directed, and any fees allowable under §
31.50 above.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-14)
§ 31.59 LIST OF CATEGORIES OF RECORDS.
   (A)   As to public records prepared or received after the effective date of
this subchapter, the Village Clerk shall maintain and make available for
inspection and copying a reasonably current list of all types or categories of
records under its control.
   (B)   The list shall be reasonably detailed in order to aid persons in
obtaining access to public records pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall furnish upon request a description of the
manner in which public records stored by means of electronic data processing
may be obtained in a form comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of
computer language or printout format.
(2001 Code, § 15-1-15)
IDENTITY THEFT POLICY
§ 31.75 BACKGROUND.
   The risk to the village, its employees and customers from data loss and
identity theft is of significant concern to the village and can be reduced only
through the combined efforts of every employee and contractor.
§ 31.76 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The village adopts this sensitive information policy to help protect
employees, customers, contractors and the village from damages related to the
loss or misuse of sensitive information.
   (B)   This policy will:
      (1)   Define sensitive information;
      (2)   Describe the physical security of data when it is printed on paper;
      (3)   Describe the electronic security of data when stored and
distributed; and
      (4)   Place the village in compliance with state and federal law
regarding identity theft protection.
   (C)   This policy enables the village to protect existing customers,
reducing risk from identity fraud, and minimize potential damage to the village
from fraudulent new accounts. The program will help the village:
      (1)   Identify risks that signify potentially fraudulent activity within
new or existing covered accounts;
      (2)   Detect risks when they occur in covered accounts;
      (3)   Respond to risks to determine if fraudulent activity has occurred
and act if fraud has been attempted or committed; and
      (4)   Update the program periodically, including reviewing the accounts
that are covered and the identified risks that are part of the program.
§ 31.77 SCOPE.
   This policy and protection program applies to employees, contractors,
consultants, temporary workers, and other workers at the village, including all
personnel affiliated with third parties.
§ 31.78 SENSITIVE INFORMATION POLICY.
   (A)   Definition of sensitive information.  Sensitive information includes
the following items whether stored in electronic or printed format:
      (1)   Credit card information, including any of the following:
         (a)   Credit card number (in part or whole);
         (b)   Credit card expiration date;
         (c)   Cardholder name; or
         (d)   Cardholder address.
      (2)   Tax identification numbers, including:
         (a)   Social Security number;
         (b)   Business identification number; or
         (c)   Employer identification numbers.
      (3)   Payroll information, including, among other information:
         (a)   Paychecks; or
         (b)   Pay stubs.
      (4)   Cafeteria plan check requests and associated paperwork;
      (5)   Medical information for any employee or customer, including but not
limited to:
         (a)   Doctor names and claims;
         (b)   Insurance claims;
         (c)   Prescriptions; or
         (d)   Any related personal medical information.
      (6)   Other personal information belonging to any customer, employee or
contractor, examples of which include:
         (a)   Date of birth;
         (b)   Address;
         (c)   Phone numbers;
         (d)   Maiden name;
         (e)   Names; or
         (f)   Customer number.
      (7)   Municipal personnel are encouraged to use common sense judgment in
securing confidential information to the proper extent. Furthermore, this
section should be read in conjunction with the Illinois Public Records Act and
the village's open records policy. If an employee is uncertain of the
sensitivity of a particular piece of information, he or she should contact
their supervisor. In the event that the village cannot resolve a conflict
between this policy and the Illinois Public Records Act, the village will
contact the Illinois Office of Open Records.
   (B)   Hard copy distribution. Each employee and contractor performing work
for the village will comply with the following policies.
      (1)   Each cabinet, desk drawers, overhead cabinets, and any other
storage space containing documents with sensitive information will be locked
when not in use.
      (2)   Storage rooms containing documents with sensitive information and
record retention areas will be locked at the end of each workday or when
unsupervised.
      (3)   Desks, workstations, work areas, printers and fax machines, and
common shared work areas will be cleared of all documents containing sensitive
information when not in use.
      (4)   Whiteboards, dry-erase boards, writing tablets, and the like in
common shared work areas will be erased, removed or shredded when not in use.
      (5)   When documents containing sensitive information are discarded they
will be placed inside a locked shred bin or immediately shredded using a
mechanical cross cut or Department of Defense (DOD)-approved shredding device.
Locked shred bins are labeled "Confidential paper shredding and recycling."
Municipal records, however, may only be destroyed in accordance with the State
Local Records Commission retention policy.
   (C)   Electronic distribution. Each employee and contractor performing work
for the village will comply with the following policies:
      (1)   Internally, sensitive information may be transmitted using approved
municipal e-mail. All sensitive information must be encrypted when stored in an
electronic format.
      (2)   Any sensitive information sent externally must be encrypted and
password protected and only to approved recipients. Additionally, a statement
such as this should be included in the e-mail: "This message may contain
confidential and/or proprietary information and is intended for the person/
entity to which it was originally addressed. Any use by other is strictly
prohibited."
§ 31.79 ADDITIONAL IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM.
   If the village maintains certain covered accounts pursuant to federal
legislation, the village may include the additional program details.
   (A)   Covered accounts. A covered account includes any account that involves
or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions. Every new and
existing customer account that meets the following criteria is covered by this
program:
      (1)   Business, personal and household accounts for which there is
reasonably foreseeable risk of identity theft; or
      (2)   Business, personal and household accounts for which there are a
reasonably foreseeable risk of the safety or soundness of the village from
identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or
litigation risks.
   (B)   Red flags.
      (1)   The following red flags are potential indicators of fraud. Any time
a red flag, or a situation closely resembling a red flag, is apparent it should
be investigated for verification.
         (a)   Alerts, notifications or warnings from a consumer reporting
agency;
         (b)   A fraud or active duty alert included with a consumer report;
         (c)   A notice of credit freeze from a consumer reporting agency in
response to a request for a consumer report; or
         (d)   A notice of credit freeze from a consumer reporting agency in
response to a request for a consumer reporting agency as defined in § 334.82(b)
of the Fairness and Accuracy in Credit Transactions Act.
      (2)   Red flags also include consumer reports that indicate pattern of
activity inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an
applicant or customer, such as:
         (a)   A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
         (b)   An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;
         (c)   A material change in the use of credit especially with respect
to recently established credit relationships; or
         (d)   An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of
account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.
   (C)   Suspicious documents.
      (1)   Documents provided for identification that appear to have been
altered or forged.
      (2)   The photograph or physical description on the identification is not
consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the
identification.
      (3)   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
information provided by the person opening a new covered account or customer
presenting the identification.
      (4)   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the village, such as a
signature card or a recent check.
      (5)   An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the
appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.
   (D)   Suspicious personal identifying information.
      (1)   Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when
compared against external information sources used by the village. For example:
         (a)   The address does not match any address in consumer report;
         (b)   The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued or is
listed on the Social Security Administrations Death Master File; or
         (c)   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not
consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the SSN range and
the date of birth.
      (2)   Personal identifying information provided is associated with known
fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the
village. For example, the address on an application is the same as the address
provided on a fraudulent application.
      (3)   Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly
associated with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party
sources used by the village. For example:
         (a)   The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop, or a
prison; or
         (b)   The phone number is invalid or is associated with a pager or
answering service.
      (4)   The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons
opening an account or other customers.
      (5)   The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar
to the address or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of
other customers or other persons opening accounts.
      (6)   The customer or the person opening the covered account fails to
provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in
response to notification that the application is incomplete.
      (7)   Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with
personal identifying information that is on file with the village.
      (8)   When using security questions (mother's maiden name, pet's name,
and the like), the person opening the covered account or the customer cannot
provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be
available from a wallet or consumer report.
   (E)   Unusual use of, or suspicious activity related to, the covered
account.
      (1)   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a covered
account, the village receives a request for new, additional or replacement
goods or services, or for the addition of authorized users on the account.
      (2)   A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly
associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer
fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent
payments.
      (3)   A covered account is used in a manner that is not consistent with
established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example:
         (a)   Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
or
         (b)   A material change in purchasing or usage patterns.
      (4)   A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably lengthy
period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the
expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors).
      (5)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable
although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the
customer's covered account.
      (6)   The village is notified that the customer is not receiving paper
account statements.
      (7)   The village is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in
connection with a customer's covered account.
      (8)   The village receives notice from customers, victims of identity
theft, law enforcement authorities or other persons regarding possible identity
theft in connection with covered accounts held by the village.
      (9)   The village is notified by a customer, a victim of identity theft,
law enforcement authority or any other person that it has opened a fraudulent
account for a person engaged in identity theft.
§ 31.80 RESPONDING TO RED FLAGS.
   (A)   Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, an employee must act
quickly as a rapid appropriate response can protect customers and the village
from damages and loss.
      (1)   Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, gather all
related documentation and write a description of the situation. Present this
information to the designated authority for determination.
      (2)   The designated authority will complete additional authentication to
determine whether the attempted transaction was fraudulent or authentic.
   (B)   If a transaction is determined to be fraudulent, appropriate actions
must be taken immediately. Actions may include:
      (1)   Canceling the transaction;
      (2)   Notifying and cooperating with appropriate law enforcement;
      (3)   Determining the extent of liability of the village; and
      (4)   Notifying the actual customer that fraud has been attempted.
§ 31.81 PERIODIC UPDATES TO PLAN.
   (A)   At periodic intervals established in the program, or as required, the
program will be reevaluated to determine whether all aspects of the program are
up to date and applicable in the current business environment.
   (B)   Periodic reviews will include an assessment of which accounts are
covered by the program.
   (C)   As part of the review, red flags may be revised, replaced or
eliminated. Defining new flags may also be appropriate.
   (D)   Actions to take in the event that fraudulent activity is discovered
may also require revision to reduce damage to the village and its customers.
§ 31.82 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Involvement of management.
      (1)   The identity theft prevention program shall not be operated as an
extension to existing fraud prevention programs, and its importance warrants
the highest level of attention.
      (2)   The identity theft prevention program is the responsibility of the
governing body. Approval of the initial plan must be appropriately documented
and maintained.
      (3)   Operational responsibility of the program is delegated to the
Village Clerk.
   (B)   Staff training.
      (1)   Staff training shall be conducted for all employees, officials and
contractors for whom it is reasonably foreseeable that they may come into
contact with accounts or personally identifiable information that may
constitute a risk to the village or its customers.
      (2)   The Village Clerk is responsible for ensuring identity theft
training for all requisite employees and contractors.
      (3)   Employees must receive annual training in all elements of this
policy.
      (4)   To ensure maximum effectiveness, employees may continue to receive
additional training as changes to the program are made.
   (C)   Oversight of service provider arrangements.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of the village to ensure that the
activities of all service providers are conducted in accordance with reasonable
policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent and mitigate the risk of
identity theft.
      (2)   A service provider that maintains its own identity theft prevention
program, consistent with the guidance of the red flag rules and validated by
appropriate due diligence, may be considered to be meeting these requirements.
      (3)   Any specific requirements should be specifically addressed in the
appropriate contract arrangements.
PREVAILING WAGE DETERMINATION
§ 31.90 ESTABLISHMENT OF PREVAILING WAGE RATE.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by “An Act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by state, county, city
or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for
public works,” approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing rate
of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the Village of
Argenta is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages
for construction work in the Macon County area as determined by the Department
of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June 2015, a copy of that determination
being attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. (Due to the State
Budget impasse, the Village of Argenta will reference the 2015 Prevailing Wage.
The Prevailing Wage will be updated with current information when it is
available from the State of Illinois.) The definition of any terms appearing in
the Ordinance which are also used in aforesaid Act shall be the same as in said
Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the Village of Argenta to the extent required by
the aforesaid Act.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection
by any interested party in the main office of the Village of Argenta, this
determination or any revisions of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this
determination or of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of
wages then in effect shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   (D)   The Village Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any
employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or association
of employees who have filed their names and addressees, requesting copies of
any determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of
workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   (E)   The Village Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of Ordinance
16-06-20-03 with both the Secretary of State Index Division and the Department
of Labor of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 10-06-07-03, passed 6-7-2010; Ord. 11-06-06-08, passed 6-6-2011; Ord. 12-
06-18-3, passed 6-18-2012; Ord. 13-06-17-07, passed 6-17-2013; Ord. 14-08-04-
04, passed 8-4-2014; Ord. 15-06-01-07, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 16-06-20-03,
passed 6-20-2016)
CHAPTER 32: VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Section
Board of Trustees
   
32.001   Composition and general powers
   
32.002   Regular meetings
   
32.003   Special meetings
   
32.004   Vacancy
   
32.005   Committees
   
32.006   Special committees
   
32.007   Quorum
   
32.008   Members; non-attendance at meeting
   
32.009   Rules of the Board
   
32.010   Agenda
   
32.011   Ordinances
   
32.012   Reconsideration; passing over veto
   
32.013   No vote to be reconsidered at special meeting
   
32.014   Electronic attendance at meetings
General Provisions
   
32.025   Corporate seal
   
32.026   Elections
   
32.027   Appointment of elected officials
   
32.028   Municipal officers; regulations
   
32.029   Resignation of appointed officials
   
32.030   Qualifications; elective office
   
32.031   Bonds of village officers
   
32.032   Bidding and contract procedures
   
32.033   Salaries regulation
   
32.034   Claims
   
32.035   Municipal year
   
32.036   Expenses; reimbursement
   
32.037   Official records
   
32.038   Federal old age and survivor's insurance system
   
32.029   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
   
32.040   Employee removal
   
32.041   Salaries
Mayor
   
32.050   Election
   
32.051   Mayor pro tem; temporary Chairperson
   
32.052   Vacancy
   
32.053   Chief Executive Officer
   
32.054   Mayor's signature
   
32.055   Appointment of officers
   
32.056   Supervise conduct of officers; removal of officers
   
32.057   Designation of officers' duties
   
32.058   Formal occasions
   
32.059   General duties
   
32.060   Business License Commissioner
   
32.061   Local Liquor Commissioner
   
32.062   Health Commissioner
   
32.063   Deciding vote; Mayor
Village Clerk
   
32.075   Appointment; term
   
32.076   Publication of ordinances; Board minutes; records
   
32.077   Delivery of papers to officers
   
32.078   Preparation of documents, commissions and licenses
   
32.079   Report of licenses
   
32.080   Clerk as Village Collector
   
32.081   Administration of oaths
   
32.082   Outstanding bonds
   
32.083   Reports
   
32.084   Successor
   
32.085   Payments
   
32.086   Notification to persons appointed to office
   
32.087   Other duties
   
32.088   Submit appropriation to Village Board
   
32.089   Deputy Clerk
Village Treasurer
   
32.100   Department established
   
32.101   Finance Committee
   
32.102   Treasurer appointed; vacancy
   
32.103   Money; warrants; accounts; payments
   
32.104   Warrant register
   
32.105   Personal use of funds
   
32.106   Bond
   
32.107   Special assessments
   
32.108   Bookkeeping
   
32.109   Statements
   
32.110   Report delinquent officers
   
32.111   Year-end report
   
32.112   Deposit of funds
Judiciary
   
32.125   Appointment of Attorney
   
32.126   Duties
Village Engineer
   
32.140   Appointment
   
32.141   Duties; salary
Code Enforcement Officer/Zoning Administrator
   
32.155   Creation of position
   
32.156   Duties
Superintendent of Water and Streets
   
32.170   Office created
   
32.171   Water system
   
32.172   Streets
   
32.173   Department employees
   
32.174   Property custodian
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 32.001 COMPOSITION AND GENERAL POWERS.
   (A)   The Village Board shall consist of six Trustees, elected in conformity
with this code and state laws governing elections in villages and shall have
such powers as are granted by ILCS Ch. 65, as amended.
   (B)   The term of office shall be for four years or until their successors
are elected and have qualified.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-10-50 and 3.1-25-5
§ 32.002 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   The regular stated meetings of the Village Board shall be held in the
Village Hall building on the first and third Monday of each month at 6:00 p.m.
   (B)   When the meeting date falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting shall be
held on the following day at the same hour and place, unless otherwise
designated.
   (C)   Adjourned and reconvened meetings may be held at such times as may be
determined by the Trustees.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-2) (Ord. passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 18-09-17, passed 9-17-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-25
§ 32.003 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings of the Village Board may be called by the Mayor or
any three Trustees by giving at least 48 hours notice thereof by delivering to
them personally written or printed notices of the time of the meeting at the
residences of the Trustees.
   (B)   The notices shall be served by mail, by the Chief of Police or his or
her designated representative. The notices shall specify the purpose of the
special meeting and the business to be taken up at that time and place.
   (C)   The notice shall be posted at the Village Hall and shall be provided
to any local newspaper of general circulation or any local radio or television
station that has filed an annual request for the notice.
   (D)   The notice shall be provided to the news media in the same manner as
the notice is given to the Mayor and members of the Village Board, provided the
news media has given the village an address within the village at which the
notice may be given.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-25
§ 32.004 VACANCY.
   (A)   When a vacancy occurs, if more than 28 months remain in the term and
the vacancy occurs not less than 130 days before the general municipal election
next scheduled under the general election law, the office shall be filled for
the remainder of the term at that general municipal election.
   (B)   During the period from the time that the vacancy occurs until the next
election of Trustees, the Mayor shall appoint a qualified person to the office
subject to the advice and consent of the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50
§ 32.005 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   The following standing committees of the Village Board are hereby
established, to-wit:
      (1)   Streets and Water;
      (2)   Health and Welfare;
      (3)   Finance;
      (4)   Zoning;
       (5)   Police; and
      (6)   Ethics.
   (B)   The committees shall be appointed annually by the Mayor. In addition,
the Mayor shall appoint the Chairperson of each committee.
   (C)   The Mayor shall be ex-officio Chairperson of each and every standing
committee.
   (D)   So far as is practicable, reports of committees shall be in writing.
   (E)   As provided by law, any report of a committee of the Board shall be
deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting of the same after
the report is made, upon the request of any two Trustees present.
   (F)   Each standing committee of the Village Board shall exercise a general
supervision over the affairs of the department of municipal government with
which it is connected; shall ascertain the condition and needs of the
department; shall, from time to time, report the same to the Mayor and Village
Board so that a full understanding thereof may be had, and generally, shall do
all acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the Department.
   (G)   All committee meetings are subject to the Open Meeting Act
requirements and minutes shall be taken.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 and 2.06
§ 32.006 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   Special committees may be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, as may be needed from time to time.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-6)
§ 32.007 QUORUM.
   At all meetings of the Village Board, a majority of the corporate
authorities shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and if
no quorum attends the meeting of the Board, the Trustees may adjourn from day
to day until a quorum is present; and shall have power to compel the attendance
of absent members, except when the members are physically unable to attend the
meetings.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-7)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-20
§ 32.008 MEMBERS; NON-ATTENDANCE AT MEETING.
   All members shall be allowed two absences in each fiscal year for which
compensation shall be paid.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-8)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-20
§ 32.009 RULES OF THE BOARD.
   The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations
and meetings of the Village Board.
   (A)   Order of business.
      (1)   The order of business shall be as follows:
         (a)   Call to order;
         (b)   Roll call;
         (c)   Pledge of allegiance;
         (d)   Recognition of visitors;
         (e)   Public comments;
         (f)   Department reports;
         (g)   Approval of minutes;
         (h)   President’s comments;
         (i)   Attorney’s comments;
         (j)   Unfinished business;
         (k)   New business;
         (l)   Executive session (if any);
         (m)   Reconvene to open session (if necessary);
         (n)   Any discussion;
         (o)   Adjournment.
      (2)   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided
by the Chair without debate, subject to appeal.
   (B)   Duties of presiding officer. The presiding officer shall preserve
order and decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to other
Trustees, and shall decide all questions of order, subject to appeal.
   (C)   Duties of members. While the presiding officer is putting the
question, no member shall walk across or out of the Board chamber. Every
member, prior to his or her speaking, making a motion or seconding the same
shall not proceed with his or her remarks until recognized and named by the
Chair. He or she shall confine himself or herself to the question under debate,
avoiding personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other
Trustee's argument or vote.
   (D)   Visitors. No person other than a member of the Board of Trustees shall
address that body on the same question unless the person has been recognized by
the presiding officer.
   (E)   Presentation of new business. When a Trustee wishes to present a
communication, petition, order, resolution, ordinance or other original matter,
the member shall read the matter when reached in its proper order.
   (F)   Debate.
      (1)   No Trustee shall speak more than once on the same question, except
by consent of the presiding officer or unless three-fourths of the corporate
authorities agree that one's right to debate should be limited to speak only
once and then not until every other Trustee desiring to speak shall have had an
opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent of the matter under
consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and close
debate.
      (2)   No Trustee shall speak longer than ten minutes at any one time,
except by consent of the Village Board; and in closing debate on any question
as above provided, the speaker shall be limited to five minutes, except by
special consent of the Board.
      (3)   The Village Board, by motion, may limit debate. The presiding
officer shall have the right to participate in debate.
      (4)   While a member is speaking, no Trustee shall hold any private
discussion, nor pass between the speaker and the Chair.
   (G)   Call of Trustees to order. A Trustee, when called to order by the
Chair, shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his or her seat and the
order or ruling of the Chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to
the right to appeal.
   (H)   Appeals from decision of the Chair.
      (1)   Any Trustee may appeal to the Board from a ruling of the Chair, and
if the appeal is seconded, the Trustee making the appeal may briefly state his
or her reason for the same, and the Chair may briefly explain his or her
ruling; but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other person shall
participate in the discussion. The presiding officer shall have the right to
participate in debate.
      (2)   The Chair shall then put the question, "Shall the decision of the
Chair be sustained?" If a majority of the Trustees present vote "No", the
decision of the Chair shall be overruled; otherwise, it shall be sustained.
   (I)   Question of personal privilege. The right of a member to address the
Board on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which
his or her integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned or
impugned.
   (J)   Voting. Every other member who shall be present when a question is
stated from the Chair shall vote thereon, unless he or she is personally
interested in the question, in which case, he or she shall take whatever steps
are necessary to ensure that his or her vote is not taken.
   (K)   Special order of business. Any matter before the Village Board may be
set down as a special order of business at a time certain if two-thirds of the
Trustees present vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise.
   (L)   Seconding of motions required; written motions. No motion shall be put
or debated in the meeting or in committee unless it be seconded. When a motion
is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate, and
every motion in the Board, except motions of procedure, shall be reduced to
writing if required by a member, and the proposer of the motion shall be
entitled to the floor.
   (M)   Division of questions. If any question under consideration contains
several distinct propositions, the Trustees, by a majority vote of the Trustees
present may divide the question.
   (N)   Record of motions. In all cases where a resolution or motion is
entered in the journal, the name of the Trustee moving the same shall be
entered also.
   (O)   Announcement and changes of vote. The result of all votes by yeas and
nays shall not be announced by the Clerk, but shall be handed by him or her to
the Chairperson for announcement, and no vote shall be changed after the tally
list has passed from the hands of the Clerk.
   (P)   Precedence of motions.
      (1)   When a question is under debate, the following motions shall be in
order and shall have precedence over each other in order, as listed:
         (a)   To adjourn to a day certain;
         (b)   To adjourn;
         (c)   To take a recess;
         (d)   To lay on the table;
         (e)   The previous question;
         (f)   To refer;
         (g)   To amend;
         (h)   To defer or postpone to a time certain;
         (i)   To defer or postpone (without reference to time); and
         (j)   To defer or postpone indefinitely.
      (2)   Divisions (P)(1)(b), (d) and (e) above to be decided without
debate.
   (Q)   Motions to adjourn.
      (1)   A motion to adjourn the Village Board shall always be in order,
except:
         (a)   When a Trustee is in possession of the floor;
         (b)   While the yeas and nays are being called;
         (c)   When the members are voting;
         (d)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; and
         (e)   When it has been decided that the previous question shall be
taken.
      (2)   A motion simply to adjourn shall not be subject to amendment or
debate, but a motion to adjourn to a time certain shall be.
      (3)   The Village Board may, at any time, adjourn over one or more
regular meetings on a vote of a majority of all the Trustees authorized by law
to be elected.
   (R)   Previous question. When the previous question is moved on the main
question and seconded, it shall be put on this form: "Shall the main question
now be put?" If the motion be carried, all further amendments and all further
motions and debate shall be excluded, and the question put without delay upon
the pending amendment in proper order and then upon the main question.
   (S)   Motions to lay on the table and to take from the table.
      (1)   A motion simply to lay the question on the table shall not be
debatable, but a motion to lay on the table and publish or with any other
condition shall be subject to amendment and debate.
      (2)   A motion to take any motion or other proposition from the table may
be proposed at the same meeting at which the motion or proposition was laid
upon the table, provided two-thirds of the Trustees vote therefor.
      (3)   A motion to lay any particular motion or proposition on the table
shall apply to that motion or proposition only. An amendment to the main
question of other pending question may be laid on the table and neither the
main question nor the other pending question shall be affected thereby.
   (T)   Indefinite postponement; motion to defer or postpone without any
reference to time.
      (1)   When consideration of a motion or other proposition is postponed
indefinitely, it shall not be again taken up at the same meeting.
      (2)   A motion to postpone indefinitely shall not open the main question
to debate.
      (3)   A motion to defer or postpone without any reference to time shall
not be construed as a motion to postpone indefinitely, but shall be considered
to be of the same general nature and to possess the same general attributes so
far as applicable under these rules, as a motion to postpone indefinitely or to
a time certain.
   (U)   Motion to refer. A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take
precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.
   (V)   Motion to amend.
      (1)   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend
an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained. An amendment modifying
the intention of a motion shall be in order; but an amendment relating to a
different subject shall not be in order.
      (2)   On an amendment to "Strike Out and Insert", the paragraph to be
amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be
stricken out, then those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it will
stand if so amended shall be read.
      (3)   An amendment to the main question or other pending questions may be
referred to a committee and neither the main question nor the other pending
question shall be affected thereby.
   (W)   Filling of blanks. When a blank is to be filled and different sums or
times proposed, the question shall be taken first on the least sum or the
longest time.
   (X)   Motion to substitute. A substitute for any original proposition under
debate or for any pending amendment or the proposition may be entertained
notwithstanding that at such time, further amendment is admissible; and if
accepted by the Trustees by a vote shall entirely supersede the original
proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut off all amendments
appertaining thereto.
   (Y)   Reconsideration.
      (1)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration having been once made and decided in the negative shall not be
renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered.
      (2)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by Trustees who
voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless
otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received
a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground
that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the
passage or adoption of the motion, then in that case, a motion to reconsider
may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on the
question to be reconsidered.
   (Z)   Adoption of "Robert's Rules of Order Revised". The rules of
parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition of "Robert's
Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the Board in all cases to which they are
applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of the
Board.
   (AA)   Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules. These rules may be
temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds of the corporate authorities
entitled by law to be elected and shall not be repealed, altered or amended,
unless by concurrence of two-thirds of all the corporate authorities entitled
by law to be elected.
   (BB)   Censure of Trustees; expulsion of Trustees. Any Trustee acting or
appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene and
insulting language to or about any member of the Board, or who does not obey
the order of the Chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the
members present, or expelled by a two-thirds vote of all Trustees elected.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-11) (Ord. 11-05-16-06, passed 6-6-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-15
§ 32.010 AGENDA.
   (A)   Public notice. Public notice and an agenda for each regular meeting of
the Village Board shall be posted at the Argenta Village Hall, or any other
such location where the meeting is to be held, if not held in the Village Hall,
at least 48 hours in advance of the holding of the meeting. Public notice of
any special meeting excepting meeting held in the event of a bona fide
emergency, or of any rescheduled regular meeting, or of any reconvened meeting,
shall be given at least 48 hours before such meeting, which notice shall also
include the agenda for the special, rescheduled, or reconvened meeting. Notice
of an emergency meeting shall be given as soon as practicable, but in any event
prior to the holding of such meeting, to any news medium which is filed an
annual request for notice. Copies of the notice of regular meetings, and notice
of any special, emergency, rescheduled, or reconvened meetings shall be
furnished to any news medium that has filed an annual request for such notice.
   (B)   Agenda. An itemized agenda, along with all other necessary supporting
documentation shall be furnished to each member of the Village Board no later
than the close of business on the day preceding the regular Village Board
meeting. In the case of matters of emergency which could not have been
reasonably foreseen with sufficient time to comply with this section, revised
agenda shall be furnished to each member of the Village Board prior to opening
of the Board meeting.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-12)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 120, § 2.02
§ 32.011 ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Attorney. It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to prepare the
ordinances as may be required by the Village Board.
   (B)   Introduced. When a proposed ordinance is introduced, it shall be read
one time by title only and referred to the proper committee unless the Board of
Trustees shall otherwise specifically direct.
   (C)   Vote required; yeas and nays record.
      (1)   The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any
resolution or motion:
         (a)   To create any liability against a village; or
         (b)   For the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require
the concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the Village
Board, including the Mayor, unless otherwise expressly provided by the code or
any other act governing the passage of any ordinance, resolution, or motion;
provided that, where the Board consists of an odd number of Trustees, the vote
of the majority of the trustees shall be sufficient to pass an ordinance.
      (2)   The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage
of the designated ordinances, resolutions or motions and recorded in the
journal of the Village Board. In addition, the corporate authorities at any
meeting may by unanimous consent to take a single vote by yeas or nays on the
several questions of the passage on any two or more of the designated
ordinances, orders, resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes
in a single group. The single vote shall be entered separately in the journal
under the designation "omnibus vote", and in the event the Clerk may enter the
words "omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" in the journal in each case in lieu of
entering names of the members of Village Board voting "yea" and of those voting
"nay" on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions
and motions included in the omnibus group or consent agenda.
      (3)   The taking of the single or omnibus vote and the entries of the
words "omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" in the journal shall be a sufficient
compliance with the requirements of this section to all intents and purposes
and with like effect as if the vote in each case had been separately by yeas
and nays on the question of the passage of each ordinance, order, resolution
and motion included in the omnibus group, and separately recorded in the
journal. Likewise, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the
passage of any other resolution or motion at the request of any Trustee and
shall be recorded in the journal.
   (D)   Ordinances; approval; veto.
      (1)   All resolutions and motions:
         (a)   Which create any liability against the village;
         (b)   That provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money;
or
         (c)   To sell any village property, and all ordinances, passed by the
Village Board shall be deposited with the Village Clerk.
      (2)   If the Mayor approves the resolution or motion, the Mayor shall
sign them.
      (3)   Those ordinances, resolutions and motions which the Mayor
disapproves shall be returned to the Village Board, with his or her written
objections, at the next regular meeting of the Village Board occurring not less
than five days after their passage.
      (4)   The Mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in
any ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the
remainder shall be effective.
      (5)   However, the Mayor may disapprove entirely of an ordinance,
resolution or motion making an appropriation.
      (6)   If the Mayor fails to return any ordinance or any specified
resolution or motion with his or her written objections, within the designated
time, it shall become effective despite the absence of the Mayor's signature.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-14)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-45
§ 32.012 RECONSIDERATION; PASSING OVER VETO.
   Every resolution and motion, specified in §
32.011 above and every ordinance, that is returned to the Village Board by the
Mayor shall be reconsidered by the Village Board at the next regular meeting.
If, after reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Trustees then holding office
on the Village Board shall agree at that regular meeting to pass an ordinance,
resolution or motion, notwithstanding the Mayor's refusal to approve it, then
it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the Mayor's
veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the journal.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-15)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-50
§ 32.013 NO VOTE TO BE RECONSIDERED AT SPECIAL MEETING.
   No vote of the Village Board shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special
meeting unless there are present at the special meeting at least as many
Village Trustees as were present when the vote was taken.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-16)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-55
§ 32.014 ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   (A)   Rules statement. It is the decision of the Board of Trustees ("Board")
that any member of the Board may attend any open or closed meeting of the Board
via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or internet connection)
provided that such attendance is in compliance with these rules and any
applicable laws.
   (B)   Prerequisites. A member of the Board may attend a meeting
electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
      (1)   The member should notify the Village Clerk at least 48 hours before
the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications equipment can
be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result
in denial of a request for remote attendance.
      (2)   The member must assert one of the following three reasons why he or
she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
         (a)   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability;
         (b)   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the village; or
         (c)   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
   (C)   Voting procedures. After a roll call establishing that a quorum is
physically present, the presiding officer shall call for a motion that a member
may be permitted to attend the meeting electronically after specifying the
reason entitling the absent member to attend electronically. The motion must be
approved by a vote of a majority of the Board members present.
   (D)   Adequate equipment required. The member participating electronically
and other members of the Board must be able to communicate effectively, and
members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting
site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the Board shall
provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
   (E)   Minutes. Any Board member attending electronically shall be considered
an off-site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if
the member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and
state specifically whether each member is physically present or present by
electronic means.
   (F)   Rights of remote member. A Board member permitted to attend
electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting
and participate in the same capacity as those members physically present,
subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and
adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and
counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending
electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote
counted and recorded by the Village Clerk and placed in the minutes for the
corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may leave a meeting
and return as in the case of any member, provided the member attending
electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.025 CORPORATE SEAL.
   (A)   The corporate seal of the village shall be the same as that heretofore
provided and used by the village. It shall be circular in form with the words,
"Village of Argenta, Macon County, Illinois" in the exterior circle, and the
words "Corporate Seal" in the interior circle.
   (B)   The corporate seal shall be used as the seal in all cases provided for
by law or by the ordinances of the village and in all other cases in which, by
law and custom, it is usual and necessary for the corporation to use a seal.
The seal shall be and remain with the Village Clerk who shall be the legal
custodian.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-18)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 2-2-12 and 3.1-35-90
§ 32.026 ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Election procedure. The provisions of ILCS Ch. 10, concerning
municipal elections, shall govern the conduct of the village elections.
   (B)   Inauguration. The inauguration of newly elected village officials
shall occur at the first regular or special meeting of the Village Board in the
month of May following the general municipal election in April.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-19)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-10-10 and 3.1-10-15
§ 32.027 APPOINTMENT OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   No Trustee of this village, during the term of office for which he or she is
elected, may accept or be appointed to or hold any office appointed by the
Mayor except if the Trustee is granted a leave of absence from the office.
However, the Trustee may serve as a volunteer firefighter and receive
compensation for the service. Any appointment in violation of this section is
void.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 50, Act 105, § 2, Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-15-
15, 4-1
§ 32.028 MUNICIPAL OFFICERS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Effect. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply alike to all
officers and employees of the village regardless of the time of creation of the
office or position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.
   (B)   Qualifications; appointive office.
      (1)   No person shall be eligible for any appointive municipal office
unless that person is a qualified elector of the municipality or otherwise
provided by law.
      (2)   The residency requirements do not apply, however, to municipal
engineers, health officers, attorneys or other officers who require technical
training or knowledge, to appointed village treasurers, or to appointed village
clerks.
   (C)   Bond. Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Village
Board upon entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in the
amount and with sureties as may be determined by the Board, conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office or position.
   (D)   Books delivered to successor.
      (1)   Every officer shall, upon going out of office, deliver to his or
her successor, all books, papers, furniture and other things appertaining to
the office, and which are the property of the village.
      (2)   Within five days after notification and request, any person who has
been an officer of a municipality is required to deliver to his or her
successor in office, all property, books and effects in his or her possession
belonging to the municipality, or pertaining to the office he or she has held.
      (3)   Upon his or her refusal to do so, he or she shall be liable for all
damages caused thereby, and shall, upon conviction, be penalized according to
the provisions of §
10.99.
      (4)   He or she shall not receive his or her final check until his or her
village code book and keys are turned over to the Village Clerk.
   (E)   Books open to inspection. Every officer shall, at all times when
required, submit the books and papers of his or her office to the inspection of
the Mayor or any committee or member of the Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Fees; report of fees. No officer of the municipality shall be entitled
to charge or receive any fees as against the village. All officers of the
village entitled to receive fees shall keep a correct account thereof, and make
a report thereof under oath to the Village Board prior to the regular meeting
of each month. In the report, they shall specify from whom the fees were
received, for what service, and when received. All fees received shall be paid
over into the Village Treasury.
   (G)   Other rules and regulations. Every officer of the village shall
perform such other duties and be subject to such other rules and regulations as
the Village Board may provide by law.
   (H)   Conservators of peace.
      (1)   After receiving a certificate attesting to the successful
completion of a training course administered by the State Law Enforcement
Training Standards Board, the Mayor, Trustees and police officers in
municipalities shall be conservators of the peace. Those persons and others
authorized by ordinance shall have power:
         (a)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal ordinance or
any criminal law of the state;
         (b)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
         (c)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody over night
or Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the proper
court; and
         (d)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace
prescribed by the corporate authorities.
      (2)   All warrants for the violation of municipal ordinances or the state
criminal law, directed to any person, may be served and executed within the
limits of a municipality by any police officer of the village. For that
purpose, police officers have all the common law and statutory powers of
sheriffs.
   (I)   Oath.
      (1)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
municipal officers, whether elected or appointed shall take and subscribe to
the following oath:
"I,_________________________________________, do solemnly swear that I will
support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State
of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
______________________________, according to the best of my ability."
      (2)   The Mayor and the Clerk shall have the power to administer this
oath or affirmation upon all lawful occasions.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-21) (Ord. 12-11-19-9, passed 11-19-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Administration of oaths, see §
32.081
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-10-30, 3.1-10-35, 3.1-15-
20 and 3.1-15-25
§ 32.029 RESIGNATION OF APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
   Any officer of the village may resign from office. If the officer resigns,
he or she shall continue in office until his or her successor has been chosen
and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a village officer, or the
person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the office shall continue
in office until his or her successor has been chosen and has qualified.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50
§ 32.030 QUALIFICATIONS; ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   (A)   A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office unless that
person is a qualified elector of the municipality and has resided in the
municipality at least one year next preceding the election.
   (B)   A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office if that
person is in arrears in the payment of a tax or other indebtedness due to the
municipality or has been convicted in any court located in the United States of
any infamous crime, bribery, perjury or other felony.
   (C)   A person is not eligible for the office of trustee unless that person
has resided in the municipality, as the case may be, at least one year next
preceding the election or appointment.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-5
§ 32.031 BONDS OF VILLAGE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Amount. Bonds of village officers required under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
3.1-10-30 shall be executed in the following penal sums:
      (1)   Mayor: $3,000;
      (2)   Village Treasurer: $3,000;
      (3)   Village Clerk: $3,000;
      (4)   Water Clerk: $500;
      (5)   Supervisor of Water Department: $500;
      (6)   Assistant Clerk: $500; and
      (7)   Assistant Treasurer: $500.
   (B)   Premium payment by village. The surety bonds required by law shall be
paid by the village.
   (C)   Surety. The Village Board shall not receive or approve any bond or
security whereon the name of the Village Board, any one of the Board of
Trustees or any elected or appointed officer of the village appear as bondsman
or security. If, by mistake, a bond containing the name of any like officer is
approved by the Village Board or if any bondsman, after becoming such is
elected or appointed to any village office, this section shall not act as a
release of any obligation incurred.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-24)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 270, § 1
§ 32.032 BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Competitive bidding required. Any work or other public improvement
which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or
special taxation, and all purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials
and services shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based whenever
possible on competitive bids.
   (B)   Formal contract procedure. All work or other public improvement which
is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, and all purchases, orders or contracts for supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services except as otherwise provided herein, when the
estimated cost thereof shall exceed the maximum amount allowed pursuant to the
provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, shall be purchased from the lowest
responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding
is waived by a vote of two-thirds of the Trustees then holding office.
   (C)   Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least
once in a newspaper with general circulation within the village. The village
shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the
public bulletin board in the Village Hall.
   (D)   Scope of notice. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be
purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and the time and
place for opening bids.
   (E)   Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees, bid
deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful
bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of
the contract by the Board of Trustees. A successful bidder shall forfeit any
bid deposit required by the Board of Trustees upon failure on his or her part
to enter into a contract within ten days after the award.
   (F)   Bid opening procedure.
      (1)   Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
      (2)   Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place
stated in the public notice.
      (3)   Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
Board of Trustees or by a village employee, in which event, a tabulation of the
bids shall be furnished to the Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting.
   (G)   Rejection of bids. The village shall have the authority to reject all
bids or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served thereby.
   (H)   Bidders in default to village. The village shall not accept the bid of
a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other
moneys due the village.
   (I)   Award of contract.
      (1)   Authority in village. The Board of Trustees shall have the
authority to award contracts within the purview of this section.
      (2)   Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the
village to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the Board of
Trustees shall consider:
         (a)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
         (b)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
         (c)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
         (d)   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or
services;
         (e)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
         (f)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
         (g)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
         (h)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract; and
         (i)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
      (3)   Performance bonds. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority
to require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts
as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the
village.
   (J)   Open market procedure. All work and purchases of supplies, materials
and services of less than the estimated value of $10,000 shall be made in the
open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the
procedure prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
   (K)   Professional services exempt from bidding requirements. All contracts
for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers,
real estate appraisers and architects and any other profession whose ethical
code involved prohibits or discourages involvement in normal bidding
procedures, may be entered into by the village without observing the bidding
procedures prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
   (L)   Emergency purchases. In case of an apparent emergency which requires
immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials or services, the Board of
Trustees shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set
forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials or
services regardless of the amount of the expenditure.
   (M)   Cooperative purchasing. The village shall have the authority to join
with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best
interests of the village would be served thereby.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-25) (Ord. 11-01-03-01, passed 1-3-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 2-2-12, 8-9-1 and 8-9-2
§ 32.033 SALARIES REGULATION.
   (A)   Elected. No salary or compensation of any elected municipal officer
who is elected for a definite term of office shall be increased or diminished
during the term.
   (B)   Appointed. No salary or compensation of any appointed official who is
appointed for a definite term of office shall be decreased during the term, but
may be increased.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-26)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-50-5 et seq.
§ 32.034 CLAIMS.
   (A)   Presentation.
      (1)   All claims against the village for goods purchased, damaged or
originating in any other way, except for claims for salaries and other
allowances that are fixed by ordinance shall be presented on the Friday prior
to the first meeting of each month to the Village Clerk.
      (2)   All the claims must be in writing and items shall be specified.
   (B)   Exception. This does not prohibit the Village Board from passing on
any claims not previously presented to the Village Clerk if, in the opinion of
the Board, justice to the claimant requires it.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-27)
§ 32.035 MUNICIPAL YEAR.
   (A)   The municipal year shall commence on May 1 and shall end on the
following April 30.
   (B)   No appointments shall be made during the last month of the municipal
year in the year of a mayoral election.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-28)
§ 32.036 EXPENSES; REIMBURSEMENT.
   Each member of the corporate authorities may receive reimbursement from the
municipality for expenses incurred by the member in attending committee
meetings of the corporate authorities or for other expenses incurred by the
member in the course of performing official duties.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-29)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-15(D)(8)
§ 32.037 OFFICIAL RECORDS.
   All official records, including the corporate seal, shall be kept in the
Village Hall.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-30)
§ 32.038 FEDERAL OLD AGE AND SURVIVOR'S INSURANCE SYSTEM.
   (A)   ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES shall mean all employees of the village, eligible
under the Federal Act, except persons elected to office by popular election and
also the Village Treasurer and Village Attorney.
   (B)   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose
provided in sections hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and
at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations, and shall be paid quarterly.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-31)
§ 32.039 ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   Participation in the State Municipal Retirement Fund. The village does
hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund.
   (B)   Special tax. The village includes in its levy and appropriation
ordinance provision for the levying of a special tax to pay the village's cost
of participating in the Retirement Fund and appropriate therefrom funds to pay
the cost of participation.
   (C)   Coverage. To be eligible to be included in the IMRF a person shall
have to work a minimum of 1,000 hours per year.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-32)
§ 32.040 EMPLOYEE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Any employee of the village whether appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Board of Trustees or hired by motion of the Board of Trustees or
by a department supervisor or head are considered to be "at will" and his or
her employment may be terminated without cause at any time.
   (B)   This provision does not apply to any employee who has a valid written
employment contract with the village.
   (C)   All employees whether "at will" or under written contract shall have
the right to demand a termination hearing before the Board of Trustees and to
have an attorney present or some other spokesperson, to examine any witnesses
and present any evidence relevant to the proceedings.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-33)
§ 32.041 SALARIES.
   (A)   The following salaries are hereby established for village officials:
      (1)   Mayor. The Mayor shall receive $500 per regular, $100 per special
meeting and $25 per committee meeting.
      (2)   Trustees. The Village Trustees shall receive $80 per regular
meeting and $20 per special meeting.
      (3)   Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall be paid an annual salary as
provided in the appropriation ordinance.
      (4)   Village Treasurer. The Village Treasurer shall be paid an annual
salary as provided in the appropriation ordinance.
   (B)   Likewise, the following stipends are hereby established for the
following appointed positions:
      (1)   Zoning Administrator.  The Zoning Administrator shall receive $144
per year plus 25% of the permit fee.
      (2)   Zoning Chairman, Zoning Vice Chairman and Zoning Secretary. The
Zoning Chairman, Zoning Vice Chairman and Zoning Secretary shall receive $25
per meeting.
      (3)   Zoning Members. The Zoning Members shall receive $20 per meeting.
      (4)   Building Inspector.  The Building Inspector shall receive $144 per
year plus $35 per inspection.
      (5)   Plumbing Inspector. The Plumbing Inspector shall receive $144 per
year plus $35 per inspection.
      (6)   Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall receive $144
per year plus $35 per inspection.
(2001 Code, § 1-3-1) (Ord. 12-11-19-8, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 18-09-17, passed
9-17-2018; Ord. 24-11-18 Ord06, passed 11-18-2024)
MAYOR
§ 32.050 ELECTION.
   The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until a
successor is elected and has qualified.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-40)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-5
§ 32.051 MAYOR PRO TEM; TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON.
   (A)   If the Mayor is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to perform
official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the office,
the corporate authorities shall elect one of their members to act as Mayor pro
tem. The Mayor pro tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform the
duties and possess all the rights and powers of the Mayor but shall not be
entitled to vote both as Mayor pro tem and as a Trustee.
   (B)   In the absence of the Mayor, or Mayor pro tem, the corporate
authorities may elect one of their members to act as a temporary Chairperson.
The temporary Chairperson shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and
a right to vote only in the capacity as Trustee on any ordinance, resolution or
motion.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-41)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-35
§ 32.052 VACANCY.
   (A)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Mayor and there remains an
unexpired portion of the term of at least 28 months and the vacancy occurs at
least 130 days before the general municipal election next scheduled under the
general election law, the vacancy shall be filled at that general municipal
election.
   (B)   The Village Board shall elect one of its members as "Acting Mayor" who
shall perform the duties and shall possess all the rights and powers of the
Mayor until a successor to fill the vacancy has been elected and has qualified.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-42)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50
§ 32.053 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the village and
shall see to the enforcement of all laws and ordinances. The Mayor shall
preside over the meetings of the Board of Trustees and perform such duties as
may be required of him or her by statute or law.
   (B)   The Mayor, in conjunction with the Board of Trustees, shall have
supervision over all of the executive officers and village employees; provided,
however, his or her control is subject to the power of the Village Board to
prescribe the duties of various officers and employees.
   (C)   The Mayor shall have the power and authority at any reasonable time to
inspect all books, papers and records pertaining to village affairs and kept by
any officer of the village.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-43) (Am. Ord. 11-10-03-12, passed 10-3-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-15-10 and 3.1-35-20
§ 32.054 MAYOR'S SIGNATURE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall sign all village warrants, commissions, permits and
licenses granted by authority of the Village Board, except as otherwise
provided, and such other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require his or
her official signature.
   (B)   The Mayor may designate another to affix his or her signature to any
written instrument that requires the Mayor's signature. The Mayor must send
written notice of this designation to the Village Board stating the name of the
person whom he or she has selected and what instrument the person will have
authority to sign.
   (C)   A written signature of the Mayor executed by the person so designated
with the signature underneath the signature of the person so designated shall
be attached to the notice.
   (D)   The notice with the signature attached shall be recorded in the
journal of the Village Board and then filed with the Village Clerk. When the
signature of the Mayor is placed on a written instrument at the direction of
the Mayor in the specified manner, the instrument, in all respects, shall be as
binding on the village as if signed by the Mayor in person.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-45)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-30
§ 32.055 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Appointed. At the first annual meeting in May, the Mayor shall
appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Village Board, all officers
of the village whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for, and
the officers shall hold their offices for the ensuing month or year, and until
their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring
in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. The Mayor shall
issue a commission or certificate of appointment to all persons appointed to
office in the municipality.
   (B)   Filling vacancies. The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and
consent of the Village Board, all officers of the village whose appointment
will not otherwise be provided for by law; and whenever a vacancy shall occur
in any office, which by law or ordinance the Mayor is empowered and required to
fill, the Mayor shall, at the next regular meeting of the Village Board,
communicate to it the name of the appointee to the office and pending the
concurrence of the Village Board in the appointment, the Mayor may designate
some suitable person to discharge the functions of the office.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-46)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 50, Act 105, § 2 and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
3.1-30-5
§ 32.056 SUPERVISE CONDUCT OF OFFICERS; REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the village
and see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their
respective offices.
   (B)   Except where otherwise provided by statute, the Mayor may remove any
officer appointed by the Mayor under this code, on any written charge, whenever
the Mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the municipality demand
removal.
   (C)   The official may request a hearing before the Village Board to present
his or her side of the case in accordance with §
32.040 above. The Mayor shall report the reasons for the removal to the
corporate authorities at a meeting to be held not less than five days nor more
than ten days after the removal.
   (D)   If the Mayor fails or refuses to report to the corporate authorities
the reasons for the removal, or if the corporate authorities by a two-thirds
vote of all members authorized by law to be elected disapprove of the removal,
the officer thereupon shall be restored to the office from which the officer
was removed.
   (E)   The vote shall be by yeas and nays, which shall be entered upon the
journal of the corporate authorities.
   (F)   Upon restoration, the officer shall give a new bond and take a new
oath of office. No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-47)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-10
§ 32.057 DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS' DUTIES.
   Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any
appointed officer of the village, this dispute shall be settled by the Mayor,
after consultation with the Village Attorney; and the Mayor shall have the
power to delegate to any appointive officer, any duty which is to be performed
when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-48)
§ 32.058 FORMAL OCCASIONS.
   The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the village on formal occasions and
receptions, but in the absence or inability to attend any such function, the
Mayor may select any other village officer to so act.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-49)
§ 32.059 GENERAL DUTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by law and
shall take care that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.
   (B)   The Mayor from time to time may and annually shall give the Village
Board information relative to the affairs of the village, and may recommend for
their consideration such measures as he or she believes expedient.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-50)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-5
§ 32.060 BUSINESS LICENSE COMMISSIONER.
   The Mayor is hereby designated as License Commissioner to issue and revoke
any and all business licenses as prescribed by law, with the advice and consent
of the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-51)
§ 32.061 LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
   The Mayor is hereby designated as Local Liquor Commissioner with all the
powers to license and/or revoke any village liquor license according to state
and village laws.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-52)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-2
§ 32.062 HEALTH COMMISSIONER.
   The Mayor is hereby declared to be Health Commissioner with all powers to
abate and remove all nuisances or health hazards within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the village authority as prescribed by law.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-53)
§ 32.063 DECIDING VOTE; MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Village Board.
   (B)   The Mayor shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion,
except:
      (1)   Where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie;
      (2)   Where one-half of the Trustees elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie; or
      (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities
is required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes to adopt an ordinance, resolution
or motion.
   (C)   In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall deprive an acting Mayor or Mayor pro tem
from voting in his or her capacity as Trustee, but he or she shall not be
entitled to another vote in his or her capacity as Acting Mayor or Mayor pro
tem.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-54)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-45-5
VILLAGE CLERK
§ 32.075 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   The Village Clerk shall be appointed annually by the Mayor upon concurrence
of the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-57)
§ 32.076 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES; BOARD MINUTES; RECORDS.
   (A)   Ordinances. The Village Clerk shall cause all ordinances passed by the
Village Board and approved by the Mayor, imposing any fine, penalty,
imprisonment or forfeiture or making any appropriation to be published or
printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the corporate
authorities, or be published at least once within 30 days after passage, in one
or more newspapers published in the village.
   (B)   Minutes; records.
      (1)   The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Village Board
and shall keep in a suitable book, to be styled "The Journal of the Village
Board", a full and faithful record of its proceedings.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall record and properly index, in a book kept
for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the Village Board, and at the foot
of the record of each ordinance so recorded, the Clerk shall make a memorandum
of the date of the passage, when published, and a memorandum of the publication
of the ordinance.
   (C)   Bonds. The Clerk shall also record, in proper books for the purpose,
all official bonds and note upon each bond so recorded when the same was
entered of record and the book and pages where recorded.
   (D)   Issue notices. The Clerk shall issue and cause to be served upon all
Trustees notices of all special meetings of the Village Board; also notices to
the members of the different committees of that body and all persons whose
attendance may be required before any such committee, when so directed by the
Chairperson thereof.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-58)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-4, 1-2-5, 3.1-35-110,
3.1-35-90 and 3.1-35-90
§ 32.077 DELIVERY OF PAPERS TO OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Clerk shall deliver to the several committees of the Village Board
and to the officers of this village, all petitions, communications, reports and
resolutions, orders, claims and other papers referred to those committees or
officers by the Board on demand therefor.
   (B)   The Clerk shall also, without delay, deliver to the Mayor, all
ordinances or resolutions, orders and claims in his or her charge which may
require to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the Mayor.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-59)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90
§ 32.078 PREPARATION OF DOCUMENTS, COMMISSIONS AND LICENSES.
   The Clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and other
official documents required to be issued by him or her under this code and
shall attest the same with the corporate seal, and the Clerk shall, in like
manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by this
village.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-60)
§ 32.079 REPORT OF LICENSES.
   The Clerk shall report to the Village Board at its regular meeting each
month and oftener if the Board so requires the data contained in the license
register with respect to licenses issued during the previous month. In all
cases where the village requires a license to be obtained for the purpose of
engaging in or carrying on any business or occupation, and the licensee is
required to obtain plates, tags or stickers from the Clerk, it shall be the
duty of the Clerk to deliver the plates, tags or stickers to the person paying
the license fee.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-61)
§ 32.080 CLERK AS VILLAGE COLLECTOR.
   The Village Clerk shall be the collector and perform all duties of that
office.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-62)
§ 32.081 ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS.
   The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths or affirmations for all
lawful purposes.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-63)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-20
§ 32.082 OUTSTANDING BONDS.
   The Clerk shall keep in his or her office in a book or books kept expressly
for that purpose a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the village,
showing the number and amount of each, for and to whom the bonds are issued;
and when the village bonds are issued, or purchased, or paid, or cancelled, the
book or books shall show that fact (and in the annual report, the Clerk shall
describe particularly the bonds sold during the year and the terms of sale with
each and every item of expense thereof).
(2001 Code, § 1-2-64)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-110
§ 32.083 REPORTS.
   The Clerk shall, on or before the regular meeting in each month, make out
and submit to the Village Board a statement or report in writing of all the
moneys received and warrants drawn during the preceding month, showing therein
from or what sources and on what account moneys were received, and for what
purposes and on what account the warrants were drawn or paid.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-65)
§ 32.084 SUCCESSOR.
   The Village Clerk shall carefully preserve all books, records, papers, maps
and effects of every detail and description belonging to the village or
pertaining to the office, and not in actual use and possession of other village
officers; and upon the expiration of his or her official term, the Clerk shall
deliver all the books, records, papers and effects to the successor in office.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-66)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-35
§ 32.085 PAYMENTS.
   The Clerk shall prepare monthly an itemized list of all moneys received and
shall deliver a copy of the same to the Village Treasurer and shall also pay
over to the Treasurer all moneys received in the office and take a receipt
therefor.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-67)
§ 32.086 NOTIFICATION TO PERSONS APPOINTED TO OFFICE.
   Within five days after an appointment is made, the Clerk shall notify all
persons appointed to office of their appointment. The office becomes vacant
unless the person appointed qualifies within ten days after the notice.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-68)
§ 32.087 OTHER DUTIES.
   In addition to the foregoing duties, the Clerk shall perform all such other
duties pertaining to the office as are or may be imposed upon the office by law
or resolution or ordinance of the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-69)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-40
§ 32.088 SUBMIT APPROPRIATION TO VILLAGE BOARD.
   (A)   The Clerk shall on or before May 15 in each year, and before the
annual appropriations to be made by the Village Board, submit to the Village
Board a report of the estimates as nearly as may be of moneys necessary to
defray the expenses of the corporation during the current fiscal year.
   (B)   The Clerk shall, in the report, classify the different objects and
branches of expenditures, giving as nearly as may be the amount required for
each; and for the purpose of making such a report, the Clerk is hereby
authorized to require of all officers their statement of the condition and
expenses of their respective offices or departments with any proposed
improvements, and the probable expense thereof, all contracts made and
unfinished and the amount of any and all unexpended appropriations of the
preceding year.
   (C)   The Clerk shall, in the report, show the aggregate income of the
preceding fiscal year, from all sources, the amount of liabilities outstanding
upon which interest is to be paid, the bonds and debts payable during the year,
when due and when payable; and in the report, shall give such other information
to the Village Board as he or she may deem necessary to the end that the
Village Board may fully understand the money exigencies and demands upon the
corporation for the current year.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-70)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-115
§ 32.089 DEPUTY CLERK.
   (A)   The Village Clerk, when authorized by the Village Board, may appoint
the Deputy Clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute all documents
required by any law to be executed by the Clerk and affix the seal of the
village thereto whenever required.
   (B)   In signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the
Village Clerk followed with the word, "By" and the Deputy Clerk's name and the
words, "Deputy Clerk".
   (C)   The powers and duties herein described shall be executed by the Deputy
Clerk only in the absence of the Village Clerk from the Village Clerk's office
in the Village Hall, and only when either written direction has been given by
the Village Clerk to the Deputy Clerk to exercise the power or the Village
Board has determined by resolution that the Village Clerk is temporarily or
permanently incapacitated to perform the functions.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-71)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-10-45, 3.1-30-10, and
3.1-35-95
VILLAGE TREASURER
§ 32.100 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a department of the municipal government of the
village which shall be known as the "Finance Department". It shall embrace the
Finance Committee and the Treasurer.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-72)
§ 32.101 FINANCE COMMITTEE.
   The Standing Committee on Finance shall exercise a general supervision over
the affairs of the Finance Department. It shall ascertain the condition and
needs thereof; shall, from time to time, report the same to the Mayor and
Village Board so that a full understanding thereof shall be had and generally
shall do all the acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the Department.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-73)
§ 32.102 TREASURER APPOINTED; VACANCY.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Village Board and shall serve until a successor is appointed and
has qualified.
   (B)   Whenever a vacancy in the office of Treasurer, the Mayor shall appoint
a qualified person to the office subject to the advice and consent of the
Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-74)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-10-35 and 3.1-30-5
§ 32.103 MONEY; WARRANTS; ACCOUNTS; PAYMENTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to this
village and shall pay all warrants signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the
Village Clerk and not otherwise, and shall keep a separate account of each fund
or appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall give to every person paying money into the Village
Treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, and upon what
account paid, and shall file copies of the receipts with the Clerk with the
monthly reports.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-75)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-40
§ 32.104 WARRANT REGISTER.
   The Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid,
showing the number, date and amount of each, the fund from which paid, and the
name of the person to whom and when paid; and the Treasurer shall cancel all
warrants as soon as they are redeemed.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-76)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-40 and 3.1-35-45
§ 32.105 PERSONAL USE OF FUNDS.
   The Municipal Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the municipality
and in the Treasurer's custody separate and distinct from the Treasurer's own
money and shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the municipality's
moneys or warrants for the personal use and benefit of the Treasurer or of any
other person. Any violation of this provision shall subject the Treasurer to
immediate removal from office by the corporate authorities, who may declare the
Treasurer's office vacant.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-77)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-55
§ 32.106 BOND.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his or her duties and to indemnify the village for any loss due
to neglect of duty or wrongful act on his or her part; and the amount of the
bond shall not be less than 10% of the highest amount of taxes and special
assessments received by the Treasurer during any fiscal year in the preceding
five fiscal years, nor less than one and one-half times the largest amount
which the Board estimates will be in his or her custody at any one time, nor
less than three times the number of residents of the village, as determined by
the last Federal Census.
   (B)   The bond shall be filed with the Clerk as required by statute.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-78)
§ 32.107 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The Treasurer shall collect all payments on special assessments and shall
see to it that the same are properly recorded and credited to the particular
account entitled thereto.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-79)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-85
§ 32.108 BOOKKEEPING.
   The Treasurer shall keep the books and accounts in such a manner as to show
with accuracy, all moneys received and disbursed for the village, stating from
whom and on what account received, and to whom and on what account paid out,
and in such a way that the books and accounts may be readily investigated and
understood, and the books and accounts and all files and papers of the office
shall be, at all times, open to examination by the Mayor or the Finance
Committee of the Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-80)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-40
§ 32.109 STATEMENTS.
   The Treasurer shall report to the corporate authorities at the regular
monthly meeting, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures
of the municipality as shown by his or her books up to the time of the report.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-81)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-45
§ 32.110 REPORT DELINQUENT OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to report to the Village Clerk any
officer of the village authorized to receive money for the use of the village
who may fail to make a return of the moneys received by the Treasurer at the
time required by law or by ordinances of the village.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-82)
§ 32.111 YEAR-END REPORT.
   (A)   Within six months after the end of each fiscal year, the Treasurer
shall prepare and file annually with the Village Clerk an account of moneys
received and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year as
specified in this section.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall show the following in the account:
      (1)   All moneys received by the village, indicating the total amounts in
the aggregate received in each account of the village, with a general statement
concerning the source of the receipts; provided, however, for the purposes of
this division, the term ACCOUNT shall not be construed to mean each individual
taxpayer, householder, licensee, utility user or other persons whose payments
to the village are credited to the general account;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) below all moneys paid out by
the village where the total amount paid during the fiscal year exceeds $2,500,
giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid, and the
total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each account;
      (3)   All moneys paid out by the village as compensation for personal
services, giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid,
and the total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each account;
and
      (4)   A summary statement of operations for all funds and account groups
of the village as excerpted from the annual financial report, as filed with the
appropriate state agency of the state.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the account from the Village Treasurer, the Village
Clerk shall publish the account at least once in one or more newspapers
published in the village.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-83)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-65
§ 32.112 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Treasurer is hereby required to keep all funds and moneys in his
or her custody belonging to the village in such places of deposit as have been
designated by division (D) below. When requested by the Treasurer, the
corporate authorities shall designate a bank or banks in which may be kept the
funds and moneys of the village in the custody of the Treasurer. When a bank or
savings and loan association has been designated as a depository, it shall
continue as the depository until ten days have elapsed after a new depository
is designated and has qualified by furnishing the statements of resources and
liabilities as required by this section. When a new depository is designated,
the corporate authorities shall notify the sureties of the Municipal Treasurer
of that fact in writing at least five days before the transfer of funds. The
Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds or money that
the Treasurer deposits in a designated bank or savings and loan association
while the funds and money are so deposited.
   (B)   The Municipal Treasurer may require any bank or savings and loan
association to deposit with the Treasurer securities or mortgages that have a
market value at least equal to the amount of the funds or moneys of the
municipality deposited with the bank or savings and loan association that
exceeds the insurance limitation provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.
   (C)   The Municipal Treasurer may enter into agreements of any definite or
indefinite term regarding the deposit, redeposit, investment, reinvestment or
withdrawal of municipal funds.
   (D)   (1)   Each Municipal Treasurer may:
         (a)   Combine moneys from more than one fund of a single municipality
for the purpose of investing those funds; and
         (b)   Join with other municipal treasurers or municipalities for the
purpose of investing the municipal funds of which the Treasurer has custody.
      (2)   Joint investments shall be made only in investments authorized by
law for the investment of municipal funds.
      (3)   When moneys of more than one fund of a single municipality or
moneys of more than one municipality are combined for investment purposes, the
moneys combined for that purpose shall be accounted for separately in all
respects and the earnings from investments shall be separately and individually
computed, recorded and credited to the fund or municipality, as the case may
be, for which the investment was acquired.
   (E)   No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as
permitted by this section unless it has complied with the requirements
established by § 6 of the Public Funds Investment Act.
   (F)   The following bank(s) are herewith designated as places of deposit
where the Treasurer of the village is required to keep all funds and moneys in
his or her custody belonging to this village:
      (1)   Gerber State Bank, Argenta, IL; and
      (2)   Illinois State Treasurer's Investment Pool.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-84)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-50 and ILCS Ch. 30, Act
235, § 6
JUDICIARY
§ 32.125 APPOINTMENT OF ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice
and consent of the Village Board for the term of one year, unless sooner
removed for cause, and until a successor shall have been appointed and
qualified.
   (B)   The Attorney shall have full charge of the law affairs of the village
and shall be known as the Village Attorney and shall receive an annual retainer
of $1,200 plus compensation for office services and advice, and shall receive
reasonable fees for other services rendered when, in his or her judgment, or in
the judgment of the Mayor or Village Board, the same are necessary or are for
the best interests of the village.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-88)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5
§ 32.126 DUTIES.
   (A)   Prosecute for village. The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend
on behalf of the village in all cases in which the interests of the corporation
or any officer thereof are involved; and the Village Clerk shall furnish him or
her with certified copies of any ordinance, bond or paper in keeping necessary
to be filed or used in any suit or proceedings.
   (B)   Preparation of ordinances. The Attorney shall, when required, advise
the Village Board or any officer in all matters of law in which the interests
of the corporation are involved, and shall draw the ordinances, bonds, forms
and contracts, or examine and pass upon the same, as may be required by the
Mayor, the Village Board or any committee thereof.
   (C)   Judgments.
      (1)   The Attorney shall direct executions to be issued upon all
judgments recovered in favor of the village, and shall direct their prompt
service.
      (2)   The Attorney shall examine all the bills of the officers of courts,
and of other officers of the law, and shall certify to their correctness and
the liability of the village therefor.
   (D)   Violations of ordinances. The Attorney shall institute and prosecute
an action in every case of violation of a village ordinance when instructed to
do so by the Mayor or the Village Board.
   (E)   Prosecution of suits. The Attorney shall not be required to prosecute
any suit or action arising under the ordinances of the village when, upon
investigation of the same, the Attorney shall become satisfied that the
complaint was instituted maliciously, vexatiously or without just cause; and
shall dismiss or discontinue any such suit or proceeding upon such terms as he
or she may deem just or equitable.
   (F)   Collection of taxes. The Attorney is hereby authorized and instructed
to enforce the collection of any and all taxes and special assessments in the
collection of which the village is interested and to attend all sales of real
or personal property made to enforce the collection of the taxes or special
assessments and to bid thereat on behalf of the village.
   (G)   Commissions.
      (1)   The Village Attorney shall act as the legal advisory for the
utilities systems, for the Plan Commission, for the Zoning Board of Appeals and
for all other boards and commissions hereafter established by the Village
Board.
      (2)   The Attorney shall perform all legal services as may be required
for those boards and commissions.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-89)
VILLAGE ENGINEER
§ 32.140 APPOINTMENT.
   With the advice and consent of the Village Board, the Mayor may appoint an
engineer for the village, who shall serve for the term of the Mayor or for the
period not exceeding the term of the Mayor, as may be designated by the Mayor
and Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-94)
§ 32.141 DUTIES; SALARY.
   The Village Engineer shall make and submit plans, estimates and
specifications for any public work which may be proposed or ordered by the
Village Board. The Engineer shall also examine all public works under his or
her charge and see that the plans, estimates and specifications for the same
are properly executed. He or she shall receive a salary as agreed upon with the
Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-95)
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER/ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
§ 32.155 CREATION OF POSITION.
   There is hereby created the position of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall also serve as the Flood Plain Inspector and as the Code
Enforcement Officer. Additional duties shall be outlined in the Zoning
Administrator's job description and may be amended from time to time by the
Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-98)
§ 32.156 DUTIES.
   The Zoning Administrator or his or her authorized representative shall
administer and enforce the Zoning Code, as amended from time to time and is in
effect, in accordance with the powers and duties therein set forth, and in
furtherance of the authority shall:
   (A)   Issue all building permits and zoning certificates, and make and
maintain records thereof;
   (B)   Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and maintain records
thereof;
   (C)   Issue building and zoning occupancy permits as authorized by the
Zoning Code;
   (D)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and land to determine
compliance with the Zoning Code and to notify in writing the person responsible
for any violation found, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it;
   (E)   Order the discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations or structural changes, discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by statute or by the Zoning
Code to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions;
   (F)   Prepare and cause to be published, on or before March 31 of each year,
a map showing the existing zoning uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations
and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31;
   (G)   Maintain permanent and current records of the Zoning Code, including,
but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special-use permits, planned building
developments, variances, appeals and applications therefor;
   (H)   Provide and maintain a source of public information relative to all
matters arising out of the Zoning Code;
   (I)   Receive, file and forward to the Plan Commission, all applications for
amendments, use variances and special permits, and other matters upon which the
Plan Commission is required to act under the Zoning Code;
   (J)   Receive, file and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals all
applications for variance, appeals and other matters upon which the Zoning
Board of Appeals is required to act under the Zoning Code;
   (K)   Keep the Mayor and Village Board advised of zoning activities by
written report once each month, including statements of permits and
certificates issued and orders promulgated;
   (L)   The Zoning Administrator may request and shall receive so far as may
be necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of the Chief of Police in enforcing orders, of the Village Attorney
in prosecuting violators, and of other village officials and officers; and
   (M)   The Zoning Administrator shall perform other duties as a Code
Enforcement Officer as prescribed by laws and the village code and as may be
specifically assigned to him or her by the Village Board. The laws and code may
include, but not be limited to, the Mobile Home Code, Subdivision Code, and the
Building Code, as adopted and amended from time to time by the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-99)
SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER AND STREETS
§ 32.170 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of Superintendent of Water and Streets,
an executive office of the village. The Superintendent shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of
one year.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-100)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5
§ 32.171 WATER SYSTEM.
   The Superintendent shall have charge of the operation and maintenance of the
municipal water distribution system as provided in
Chapter 51 of this code of ordinances.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-101)
§ 32.172 STREETS.
   The Superintendent shall exercise those powers and duties as provided in
this code as provided in
Chapter 93 of this code of ordinances.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-102)
§ 32.173 DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES.
   All officers or employees assigned to the Department shall perform their
duties subject to the orders and under the supervision of the Superintendent.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-103)
§ 32.174 PROPERTY CUSTODIAN.
   The Superintendent shall be the custodian of all property of the village
which is not assigned to the care or custody of any other officer.
(2001 Code, § 1-2-104)
CHAPTER 33: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Declaration of emergency
   
33.03   Curfew
   
33.04   Authority of Mayor to issue orders
   
33.05   Effectiveness
   
33.06   Notification
   
33.07   National Incident Management System (NIMS)
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY. Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including, but
not limited to, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion
within the corporate limits of the village, or near the corporate limits of the
village, which a reasonable person could conclude will threaten or result in
the death or injury of multiple persons or the widespread destruction of
property within the corporate limits of the village unless extraordinary
measures are immediately taken to preserve and protect persons and property.
   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated
to duty with reference to the civil emergency.
(Ord. 02-03-19, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 33.02 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever an emergency as defined in §
33.01 above exists, the Mayor shall declare the existence by means of a written
declaration or proclamation under oath setting forth his or her findings that
the standards as set out in §
33.01 above have been met, setting forth the facts which substantiate those
findings, describing the nature of the emergency and declaring that a state of
emergency exists. The Mayor shall file the declaration or proclamation with the
Village Clerk as soon as practical.
(Ord. 02-03-19, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 33.03 CURFEW.
   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may order a
general curfew applicable to the geographical areas of the village or to the
village as a whole as he or she deems advisable and applicable during those
hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary in the interest of the
public safety and welfare.
(Ord. 02-03-19, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 33.04 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO ISSUE ORDERS.
   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other flammable liquid or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;
   (E)   Order the use of any and all village property, equipment and manpower
to preserve the health and welfare of village residents and their property;
   (F)   Order the utilization of any other village asset to otherwise limit or
contain the emergency area or its impact on village residents or their
property; and/or
   (G)   Issue any such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property when considering the whole of the welfare of
the residents of the village and their property.
(Ord. 02-03-19, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 33.05 EFFECTIVENESS.
   (A)   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of
seven days or until adjournment of the next regular meeting of the Village
Board of Trustees, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists.
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the power to renew the proclamation of the
existence of a civil emergency at the end of each seven-day period during the
time the civil emergency exists, but in no case may the Mayor extend the
proclamation beyond the adjournment of the next regular meeting of the Board of
Trustees or any special meeting called for the purpose of acting upon the
emergency.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village Board of Trustees from
declaring a continuing state of emergency and vesting continued extraordinary
powers in the Mayor to a date certain or until the adjournment of the next
regular meeting of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 02-03-19, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 33.06 NOTIFICATION.
   Upon issuing the proclamation herein local television station, a radio
station and a authorized, the Mayor shall notify a newspaper with general
circulation within the village and shall cause three copies of the proclamation
declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places
within the village:
   (A)   The Village Hall;
   (B)   The post office; and
   (C)   The library.
(Ord. 02-03-19, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 33.07 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).
   The village hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as
its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 7-17-2006)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Department established
   
34.02   Office of Chief created
   
34.03   Duties of Chief
   
34.04   Appointment of patrol persons
   
34.05   Salary
   
34.06   Legal processes
   
34.07   Assisting police officer
   
34.08   Aiding Fire Department
   
34.09   Aiding in escape
   
34.10   Use of intoxicating liquor
   
34.11   Witness fees
   
34.12   Rules and regulations
   
34.13   Training
   
34.14   Stolen property
   
34.15   Contract
Alarm Code
   
34.30   Definitions
   
34.31   General provisions
 
   
34.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a department of the municipal government of the
village which shall be known as the Police Department. The Police Department
shall consist of the Chief of Police and of such number of patrol persons as
may be provided from time to time by the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-1)
§ 34.02 OFFICE OF CHIEF CREATED.
   There is hereby established the office of the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-2)
§ 34.03 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall keep records and make reports concerning the
activities of his or her Department as may be required.
   (B)   The Chief shall be responsible for the performance of the Police
Department, of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the
Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-3)
§ 34.04 APPOINTMENT OF PATROL PERSONS.
   A sufficient number of patrol persons shall be appointed by the Mayor, by
and with the advice and consent of the Village Board. A police officer may be
appointed to office by the Mayor and Village Board if he or she meets the
necessary qualifications, notwithstanding the fact that the police officer is
not a resident of the village when appointed or when he or she is to serve as
such an official.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-4)
§ 34.05 SALARY.
   The Police Department shall receive compensation as may be provided by
ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-5)
§ 34.06 LEGAL PROCESSES.
   All police shall have the power and authority to execute village warrants or
other similar legal processes outside the corporate limits of the village and
within the distance therefrom as authorized by law in all cases when any
ordinance of the Village Board made pursuant to law shall prescribe a penalty
for the violation of any of its provisions by persons residing, acting or doing
any business within the limits of the village.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-6)
§ 34.07 ASSISTING POLICE OFFICER.
   Every police officer of the village may, at any time, call upon any able-
bodied person(s) above the age of 18 years to aid him or her in the arresting,
retaking or holding in custody of any person guilty of having committed any
unlawful act or charged therewith, or to aid the officer in preventing the
commission of any unlawful act.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-7)
§ 34.08 AIDING FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Every police officer shall aid the Fire Department by giving the alarm in
case of fire and in clearing the streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity
of any fire so that the firefighters shall not be hindered or obstructed in the
performance of their duties.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-8)
§ 34.09 AIDING IN ESCAPE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in this village to resist or obstruct
any member of the police force in the discharge of his or her duty or to
endeavor to do so, in any manner, assist any person in the custody of any
member of the Police Department to escape or to attempt to escape from the
custody or to attempt to rescue any such person in custody.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-9) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.10 USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR.
   No member on an active tour of duty or while wearing the official police
officer's badge of the village shall indulge in the use of intoxicating liquor
of any kind, and intoxication at any time shall be sufficient cause for
removal.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-10)
§ 34.11 WITNESS FEES.
   (A)   Any member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever
this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any
state or federal law.
   (B)   No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness in
any action or suit to which the village is a party; and fees paid for those
services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police who shall deposit the same
with the Village Treasurer.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-11)
§ 34.12 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police may make or prescribe rules and regulations for the
conduct and guidance of the members of the Police Department as he or she shall
deem advisable, and those rules, when approved by the Mayor, shall be binding
on those members.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-12)
§ 34.13 TRAINING.
   All police officers, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall
receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures
by the proper authorities as established by the state for full-time police
officers.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-13)
§ 34.14 STOLEN PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all lost and abandoned or
stolen property in the village.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-14)
§ 34.15 CONTRACT.
   The Village Board, at its discretion, upon motion by the Board of Trustees,
as an alternative to the staffing of a Police Department, may contract for law
enforcement services with an outside law enforcement agency.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 5-19-2008)
ALARM CODE
§ 34.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM. An audible, mechanical or electrical signal from an alarm system
which indicates the system has detected a disturbance it was designed or
programmed to warn about.
   ALARM ANSWERING POINT. A facility operated and maintained at a place, other
than with the police facility of the village, wherein alarm systems terminate
and alarms are initially answered.
   ALARM SYSTEM. A device or assembly of equipment which is designed or
functions to provide an alarm upon detection of a disturbance it was designed
or programmed to warn about.
   ALARM USER. Any person or entity owning, possessing or in control of
premises wherein an alarm system is maintained.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. A device programmed to transmit by telephone line
an alarm to a telephone number selected in advance.
   FALSE ALARM. The transmission of an alarm indicating need of an emergency
response in instances where an emergency does not, in fact, exist.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-21)
§ 34.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Approved alarm system. No alarm system shall be installed, maintained
or operated within the village limits so as to directly transmit an alarm to
the Police Department or the Village Hall without prior written approval of the
President and Village Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Good working order. Any alarm system installed or operated within the
village limits shall be maintained in good working order so as not to generate
false alarms due to system defect or malfunctions and every alarm system so
installed or maintained within the village limits shall be so operated as not
to transmit false alarms.
   (C)   List of names. Every alarm user of an alarm system installed and
operated within the village limits shall provide the Police Department and keep
current an up-to-date list of names and telephone numbers of persons who are
authorized and readily available to assist at the premises or facility at any
time an alarm is transmitted therefrom.
   (D)   Disconnection. Any user of an alarm system not installed, maintained
or operated as provided herein, after reasonable written notice and an
opportunity to be heard at a regular or special meeting of the Board of
Trustees of the village, may have police response to the premises of alarm
origination termination.
   (E)   Private direct service only. Relay to the Police Department of alarms
received by a private alarm answering service at an alarm answering point shall
only be by direct line service from the point terminating at a private
telephone installed and maintained at the Police Department at the expense of
the alarm service, permission for the installation and maintenance of which
line and telephone has been and continues to be authorized by the President and
Board of Trustees for the village.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-22)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Charge for false alarm. A response charge in the amount of $30
is hereby authorized and levied for each response to a false alarm transmitted
to the Police Department whether the transmission is by private line or via the
County Sheriff's office dispatcher.
      (2)   Waiver of charge. The response charge may be waived by the
President and Board of Trustees if, upon due investigation, taking into account
the cause and circumstances of the false alarm and the lack of frequency of
other false alarms by the alarm user, the same did not cause reasonably
expectable levels of public safety service to be exceeded.
      (3)   Non-payment of charge. Should any alarm user fail to reasonably and
promptly pay a response charge after being billed for the same, the charge may
be recovered by appropriate court action, or, after reasonable notice, police
response to the premises of alarm origination may be terminated.
      (4)   Fine. Any alarm user violating any provision contained in this
chapter shall be subject, in addition to other penalties previously stated, to
a fine of not less than $75 and not more than $750 for each violation; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
      (5)   Injunction. Any user violating any provision of this chapter shall,
in addition to all other penalties previously stated, be subject to injunctive
relief prohibiting the continued violations upon application to the appropriate
court.
(2001 Code, § 30-2-23)
CHAPTER 35: TAX AND FINANCE
Section
General Finance
   
35.01   Authorizes village to borrow funds
Taxation Generally
   
35.15   Corporate rate
   
35.16   Police tax
   
35.17   Audit tax
   
35.18   F.I.C.A. tax
   
35.19   I.M.R.F.
   
35.20   General liability
   
35.21   Street lighting
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
   
35.35   Definitions
   
35.36   Registration of telecommunications providers
   
35.37   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
   
35.38   Collection, enforcement and administration of fees
   
35.39   Compliance with other laws
   
35.40   Existing franchises and licenses
   
35.41   Waiver and fee implementation
Taxpayers' Rights Code
   
35.55   Title
   
35.56   Scope
   
35.57   Definitions
   
35.58   Notices
   
35.59   Late payment
   
35.60   Payment
   
35.61   Certain credits and refunds
   
35.62   Audit procedure
   
35.63   Appeal
   
35.64   Hearing
   
35.65   Interest and penalties
   
35.66   Abatement
   
35.67   Installment contracts
   
35.68   Statute of limitations
   
35.69   Voluntary disclosure
   
35.70   Publication of tax ordinances
   
35.71   Internal review procedure
   
35.72   Application
 
   
35.99   Penalty
GENERAL FINANCE
§ 35.01 AUTHORIZES VILLAGE TO BORROW FUNDS.
   (A)   Incorporation of preambles. The corporate authorities hereby find that
the recitals contained in the preambles to this section are true and correct
and do incorporate them into this section by this reference.
   (B)   Determination to borrow funds. It is necessary and in the best
interests of the village to construct the project for the public health, safety
and welfare, in accordance with the plans and specifications, as described,
that the system continue to be operated in accordance with the provisions of
the Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.; and that for the purpose of
constructing the project, it is hereby authorized that funds be borrowed by the
village in an aggregate principal amount (which includes construction period
interest financed over the term of the loan) not to exceed $700,810.
   (C)   Publication. This section, together with a notice in the statutory
form, shall be published once within ten days after passage in the Decatur
Herald & Review, a newspaper of general circulation in the village, and if no
petition signed by 10% of the registered voters in the village (i.e., 63
electors) and asking the question of improving the system as provided in this
section and entering into the loan agreement therefore be submitted to the
electors of the village, is filed with the Village Clerk within 30 days after
the date of publication of this section and the notice, then this section shall
be in full force and effect. A petition form shall be provided by the Village
Clerk to any person requesting one.
   (D)   Additional ordinances.
      (1)   If no petition meeting the requirements of the Act and other
applicable law is filed during the 30-day petition period, then the corporate
authorities may adopt additional ordinances or proceedings supplementing or
amending this section providing for the entering into the loan agreement with
the State Environmental Protection Agency, prescribing all the details of the
loan agreement, and providing for the collection, segregation and distribution
of revenues of the system, so long as the maximum amount of the loan agreement
as set forth in this section is not exceeded and there is no material change in
the project or purposes described herein. Any additional ordinances or
proceedings shall in all instances become effective in accordance with the Act
and other applicable law. This section, together with additional ordinances or
proceedings, shall constitute complete authority for the entering into of the
loan agreement under applicable law.
      (2)   However, notwithstanding the above, the village may not adopt
additional ordinances or amendments which provide for any substantive or
material change in the scope and intent of this section, including but not
limited to interest rate, preference or priority of any other ordinance with
this section, parity of any other ordinance with this section, or otherwise
alter or impair the obligation of the village to pay the principal and interest
due to the Public Water Supply Loan Program without the written consent of the
State Environmental Protection Agency.
   (E)   Loan not indebtedness of village. Repayment of the loan to the State
Environmental Protection Agency by the village pursuant to this section is to
be solely from the revenue derived from operation of the system and the loan
does not constitute an indebtedness of the village within the meaning of any
constitutional or statutory limitation.
   (F)   Acceptance of loan agreement.
      (1)   The Village President is hereby authorized to make application to
the State Environmental Protection Agency for a loan through the Public Water
Supply Loan Program, in accordance with the loan requirements set out in 35
Ill. Adm. Code Part 662.
      (2)   The loan funds shall be solely for the purposes of the project as
approved by the State Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the loan agreement.
   (G)   Authorization of Village President to execute the loan agreement. The
Village President is hereby authorized and directed to execute the loan
agreement with the State Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 03-09-02, passed 9-2-2003)
TAXATION GENERALLY
§ 35.15 CORPORATE RATE.
   The maximum rate for general corporate purposes of the village be and the
same is hereby established at a rate of 0.25%.
(2001 Code, § 36-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-3-1
§ 35.16 POLICE TAX.
   The maximum rate for police protection purposes of the village be and the
same is hereby established at a rate of 0.075%.
(2001 Code, § 36-1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-3
§ 35.17 AUDIT TAX.
   The Village Board may levy a Municipal Auditing Tax upon all taxable
property in the village which will produce an amount which will equal the cost
of all auditing for the village.
(2001 Code, § 36-1-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-8-8
§ 35.18 F.I.C.A. TAX.
   The Village Board may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the village at
whatever rate is necessary to participate in the federal Social Security
System.
(2001 Code, § 36-1-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 21-101 et seq.
§ 35.19 I.M.R.F.
   The Village Board may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the village at
whatever rate is necessary to participate in the State Municipal Retirement
Fund.
(2001 Code, § 36-1-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 7-132 et seq.
§ 35.20 GENERAL LIABILITY.
   The Village Board may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the village at
whatever rate is necessary to purchase general liability insurance for the
village.
(2001 Code, § 36-1-6)
§ 35.21 STREET LIGHTING.
   The Village Board may levy a Street Lighting Tax upon all taxable property
in the village at a rate of 0.50%.
(2001 Code, § 36-1-7)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
§ 35.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS CHARGES. The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of the telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the village, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office
channel provided within the village. However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under:
         (a)   The fee imposed by this section;
         (b)   Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, §§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act;
         (c)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, being
Ch. 35, Act 635;
         (d)   911 surcharges; or
         (e)   The tax imposed by I.R.C. § 4251.
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
village;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. The equipment includes, but
is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including the equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein the charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of the exemption and
during the period of time specified by the village;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent
corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries
represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of
profit other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering
those services;
      (7)   Bad debts. Bad debt means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices; or
      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the village.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Or any like term,
means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether the place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether the retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another corporation is not greater than
the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for
sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the customer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in
the state where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless telecommunications as
hereinafter defined. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value-added services
in which computer-processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provisions and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include the provision of cable service through a cable system as defined in the
Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.) as now or hereafter
amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as
now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.
      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and
      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Includes every person
engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as
defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of
the village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
in the village.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes cellular mobile services, personal
wireless services as defined in § 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996
(Pub. Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. § 331(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended,
including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging services.
(2001 Code, § 36-2-1)
§ 35.36 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this subchapter shall
register with the village within 30 days after the effective date of this
subchapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a
form to be provided by the village; provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to §
35.37(C) below shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village
pursuant to §
35.35 above has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or
current return as required by §
35.37 below, as the case may be, to the village within 30 days from the date of
the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the village.
(2001 Code, § 36-2-3)
§ 35.37 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of all gross
charges charged by the telecommunications retailers to service addresses within
the village for telecommunications originating or received in the village.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this subchapter, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this subchapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced and administered as set
forth in this section.
(2001 Code, § 36-2-4)
§ 35.38 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEES.
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the village the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in
which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the
village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for
expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the village, which shall
contain such information as the village may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this subchapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by the
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under §
35.37 above by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this subchapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides the services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for those services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether
as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this subchapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the
erroneous payment; provided, however, the village may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for the
credit. However, no claim for the credit may be made more than three years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless:
      (1)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by
the village within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and
      (2)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications retailers
shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
      (1)   "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
      (2)   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2;
      (3)   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
   (G)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
subchapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due to
the village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the village
plus 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus
any costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. The
sum shall be paid to the village within 21 days after the date of issuance of
an invoice for same.
   (H)   The village or his or her designee, may promulgate further or
additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
subchapter consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant
to §
35.35 above of those regulations.
(2001 Code, § 36-2-5)
§ 35.39 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of or repair
of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free standing
towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as provided;
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under or within,
use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.
(2001 Code, § 36-2-6)
§ 35.40 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.
   Any franchise, license or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the village entered into before the effective date of this
subchapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid
according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived.
(2001 Code, § 36-2-6)
§ 35.41 WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   The village hereby waives all fees, charges and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village franchise, license
or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time the
village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This
waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure maintenance
fee provided for in this subchapter is subject to being lawfully imposed on the
telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer
from the customer.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/
return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
village has a franchise.
   (C)   The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
subchapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than 90 days after the village provides written notice by certified mail
to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has an existing
franchise, license or similar agreement that the village waives all
compensation under the existing franchise, license or similar agreement during
such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the
retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall
apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in
the preceding sentence.
(2001 Code, § 36-2-8) (Ord. 1-18-99, passed 1-18-1999)
TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS CODE
§ 35.55 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Code
(2001 Code, § 36-3-1)
§ 35.56 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this code shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-2)
§ 35.57 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Village's President and Board of Trustees.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
      (1)   The village's President is charged with the administration and
collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff,
employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the LOCAL TAX
ADMINISTRATOR to act in the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR'S stead.
      (2)   The LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall have the authority to implement
the terms of this code to give full effect to this code. The exercise of the
authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
code and the Act.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of the tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Argenta, Macon County, Illinois.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-3)
§ 35.58 NOTICES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given,
the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of
the local tax administrator.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows:
      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the person's last known address; or
      (2)   Personal service or delivery.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-4)
§ 35.59 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   (A)   Physically received by the village on or before the due date; or
   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the village, with adequate postage prepaid.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-5)
§ 35.60 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (A)   First, to the tax due for the applicable period;
   (B)   Second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (C)   Third, to the penalty for the applicable period.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-6)
§ 35.61 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error
was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any moneys to the village.
      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 4% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-7)
§ 35.62 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this code.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than
30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer
is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing the tax.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-8)
§ 35.63 APPEAL.
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax.
   (B)   The notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the assessment;
      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (C)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (D)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (E)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (F)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-9)
§ 35.64 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under §
35.63 above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-10)
§ 35.65 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of the tax to be 10% per
annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-11)
§ 35.66 ABATEMENT.
   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-12)
§ 35.67 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-13)
§ 35.68 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing.
   (B)   The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed
tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and
owing.
      (1)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.
      (3)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-14)
§ 35.69 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment form the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due.
   (B)   A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay
the amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods
prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the
date of filing the application.
   (C)   A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be
liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void.
   (D)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-15)
§ 35.70 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal
or standard publishing requirements.
   (B)   The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the
publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available
to the public upon request at the Village Clerk's office.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-16)
§ 35.71 INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
   (B)   Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is
valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect.
   (C)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator
shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-17)
§ 35.72 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be
controlling.
(2001 Code, § 36-3-18)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of §§
35.35 through
35.41 shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty
provisions of the village municipal code.
(2001 Code, § 36-2-7)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   GARBAGE
         
51.   WATER SYSTEM
         
52.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Receptacles; duty to provide
   
50.03   Preparation of garbage
   
50.04   License required
   
50.05   License prerequisites
   
50.06   Application
   
50.07   Revocation
   
50.08   Place of disposal
   
50.09   List of costumers
   
50.10   Compact areas
   
50.11   Rates
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   RUBBISH. Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding; non-combustible
trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt,
small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral
waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt,
catch-basin dirt, contents of litter receptacles; provided, however, that
refuse shall not include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall
it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing
operations such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps
and shavings.
   YARD WASTE. Material such as tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves and
grass.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-1)
§ 50.02 RECEPTACLES; DUTY TO PROVIDE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, landlord, tenant, lessee or
occupant of every dwelling, tenement house, lodging house, hotel, boarding
house or other person, persons, firm or corporations whether residential or
commercial and on whose premises kitchen and household garbage or other refuse
collects, excepting those tenants who occupy multi-family dwellings and whose
garbage service is provided by their landlord at no charge to them, to
subscribe to garbage service with the current licensed garbage hauler for the
village and to provide, and at all times to keep within the building or on the
premises, garbage containers sufficient to hold all kitchen and household
garbage and other refuse which may accumulate on the premises between
collections, the containers to be of metal or rigid sturdy plastic, water tight
and with a tight-fitting cover, and shall have a capacity of not less than five
gallons nor more than 55 gallons for single-family residences and shall be
equipped with suitable handles, which containers shall be placed at all times
so as to be readily accessible for removal and emptying, and where they shall
not be a public nuisance.
   (B)   Commercial or multi-family dwellings where the owner or landlord
provides garbage service at no charge to the tenants may utilize suitable
commercial containers approved by and provided by the licensed hauler, but
shall otherwise conform with residential containers regarding placement and
removal.
   (C)   No person, firm or corporation, unless authorized and licensed for
that purpose, as hereinafter specified, shall interfere with the containers or
the contents thereof including any curb side recycling bins or the contents
thereof. All the garbage and other refuse, shall be removed as provided by
regulations to be set by the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Nothing herein is to be construed as requiring other governmental
entities with facilities and property within the village to maintain regular
garbage service with the village garbage hauler, providing that the
governmental entities first apply to and establish to the Village Board's
satisfaction that the governmental entity has an acceptable alternative means
established for the disposition of refuse or otherwise demonstrates that the
provisions of this section create an undue burden on the taxpayers of the
village.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-2)
§ 50.03 PREPARATION OF GARBAGE.
   Surplus liquids of all garbage must be drained off so as to avoid spillage.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-3)
§ 50.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of
collecting garbage or be permitted to haul, convey or transport over and upon
the streets of the village any garbage or other refuse as defined, or other
material giving off noxious odors unless he or she shall be licensed therefor.
   (B)   No license shall be issued to a person not of good moral character.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 LICENSE PREREQUISITES.
   (A)   No applicant shall be granted a license unless he or she shall have
provided himself or herself with the proper and necessary machinery and other
appliances for properly taking care of and disposing of the garbage in
conformity with this chapter and the health regulations of the state, the
county, the village and of any township.
   (B)   The applicant must own each vehicle used in the garbage collection.
   (C)   No license shall be granted to any applicant who has been guilty of
any willful violation of any health or sanitary provisions of the village, or
of this chapter, or is in default on any contract with the village.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-5)
§ 50.06 APPLICATION.
   All applications for license shall be made in accordance with the provisions
of this code.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-6)
§ 50.07 REVOCATION.
   If during the period covered by the license granted, the licensee shall
permit his or her equipment to fall into disrepair, or fail to keep the same in
a sanitary condition when not in use or fail to keep up to the standard
required by this chapter, or fail to obey any of the provisions of this
chapter, or to give adequate service, the license may be revoked in the manner
provided in this code.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-8)
§ 50.08 PLACE OF DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The licensee must designate in his or her application the location of
the place where he or she intends to dispose of garbage collected by him or
her.
   (B)   Any change in the location shall be at once reported to the Village
Clerk.
   (C)   No garbage shall be dumped at places which are in violation of the
Zoning Code of either the village or the county, or in violation of any
regulations of the township in reference to dumps.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-9)
§ 50.09 LIST OF CUSTOMERS.
   The licensee shall at all times keep a list of the names of his or her
customers and their addresses and shall, upon request, deliver a copy of the
same to the Village Clerk.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-10)
§ 50.10 COMPACT AREAS.
   (A)   Each licensee, so far as it is feasible, shall serve customers in
compact areas in order to prevent several or more garbage vehicles driving up
and down the same streets and areas.
   (B)   Each licensee is required to serve all persons desiring service in or
in close proximity to the area in which he or she is giving service.
   (C)   This, however, shall not be considered as limiting the licensee to one
area or as requiring all garbage in one area to be collected by one licensee.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-11)
§ 50.11 RATES.
   (A)   The rates for hauling garbage must be fair and reasonable.
   (B)   Each licensee at the time of his or her application for a license must
turn over to the Village Clerk his or her schedule of rates for services
rendered.
   (C)   Any change in the schedule must, at the time of taking effect, be
reported to the Clerk in writing.
   (D)   No charge shall be made in excess of the rate schedule on file with
the village.
   (E)   This schedule shall include private contracts.
(2001 Code, § 16-1-12)
CHAPTER 51: WATER SYSTEM
Section
Administration
   
51.001   Department established
   
51.002   Streets and Water Committee
   
51.003   Superintendent
   
51.004   Special agreements
Rates and Regulations
   
51.015   Contract for utility services
   
51.016   Consumer lists
   
51.017   Liability for charges
   
51.018   Estimated charge
   
51.019   Special rates
   
51.020   Utility deposits
   
51.021   Residential and commercial water leaks
General Regulations
   
51.035   Application for taps and service connections to the waterworks system
   
51.036   All service to be by meter
   
51.037   Inspection
   
51.038   Meter damaged
   
51.039   Damage due to interruption of service; liability
   
51.040   Resale
   
51.041   Discontinuing service; dangerous usage
   
51.042   Electric ground wires
   
51.043   Water for building or construction purposes
   
51.044   Fire hydrants
   
51.045   Limited water usage in emergencies
   
51.046   Shortage and purity of supply
   
51.047   Non-compliance with rules and regulations
   
51.048   Easements
   
51.049   Use of water on consumer's premises
   
51.050   Removal of meters
   
51.051   Rules to become part of contract
   
51.052   Installing and maintaining service lines
   
51.053   Allocation of maintenance costs between user and village
   
51.054   Village not liable for interruption of supply
Cross-Connection Administration
   
51.065   Approved backflow device
   
51.066   Cross-connection prohibited; exception
   
51.067   Investigations by Superintendent
   
51.068   Right to enter premises
   
51.069   Notice to customer; reconnect fee
   
51.070   Contaminations cost and the consumer
Cross-Connection Control Code
   
51.085   Purpose
   
51.086   Application
   
51.087   Responsibility of owner
   
51.088   Definitions
   
51.089   Water system
   
51.090   Cross-connection prohibited
   
51.091   Survey and investigations
   
51.092   Where protection is required
   
51.093   Type of protection required
   
51.094   Backflow prevention devices
   
51.095   Inspection and maintenance
   
51.096   Booster pumps
   
51.097   Violations
Extension of Mains
   
51.110   Determination of who pays expense of extension
   
51.111   Easements
   
51.112   Size and type
   
51.113   Title
   
51.114   Maintenance and replacement
Utility Rates
   
51.125   Building unit defined
   
51.126   Revenues
   
51.127   Accounts
   
51.128   Access to records
   
51.129   Water rates
   
51.130   Review of water rates
   
51.131   Appeal of water rates
   
Appendix A:   Application for Water System Service Connection
   
Appendix B:   Utility Main Extension Contract
ADMINISTRATION
§ 51.001 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There shall be an executive department of the village known as the Water
Department. It shall include the Water Superintendent and employees of the
Department.
(2001 Code, § 38-1-1)
§ 51.002 STREETS AND WATER COMMITTEE.
   The Village Board Standing Committee on Streets and Water shall exercise a
general supervision over the affairs of the Department. They shall ascertain
the condition and needs thereof; and shall, from time to time, report the same
to the Mayor and Village Board so that a full understanding thereof shall be
had; and generally, shall do all acts necessary to promote the efficiency of
the Department.
(2001 Code, § 38-1-2)
§ 51.003 SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   Generally. The Superintendent of the Water Department shall be subject
to the supervision of the Streets and Water Committee and shall be hereinafter
be referred to as the "Superintendent". The Superintendent shall be appointed
by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the Village Board and shall
hold office until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. He or she
shall receive a salary as may be provided by the annual budget of the Village
Board at the time of his or her appointment.
(2001 Code, § 38-1-3)
   (B)   Duties of the Superintendent. The Superintendent shall exercise
general management and control over his or her respective Department.
      (1)   He or she shall supervise over and be responsible for the conduct
and performance of all employees of the Department.
      (2)   He or she shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of
the village's water system as provided in this code.
      (3)   He or she shall be the custodian of all vehicles, equipment,
structures and property provided by the village for the use of his or her
Department.
      (4)   He or she shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and make the
inspections, measurements and tests as necessary for that purpose.
      (5)   He or she shall perform other duties as may be assigned to him or
her by the provisions of this chapter or by the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 38-1-4)
§ 51.004 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   The Board of Trustees shall be authorized to enter into an agreement with
any water customer, that contains provisions contrary to those contained in
this chapter or to vary the same, when the Board of Trustees shall have
determined that the agreement is in the best interests of the residents of the
village and the continued maintenance of the public water supply.
(Ord. 05-22-02, passed 2-22-2005)
RATES AND REGULATIONS
§ 51.015 CONTRACT FOR UTILITY SERVICES.
   (A)   Customer accepts service. The rates, rules and regulations contained
in this chapter shall constitute and be considered a part of the contract with
every person, company or corporation who is supplied with water and sewer
services from the waterworks system, and every person, company or corporation,
hereinafter called a "customer" who accepts and uses village water service
shall be held to have consented to be bound thereby.
   (B)   Not liable for interrupted service. The Department shall endeavor at
all times to provide a regular and uninterrupted supply of service; however, in
case the supply of service shall be interrupted or irregular or defective or
fail from causes beyond its control or through ordinary negligence of
employees, servants or agents, the Departments shall not be liable therefor.
   (C)   Using services without paying. Any person using water service from the
village without paying therefor, or who shall be found guilty of breaking the
seal of any meter or appurtenances, or bypassing any meter, shall be guilty of
violating this chapter, and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum as provided
in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Destroying property. Any person found guilty of defacing, tampering,
injuring or destroying, or in any manner, limiting the use or availability of
any meter or any property of the waterworks system, or erecting signs on the
property of the Department without permission shall, upon conviction of that
act, be fined as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   Service obtained by fraud. All contracts for water service shall be
made in the name of the head of the household, firm or corporation using the
established spelling of that person's or firm's name. Attempts to obtain
service by the use of other names, different spellings or by substituting other
persons or firms shall be considered a subterfuge and service shall be denied.
If service has been discontinued because of nonpayment of bills, or any unpaid
obligation and service has again been obtained through subterfuge,
misrepresentation or fraud, that service shall be promptly disconnected and the
whole or a part of the advanced payment as may be necessary to satisfy the
unpaid obligation shall be retained by the village and credited to the
appropriate account.
   (F)   Failure to receive bill. Failure to receive a bill shall not excuse a
customer from his or her obligation to pay within the time specified. Should
the Department be unable to bill a customer for services used during any month,
the following billing shall include the charges for services used during the
un-billed month.
   (G)   Request to discontinue service. Services shall have been deemed to
have been supplied to any property connected to the water system during a month
unless the customer notifies the village prior to the first day of the new
billing month in which the services are to be discontinued.
   (H)   Billing; utility shut-off.
      (1)   Billing. All water bills shall be mailed to users on or before the
first day of each month and shall be due and payable on the tenth day of such
month. There shall be added to all water bills not paid on or before the due
date a penalty of 20% of the amount due on the bill.
      (2)   Disconnection for non-payment. Water service will be terminated 20
days after the due date for payment.
      (3)   Hearing. Any customer disputing the correctness of the water bill
or a violation of this chapter shall have a right to a hearing at which time
they may be represented in person and/or by legal counsel of their choosing.
The customer may present orally or in writing their complaint and request for a
hearing on the correctness of the water bill to the Village Water Clerk. If a
hearing is requested as provided herein, the hearing shall be conducted by a
Hearing Officer as soon as practicable. The Hearing Officer shall be a designee
of the Board of Trustees. The Hearing Officer shall be authorized to order that
the customer service not be disconnected and shall have the authority to make a
final determination of the customer's complaint. Requests for delays or waiver
of payment will not be entertained at the hearing. Only questions of proper and
correct billing will be considered.
      (4)   Notice to property owner. If the customer who has been notified for
nonpayment of water bill is not the owner of record, then the village shall
also notify the record owner of the property by first class mail.
      (5)   Disconnection. Once water service has been disconnected, the same
shall not be again connected or used until all delinquent accounts and bills of
service are paid in full, including a fee of $40 for each connection of the
water service, plus expenses incurred in reconnecting the water service.
Responsibility for payment for water services at all times shall be with the
user and with the property owner of record. If water service is disconnected
for non-payment, water service will only be reconnected during normal Water
Department hours, Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.
      (6)   Reconnection. When water service has to be reconnected for a new
customer, there shall be a $40 turn-on fee paid in advance.
      (7)   Change of occupancy. Any user requesting termination of services
shall give written notice to the village ten days prior to the time the
termination of service is desired. Responsibility for payment for water
services prior to the date of termination shall be with property owner as well
as the user. There shall be no charge for transferring the water service to the
subsequent user.
      (8)   Returned check. Any check written to the village that is returned
for non-sufficient funds will be charged a fee of $25 or be subject to shut-off
of water service.
   (I)   Lien notice.
      (1)   Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for 90 days after
it has been rendered, the Clerk shall file with the County Recorder of Deeds a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the
municipality claims a lien for this amount to the period covered by the bill.
If the consumer of water service whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the Treasurer has notice of this, then notice shall be mailed to
the owner of the premises if his or her address is known to the Clerk whenever
the bill remains unpaid for a period of 60 days after it has been rendered.
      (2)   The failure of the Clerk to record the lien or to mail the notice,
or the failure of the owner to receive the notice, shall not affect the right
to foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as mentioned herein.
   (J)   Foreclosure of lien.
      (1)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid utility charges may be sold
for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. The foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the
village.
      (2)   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to institute the
proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over
the matters against any property for which the bill for utility services has
remained unpaid 90 days after it has been rendered.
(2001 Code, § 38-2-1) (Ord. 15-08-17 Ord10, passed 8-17-2015; Ord. 15-09-21
Ord11, passed 9-21-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Disconnection for non-payment of sewer bill, see §
52.22
§ 51.016 CONSUMER LISTS.
   It is hereby made the duty of the Water Clerk to prepare or cause to be
prepared a complete and accurate list of all premises and properties receiving
utility services, showing the name and address of the occupant and the owner of
the same. The list shall be kept up-to-date, and shall be corrected from time
to time to allow changes in the occupancy or ownership of any such property or
premises. It shall be presented at the regular monthly meeting if requested.
(2001 Code, § 38-2-2)
§ 51.017 LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.
   The owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises and the user of the
services shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the services
to the lot, parcel of land or premises, and all services are rendered to the
premises by the village only on the condition that the owner, occupant and user
shall be jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
(2001 Code, § 38-2-3)
§ 51.018 ESTIMATED CHARGE.
   Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair or from any cause
fails to properly register the utilities passing through the same, the consumer
shall be charged the average charge of the previous three month's usage. If no
record of the previous three months exists, then it shall be the duty of the
Water Clerk to estimate the amount of utilities consumed during the time the
meter fails to operate and the consumer shall be charged with the estimated
amount. Bills may be estimated whenever it is impossible to read the meters
during inclement weather.
(2001 Code, § 38-2-4)
§ 51.019 SPECIAL RATES.
   All rates and charges shall be non-discriminatory; provided, however, the
Mayor and Village Board may grant free water service to an individual or other
governmental entity.
(2001 Code, § 38-2-5)
§ 51.020 UTILITY DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Residential. When any application is made for utility services in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, all new applicants for which
the service is requested shall deposit with the application the following
amount: water$100. When the amount of the deposit provided for above is not
sufficient to adequately protect the Department, a greater amount than stated
above may be required, based on the consumer’s estimated bill for a customary
billing period.
   (B)   Security for payment; no interest. The deposits made under the
provisions of this chapter shall be held by the village as security for the
payment of utility services used by the applicant upon the premises to which
his or her application pertains, and may be so applied when any default is made
in the payment in the utilities bill in accordance with this chapter. The
depositor shall earn no interest on the deposit. If the applicant is the owner
of the property, his or her deposit may be returned after one year if all
previous bills have been paid.
   (C)   Liability for deposit. The owner of the premises and the tenant
thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the required deposit
herein established before water service shall be made available to the tenant-
occupied premises. In the case a portion of the deposit is used as aforesaid,
the tenant and/or owner of the premises shall immediately deposit with the
Village Clerk an amount sufficient to bring the deposit to the established rate
of deposit.
(2001 Code, § 38-2-6) (Ord. 12-11-19-7, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 15-08-17 Ord10,
passed 8-17-2015)
§ 51.021 RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL WATER LEAKS.
   When it is determined that a residential or commercial water customer has a
water leak on his or her property that has created an unduly burdensome water
bill, the amount charged for water can be reduced to $50 plus the minimum
monthly fee of $13 or the customer will be charged the average charge of the
previous three months' usage, whichever is greater. This reduction will only be
assessed by the Water Superintendent, after the above problem has been fixed,
and not before.
(2001 Code, § 38-2-7) (Ord. 19-06-17 Ord04, passed 6-17-2019)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 51.035 APPLICATION FOR TAPS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS TO THE WATERWORKS SYSTEM.
   (A)   An applicant desiring a water tap or service connection with the
waterworks system of the village shall file a written application at the
Village Hall, signed by the owner of the property for which the tap or service
connection is desired, or by the duly authorized agent of the owner.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by payment of the fee hereinafter
prescribed to cover the cost of the service connection.
   (C)   In the event the application is made by an agent for the owner, then
the application shall also be accompanied by the written authority of the owner
to the agent for the making of the application.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-1)
§ 51.036 ALL SERVICE TO BE BY METER.
   (A)   All water service, whether for domestic, commercial or industrial use
shall be metered.
   (B)   All meters shall be so placed and installed as to render the same
accessible at all times for the purpose of reading or repairing and so as to be
free from danger of freezing.
   (C)   Meters outside of a building shall be set in a suitable meter box
approved by the Water and Sewer Committee.
   (D)   Water shall not be turned on for new connections until the meter has
been installed and all other requirements of this chapter on the part of the
property owner have been fully complied with.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-2)
§ 51.037 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Access to premises. The village shall have access, in accordance with
constitutional limitations, to all portions of the premises of the consumer,
with prior notice to the consumer, at any reasonable time for the limited
purpose of inspection of the use of water and the consumer's pipe, fixtures,
plumbing and any other apparatus in any manner connected to the waterworks
system of the village.
   (B)   Meters to be open to inspection. All water meters and water fixtures,
connections and appurtenances on private property connected with the waterworks
system of the village shall be open to the inspection of the proper officers
and employees of the village at all reasonable hours.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-3)
§ 51.038 METER DAMAGED.
   Whenever a meter is found to have been damaged by hot water being forced
back into it from the consumer's hot water or heating apparatus or for any
other cause within control of the consumer, the consumer shall pay the village
for the actual cost of the removal, repair and replacement of the damaged meter
and all previous water bills shall be corrected on an estimated basis to cover
the period as it appears that the meter was out of order for the damage.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-4)
§ 51.039 DAMAGE DUE TO INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE; LIABILITY.
   All connections for the water services applied for hereunder and all
connections now attached to the present village waterworks system and all use
or service of the system shall be upon the express condition that the village
will not be liable for nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or
injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, service, pipe, apparatus
or appurtenance connected with the waterworks system or for any interruption of
the supply of water by reason of the breaking of machinery or by reason of
stoppages, alterations or renewals.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-5)
§ 51.040 RESALE.
   No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient or consumer thereof
from the village supply to any premises other than that for which application
has been made and the meter installed, except in cases of emergency.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-6)
§ 51.041 DISCONTINUING SERVICE; DANGEROUS USAGE.
   (A)   The village shall have the right to refuse water service or to
discontinue water service at any time to any consumer if the village finds any
apparatus or appliances, the operation of which will be detrimental to the
water system of the village or to any or all of its consumers. The village
shall have the right to refuse or disconnect water service without notice in
exigent circumstances. The village will provide notice and an opportunity to
the customer to avoid termination in the absence of exigent circumstances.
   (B)   Stand pipes, hydrants, gate valves and any other apparatus that cause
harm to the water or any danger to the water system or other customer's
plumbing shall be immediately repaired or removed upon notice from the village
or, at its option, the village may immediately discontinue service without
notice and without any liability for direct or resulting damages therefrom.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-7) (Ord. 03-11-17, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 51.042 ELECTRIC GROUND WIRES.
   (A)   All persons are strictly forbidden to attach any electric ground wire
to any plumbing or water piping which is or may be connected to any water
service pipe, water meter or water main belonging to the village.
   (B)   The village shall hold the owner of the premises responsible and
liable for any damage to the property or injury to the employees of the village
caused by the ground wire. Any and all owners and consumers shall remove any
existing ground wires immediately upon written notice from the village. If not
so disconnected five days after notice, the village, through its officials, may
enter the property and remove the ground wires and the consumer shall pay all
costs.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-8)
§ 51.043 WATER FOR BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES.
   (A)   Applicants desiring to use water from the village waterworks system
for building or construction purposes shall make application therefor to the
Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department on a form provided by the
Water and Sewer Department for that purpose.
   (B)   Upon a permit being granted, the service pipe shall be carried at the
expense of the applicant to the inside of the curb line where a service cock
and meter shall be placed with pipe leading to the surface and a faucet placed
at the end thereof above the surface.
   (C)   When the building or construction is completed, the faucet and meter
shall be removed and the water shut off unless permanent connection is made in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Charge for the use and
connection of the meter shall be prescribed by the Superintendent of the Water
and Sewer Department.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-9)
§ 51.044 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   All public fire hydrants with gate valves, tees and connections from
the main, inside the village limits, shall be owned, maintained and used only
by the village and shall be solely responsible for same. Use of water from fire
hydrants by contractors and others shall be only upon permission by the village
and after approved application to the village.
   (B)   The village shall not be held liable and will not assume any
responsibility for the condition of any fire hydrant inside or outside of the
village limits or the pressure or amount of water obtainable therefrom or any
damage either direct or resultant because of the condition, pressure or amount
of water available at any fire hydrant.
   (C)   All public fire hydrants located outside the village limits owned by
the village shall be maintained in as good order as reasonably possible, but
the village will not undertake or assume any responsibility or liability for
their condition or use or abuse. The public fire hydrants shall be used only
for the purpose of extinguishing fires except when the village may issue a
special permit for their use to contractors who shall then be responsible for
the hydrants and the use of water from them.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-10)
§ 51.045 LIMITED WATER USAGE IN EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to proclaim the existence of an
emergency whenever it appears that the village water supply is inadequate for
all general uses and purposes, which proclamation shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the community and the Mayor is further
authorized to declare in similar manner the end of an emergency period.
   (B)   From and after the publication of a proclamation as provided for in
division (A) above, the following uses of water shall be prohibited:
      (1)   The washing of cars and other vehicles;
      (2)   The sprinkling of lawns and shrubbery;
      (3)   The watering of gardens; and
      (4)   Other nonessential uses.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to so use water from the village
supply during such an emergency.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.046 SHORTAGE AND PURITY OF SUPPLY.
   The village shall not be held responsible for or in any manner liable to any
person, company, consumer or public body for any claim or damage, either direct
or resultant because of any shortage of water supply, any shut-off of water for
any reason, any bursting or leakage of either the consumer's or village's
mains, pipes and fixtures, any pollution or impurity in water supply or any
fire or water damage.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-12)
§ 51.047 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Village Board may promulgate water usage rules and regulations and
if any consumer fails to comply with any of the rules and regulations in force,
the village shall notify the consumer of the failure.
   (B)   If the consumer does not remedy the same as the rules provide and
within a reasonable time, the village shall have the right to discontinue
service.
   (C)   Except in case of nonpayment, emergency, necessity or as otherwise
provided, the village will not discontinue service for violation of any rule
until five days after notice has been given and the violation has not been
remedied.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-13)
§ 51.048 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   The consumer shall give the easements and rights-of-way as necessary
to the village and allow access for the purpose of construction, repair,
maintenance, meter reading, relocation or expansion of the water system.
   (B)   The necessity shall be determined by the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-14)
§ 51.049 USE OF WATER ON CONSUMER'S PREMISES.
   (A)   The village shall reserve the right to use the water from the
consumer's facilities at any time deemed necessary.
   (B)   No charge shall be made by the consumer for the use of the facilities
and no charge shall be made by the village for the water used by the village.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-15)
§ 51.050 REMOVAL OF METERS.
   (A)   All meters shall remain the property of the Department and may be
removed from the customer's premises at any time without notice for the purpose
of testing and repairing the same or upon discontinuance of service.
   (B)   Upon discovery of any unlawful act by any customer, his or her agent,
or employee herein prohibited or upon failure to comply with any other rules
and regulations of the Department, the service shall be disconnected.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-16)
§ 51.051 RULES TO BECOME PART OF CONTRACT.
   All of the rules and regulations concerning the use of the facilities of the
water system and the consumption of water shall be adopted and the same shall
become part of the contract with every water consumer and every water consumer
shall be considered to take water from the village, subject thereto and bound
thereby.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-17)
§ 51.052 INSTALLING AND MAINTAINING SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   The user shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of
service lines between the meter and the residence or business. The service
lines must be at least one inch in diameter, and must be installed at a minimum
depth of three feet. Service lines must have a minimum working pressure rating
of 160 psi at 73.4°F and must be constructed of one of the following types of
materials: copper, (Type K), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyethylene or
polybutylene. Service lines shall not be covered until they are inspected and
approved by the Superintendent.
   (B)   The user shall not connect any service line or any plumbing connected
with the service line to any other water source. The service line shall meet
all requirements of the State Environmental Protection Agency's rules and
regulations, the State Plumbing Code, and the regulations in this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-18)
§ 51.053 ALLOCATION OF MAINTENANCE COSTS BETWEEN USER AND VILLAGE.
   (A)   The village shall maintain and repair all water service pipes between
the water mains and the curb lines.
   (B)   Any repairs to service lines or taps between the water mains and the
sidewalk or property line shall be the village's expense.
   (C)   Any repairs or renewals of water service pipes between the property
line or curb line and extending to the owner's premises shall be made at the
sole expense of the consumer or owner of the premises.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-19)
§ 51.054 VILLAGE NOT LIABLE FOR INTERRUPTION OF SUPPLY.
   (A)   The village shall have the right to shut off the supply of water
whenever it is necessary to make repairs, improvements, enforce rules or for
any notice as circumstances allow, will be given to consumers but in
emergencies, the water may be shut off without notice. All hot water faucets
shall be left open during any shut-off to prevent damage to plumbing. The
necessary work will be done as rapidly as may be practical and whenever
feasible at such times as will cause the least inconvenience. The village shall
not be held responsible for or liable because of any shut-off of supply for any
direct or resultant damages to any person, company or consumer or to any pipe,
fixtures or plumbing.
   (B)   Water for steam boilers, gas engines, ice plants or other industrial
use, shall not be furnished by direct pressure from the mains, but only to
tanks holding ample reserve supply. Should any equipment be supplied direct
from mains, then in case of any shut-off of water, the village will not be held
responsible or liable for any direct or resulting damage because of interrupted
supply, insufficient pressure or otherwise.
   (C)   Whenever water mains, pipes and service connections are taken up,
shut-off or interfered with by reason of any village street improvements, the
village will endeavor to maintain service so far as reasonably possible, but
will not be directly or indirectly liable for any interruption, poor pressure
or damage of any kind either to consumers, adjacent or to other consumers
affected thereby.
   (D)   The village expressly stipulates with all its consumers and other
persons that it will not insure or be responsible or liable in any manner for
any losses, or damages, direct or resultant by reason of any fire, and all
water service furnished shall always be conditional upon acts of God,
inevitable accidents, fire, strikes, riots, war, or any other cause not within
the reasonable control of the village.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-20)
CROSS-CONNECTION ADMINISTRATION
§ 51.065 APPROVED BACKFLOW DEVICE.
   All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance
with the State Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 890. If, in accordance
with the State Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Inspector, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
supply system, the Inspector shall give notice to the water customer to install
such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his or her
own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in
accordance with the State Plumbing Code, State Environmental Protection Agency
and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made
of the approved devices upon installation and as required by the State Plumbing
Code, State Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-21)
§ 51.066 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit
to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply other than the regular public water supply enters the supply or
distribution system of the village, unless the private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply and the method of connection and use of the supply shall have been
approved by the Superintendent and the State Environmental Protection Agency.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.067 INVESTIGATIONS BY SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of commercial industrial and other properties served
by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to
the public water supply may exist.
   (B)   The surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record
and shall be repeated at least every two years or as often as the Inspector
shall deem necessary. Records of the surveys shall be maintained and available
for review for a period of at least five years.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-23)
§ 51.068 RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.
   (A)   The approved cross-connection control device Inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system for the purpose of verifying the
presence or absence of cross-connections and that the Inspector or his or her
authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system tor the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross-connection control inspection.
   (B)   On demand, the owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the Inspector any information which he or she may request
regarding the piping system or systems or water use on the property. The
refusal of the information when demanded shall, within the discretion of the
Inspector, be evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in
this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-24)
§ 51.069 NOTICE TO CUSTOMER; RECONNECT FEE.
   (A)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this chapter
is known to exist, and to take other precautionary measures as he or she may
deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply distribution mains. Water service to the property shall not be restored
until the conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and until a reconnection fee of $100 is paid to the
Village Clerk.
   (B)   Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
Inspector is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the
public water supply system exists. That action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without
notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the
reasonable opinion of the Inspector or the State Environmental Protection
Agency, that action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or
pollution of the public water supply.
   (C)   The public water supply, the Inspector or the agents or assigns shall
not be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which
may result from termination of the customer's water supply in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, whether or not the termination was with or without
notice.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-25)
§ 51.070 CONTAMINATIONS COST AND THE CONSUMER.
   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall bear the cost of clean-up of
the potable water supply system.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-26)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL CODE
§ 51.085 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
   (A)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety; and
   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-31)
§ 51.086 APPLICATION.
   These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public
potable water supply system of the village.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-32)
§ 51.087 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   (A)   The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of
the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-
siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service connection.
   (B)   If, in the judgment of the Superintendent or his or her authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent shall give notice
to the consumer to install the approved backflow prevention device at each
service connection to the premises.
   (C)   The consumer shall immediately install the approved device or devices
at his or her own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the
consumer to install the device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds
for discontinuing water service to the premises until the device or devices
have been installed.
   (D)   The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing and repair as required in §
51.095(D) for a period of at least five years. The Superintendent of Water may
require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report to the
village to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be
required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by an inspector
appropriately certified by the State Environmental Protection Agency.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-33)
§ 51.088 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The State Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes or streams or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted
or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over
which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The backflow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in the state must meet the standards of the State Plumbing
Code and the State Environmental Protection Agency.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer's
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a CUSTOMER'S WATER
SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A DOUBLE CHECK VALVE
ASSEMBLY and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check
valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word SEVERE as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the State Plumbing Code,
77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 890.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of applicable state laws and/or regulations.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping, from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. PLUMBING
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of the building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of applicable state laws
and/or regulations for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S).
      (1)   Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a consumer's potable water system.
      (2)   This includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
         (b)   Process waters;
         (c)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system
which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
         (d)   Cooling waters;
         (e)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
         (f)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and
         (g)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.
      (1)   All mains, pipes and structures through which water is obtained and
distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and
cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and
appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for
the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which
serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at least 25
persons at least 60 days per year.
      (2)   A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY or a NON-
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closed shut-off valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer's piping system. The SURVEY must be in written form, and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-34)
§ 51.089 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system, and the consumer's water system.
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Superintendent of water up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   (E)   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use.
   (F)   The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply, groundwater from
the area within the village limits of the Village of Argenta, Illinois, by the
installation or drilling of wells or by any other is hereby prohibited.
   (G)   No person, having his or her residence or place of business within the
territorial limits of the village shall be permitted to buy water from another
municipal corporation or other public utility for such residence or place of
business located in the village whenever the waterworks system of the village
is adjacent to his or her property.
   (H)   In all cases where a standard water main is now installed or hereafter
may be installed in any street, alley, public way or easement in the village,
no permit to dig a well will be granted.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-35) (Ord. 15-06-01-06, passed 6-1-2015)
§ 51.090 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency.
   (C)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-36)
§ 51.091 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
   (B)   On request of the Superintendent, or his or her authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's
premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Superintendent of Water
for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the
public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her
public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing
inspections must be conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage;
      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions;
      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions; and
      (4)   Testing and records:
         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer;
         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with ILCS Ch. 415,
Act 5, § 4(e);
         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs; and
         (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            1.   Date of each test;
            2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
            3.   Test results;
            4.   Repairs or servicing required;
            5.   Repairs and date completed; and
            6.   Serving performed and date completed.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-37)
§ 51.092 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
Part 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code Part 680. In addition,
an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line
to a consumer's water system serving premises where, in the judgment of the
Superintendent, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system
exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent of Water and
the source is approved by the State Environmental Protection Agency;
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or system containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Superintendent of Water;
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Superintendent of Water, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements it make which impractical to determine whether or not cross-
connections exist;
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey; or
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history or cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
Part 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code Part 653. In addition,
an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line
to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities unless the Superintendent of Water determines
that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
      (2)   Laboratories;
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations;
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (6)   Chemical plants;
      (7)   Metal plating industries;
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      (10)   Car washes;
      (11)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks; and
      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-38)
§ 51.093 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
51.092 above shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard;
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard; and
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under §
51.092 above of these regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap
separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
connected to the public water supply when.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; and/or
      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   (D)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-39)
§ 51.094 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on-site.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-40)
§ 51.095 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five days.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by division (A) above.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-41)
§ 51.096 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, the pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Superintendent, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-42)
§ 51.097 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice
to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any
backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed,
tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent,
or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a
low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and
maintained in working order.
   (B)   Any customer disputing the disconnection of water service as provided
herein shall have a right to a hearing, at which time he or she may be
represented in person and/or by legal counsel of his or her choosing. The
customer may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and request for
a hearing on the correctness of the water bill to the Superintendent. If a
hearing is requested as provided herein, the hearing shall be conducted by a
Hearing Officer as soon as practicable. The Hearing Officer shall be a designee
of the Board of Trustees. The Hearing Officer shall be authorized to order that
the customer service not be disconnected and shall have the authority to make a
final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (C)   Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated the conditions or defects in conformance with these
regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, and the required
reconnection fee is paid.
   (D)   Neither the village, the Superintendent, or its agents or assigns,
shall be liable to any customers of the village for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of the customer's water supply in
accordance with the terms of this subchapter, whether or not the termination of
the water supply was with or without notice.
   (E)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean-up of the potable water supply system.
   (F)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall
be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all
violation.
   (G)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in
addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the village for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the village by reason of the violation,
whether the same was caused before or after notice.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-43)
EXTENSION OF MAINS
§ 51.110 DETERMINATION OF WHO PAYS EXPENSE OF EXTENSION.
   (A)   The Village Board shall first determine if an extension of water main
is economically feasible based on the estimated cost of the extension and the
number of existing potential users that will use water along the extension. If
the extension is economically feasible, then the village may install and pay
the cost of the extension at the discretion of the Village Board.
   (B)   If the village elects not to pay the cost of extending the water main,
then the person or persons desiring water service shall install the extension
at their own personal expense upon written consent by the Village Board.
   (C)   The village shall not pay for any extensions to an undeveloped area,
such as a subdivision being developed, unless there are sufficient existing
residents or businesses to make the extension economically feasible. (See
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances for design requirements.)
(2001 Code, § 38-3-53)
§ 51.111 EASEMENTS.
   Applicants for main extensions shall deliver, without cost to the village,
permanent easements or right-of-way when necessary for the installation and
maintenance of the extensions or subsequent additions thereto. The village
shall not be obligated to authorize any construction until all requirements of
this chapter have been met.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-54)
§ 51.112 SIZE AND TYPE.
   (A)   The village reserves the right to determine and specify the diameter
and type of pipe required to provide the service requested, and subject to the
requirements of municipal authorities, its location within or without the
limits of a street.
   (B)   The village further reserves the right to install a main larger in
diameter than the main required to render the service requested, in which case,
the village will pay the difference in cost.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-55)
§ 51.113 TITLE.
   (A)   Title to all main extensions shall be vested in the village and the
village shall have the right to further extend any main installed in and to
other streets or premises without repayment or refund to any applicant.
However, the village reserves the right to consider extensions made at the
applicant's expense and without written agreement as service lines.
   (B)   Upon the lines, the village will set a meter at the beginning of the
extension to measure all water used and title to the line beyond the meter will
be vested in the customer who shall be responsible for maintenance and
replacement, when necessary.
(2001 Code, § 38-5-56)
§ 51.114 MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT.
   The village, at its own expense, shall maintain and, when necessary, replace
the village-owned mains used to supply water to its customers, and if adequate
service requires the reconstruction or replacement of the mains, the mains
shall be reconstructed or replaced by the village at its expense.
(2001 Code, § 38-3-57)
UTILITY RATES
§ 51.125 BUILDING UNIT DEFINED.
   All persons or families residing in a building under one roof, be it an
apartment or homes converted into more than one dwelling place, each family or
individual resident residing therein shall be deemed an individual customer or
the homes or apartments or dwellings shall be billed for at least one minimum
water and/or sewer account according to the number of families or individual
residents residing therein.
(2001 Code, § 38-4-1)
§ 51.126 REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water system
shall be deposited in the Water Fund.
   (B)   All the revenues and moneys shall be held by the Treasurer separate
and apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the village and all of the sum, without any deductions whatever, shall
be delivered to the Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the same,
or at such more frequent intervals as may, from time to time, be directed by
the Village Board.
   (C)   The Treasurer shall receive all the revenues from the water system and
all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of the system as the same
may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the account of the fund
designated as the "Water Fund of the Village".
   (D)   The Treasurer shall administer the fund in every respect in the manner
provided by ILCS Ch. 65. (See
Chapter 32 of this code of ordinances.)
(2001 Code, § 38-4-2)
§ 51.127 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the water system and at regular
annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an independent
auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the
water system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that water service
charges and capital amounts required to be recovered.
   (C)   In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons produced at the water plant for the
current fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year; and
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system.
(2001 Code, § 38-4-3)
§ 51.128 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The State Environmental Protection Agency, United States Environmental
Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the
village's system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state
grant.
(2001 Code, § 38-4-4)
§ 51.129 WATER RATES.
   (A)   There shall be established the following rates and charges for the use
of the water system of the village, based upon the amount of water consumed as
follows:
      (1)   First 1,000 gallons per month:$15 minimum charge effective July 1,
2022 then on January 1, 2023 the first 1,000 gallons per month shall be $16 as
minimum charge.
      (2)   For every additional 1,000 gallons per month the charge shall be
$15.50 effective July 1, 2022, beginning January 1, 2023 every additional 1,000
gallons of water shall be $17.
   (B)   Said rates shall apply both inside and outside corporate limits and to
any bulk water consumption. Said rates shall take effect March 22, 2019 and the
minimum charge shall automatically increase by 2.5% per annum thereafter.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 19-02-18 Ord01, passed 2-18-2019; Ord.
2022-06-20 Ord02, passed 6-20-2022; Ord. 23-01-17 Ord01, passed 1-17-2023)
§ 51.130 REVIEW OF WATER RATES.
   (A)   The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less
often than annually, by certified public accountants for the village in their
annual audit report.
   (B)   The water service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a
change in local capital costs or operation, maintenance and replacement costs.
(Ord. 03-11-17, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 51.131 APPEAL OF WATER RATES.
   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges shall be made available to a user within 30 days of receipt of a
written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the
computations thereof shall be remedied by the Village Board within 30 days
after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(Ord. 03-11-17, passed 11-17-2003)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FOR WATER SYSTEM SERVICE CONNECTION
   The undersigned, representing himself or herself as owner of the property
located at ___________________________________________________________, hereby
makes application for connection to the Water System of the village for the
property, and in consideration of the furnishing of the service covenants and
agrees as follows:
1.   I agree to abide by all rules and regulations as specified in and by the
ordinances of the village now in effect or enacted and passed from time to time
providing for the regulation of service furnished by the village, it is further
acknowledged and agreed that the undersigned, his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns shall pay all charges for connection
fees and water usage which shall become due as the result of the connecting of
the water mains and the furnishing of water service to the above property, and
that all such charges and fees for water service rendered to the property,
together with penalties, if any, and the costs of collection are to be
considered and become a charge against the property, the then so created to be
enforced in accordance with the ordinances of the village.
2.   All bills for the aforesaid charges are payable on or before the due date
following the receipt of the bill and. if not paid, are subject to a 10%
penalty.
3.   Each and all of the agreements and covenants herein contained shall run
with the real estate above described whose present owner is signatory to this
application.
4.   I understand that after making this application, I am to await
installation permit and instructions therewith.
5.   SERVICE CONNECTION FEE: $ ____ is enclosed herewith, payable to the
village.
6.   Permission is hereby granted to the village and its authorized
representatives at any reasonable time to enter the premises of the applicant
and any portion thereof for the purposes of inspecting all connections
appurtenant to the Water System.
CONNECTION MUST BE INSPECTED BEFORE BACKFILLING:
SIGNATURE: __________________________   _______________________________________
                     __________________________________________________
                     (STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
                     __________________________________________________
                     (VILLAGE, STATE AND ZIP CODE)
                     _________________________________________________
                     (TELEPHONE NUMBER)         (DATE)
_____________________________________________________________________________________
                     (
Do not fill in the      MAIL BILLS TO:   
(________________________________________
spaces to the right               (NAME)
if the information               (________________________________________
is the same as the               STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET
applicant above.               (
                     (_______________________________________
                     VILLAGE, STATE AND ZIP CODE
APPENDIX B: UTILITY MAIN EXTENSION CONTRACT
   AGREEMENT made and entered into this _________ day of
______________________, by and between the Utility System of the Village of
Argenta, Illinois, hereinafter called the "Utility Department" and
_____________________________________, hereinafter called the "Depositor".
   FIRST:   That the Utility Department contracts and agrees to have installed
by contract in accordance with its rules, utility mains as shown on the plat
thereof, and the specifications are attached hereto and made a part hereof.
   SECOND:   Bids having been taken and the lowest responsible bid having been
in the amount of $ _____, the Depositor agrees to deposit and does deposit
herewith the cost thereof.
               (A)   The lowest responsible bid      $ ____________.
               (B)   Engineering and Inspection Charge   $ ____________.
               (C)   TOTAL:             $_____________.
   THIRD:   Final costs to be adjusted up or down according to completed job
cost.
   FOURTH:   The ownership of the utility mains laid herein shall be at all
times in the Utility Department, its successors and assigns.
   FIFTH:   This Agreement shall be valid and binding on the Utility Department
only when signed by the Mayor and Clerk.
   SIXTH:   This Agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, executors,
administrators, successors or assigns of the respective parties.
EXECUTED in duplicate by the parties hereto on the date first above written.
                        UTILITY DEPARTMENT
                        VILLAGE OF ARGENTA
                        BY: ________________________________________
                           PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
ATTEST:
______________________________            _________________________________________
VILLAGE CLERK                  DEPOSITOR
WITNESSES:
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Use of public sewers required
   
52.02   Private sewage disposal
   
52.03   Building sewers and connections
   
52.04   Prohibitions
   
52.04   Protection of sewage works from damage
Administration Charge
   
52.20   Administration charge
   
52.21   Bills
   
52.22   Disconnection for non-payment
   
52.23   Effective date of rates
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Village of Argenta, or any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Village of Argenta or any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and an NPDES
permit has been issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for the
discharge.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the
Village of Argenta and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer
of the village, is hereby required at the owner’s expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within
90 days alter the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public
sewer is within 200 feet of the property line.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011)
§ 52.02 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
52.01(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent and a permit from the Macon County Health Department.
   (C)   The applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent when the
work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of written
notice by the Superintendent.
   (D)   No statement in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the Macon County Health
Department.
   (E)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the sewer within 90 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be completely pumped. The floor and walls shall be cracked or crumbled so
the tank will not hold water and the tank shall be filled with sand or soil. If
the tank is removed from the ground, the excavation shall be filled with soil.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011)
§ 52.03 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Argenta Sanitary District.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential, wastewater service, and
         (b)   Commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater
service.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or the owner’s agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Argenta Sanitary District. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Argenta Sanitary
District and Sanitary District of Decatur.
   (C)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the building. The owner shall
indemnify the Village of Argenta from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of building the sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings and/
or new connections to the sanitary sewer only when they are tested by a
licensed plumber and found to pass the building sewer testing standards of the
Illinois Plumbing Code.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Argenta Sanitary District.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with division (H) below, and discharged to the building
sewer.
   (H)   No person(s) shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the Argenta Sanitary District, or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of
Testing Materials, Water Environment Federation/ASCE Manual of Practice No. 9,
and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
   (J)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011)
§ 52.04 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or polluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes that will enter into any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      (2)   Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and
paper dishes, cup, milk containers, and the like, either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011)
§ 52.05 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment, which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011)
ADMINISTRATION CHARGE
§ 52.20 ADMINISTRATION CHARGE.
   The administration charge is to be used for billing services and supplies
provided by the Village of Argenta.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011)
§ 52.21 BILLS.
   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly. The owner of
the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is
furnished to the premises by the Argenta Sanitary District only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are
jointly and severally liable therefor to the Argenta Sanitary District.
   (B)   Bills for the sewer service shall be sent out by the Argenta Sanitary
District or the Village of Argenta on a monthly basis succeeding the period for
which the service is billed.
   (C)   All sewer bills are due and payable on the tenth day of the following
month. A penalty of 20% shall be added to all bills not paid by the tenth day
of the following month.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011)
§ 52.22 DISCONNECTION FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   If a sewer bill remains unpaid the following month, the user or owner will
receive another sewer bill for that month, along with a disconnection notice.
Both the delinquent portion and the current portion of the bill must be paid to
avoid having water and sewer service terminated. Water and sewer service will
be terminated 20 days after the due date for payment.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011; Ord. 15-08-17 Ord10, passed 8-17-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Disconnection provisions for water system, see §
51.015
§ 52.23 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES.
   The rates and administration charges shall be effective as of the next
fiscal year beginning May 1, 2011, and on bills to be rendered for the next
succeeding month being June, 2011, for monthly users.
(Ord. 11-09-19-11, passed 9-19-2011)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
         
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
         
72.   SNOWMOBILES
         
73.   GOLF CARTS/UTILITY TASK VEHICLES (UTVs)
         
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
         
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Illinois Vehicle Code; definitions adopted
   
70.02   Obedience to police
   
70.03   Scene of fire
   
70.04   Unauthorized signs
   
70.05   Interference with signs or signals
   
70.06   Advertising signs
   
70.07   County Highway No. 25
Stop and Through Streets
   
70.20   Through streets
   
70.21   One-way streets or alleys
   
70.22   Stop streets
   
70.23   Yield right-of-way streets
   
70.24   Posting signs
   
70.25   School crossing zones
Driving Rules
   
70.35   Illinois Vehicle Code; rules of the road adopted
   
70.36   Driving rules
   
70.37   Sound amplification system
   
70.38   Excessive noise; stopped vehicle
   
70.39   Wheels; excessive noise
   
70.40   Squealing tires
   
70.41   Excessive noise while driving
   
70.42   Compression release engine braking
Equipment of Vehicles
   
70.55   Illinois Vehicle Code; equipment of vehicles adopted
   
70.56   Muffler
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE; DEFINITIONS ADOPTED.
   The Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1, entitled "Title and
Definitions", as passed, approved and amended by the State General Assembly is
hereby adopted by the village, the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the corporate limits of the village.
(2001 Code, § 24-1-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq., 1-3-2, and
11-1-1
§ 70.02 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   Members of the Police Department, special police and auxiliary police
assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or in emergencies as public
safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police
officer. Except in cases of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
(2001 Code, § 24-2-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203
§ 70.03 SCENE OF FIRE.
   The Fire Department officer in command or any firefighter designated by him
or her may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing
traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to
an emergency call for so long as the Fire Department equipment is on the scene
in the absence of or in assisting the Police Department.
(2001 Code, § 24-2-2)
§ 70.04 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
street, any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, reflector or device
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in
view of any street, any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the
movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.
   (B)   No tree, bush or foliage of any kind shall be so placed, maintained,
allowed to remain, or be displayed upon either public or private property in
such a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the movement of traffic or
the effectiveness of any traffic-control device, sign or signal.
(2001 Code, § 24-2-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere
with any official traffic sign or signal.
(2001 Code, § 24-2-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the village any sign,
signal, marking or device other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the
Village Board or the State Department of Transportation, which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal in view of any street or highway, and it shall be
unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view any lawful
traffic-control device.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any flashing or rotating
beacon of light in view of any street or highway.
(2001 Code, § 24-2-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see
Chapter 93 and Title XIII of this code of ordinances
§ 70.07 COUNTY HIGHWAY NO. 25.
   The village agrees to take over the care and control of County Highway No.
25 within the village limits of the village subject to the following condition.
The County of Macon, Illinois, make certain repairs upon the highway to bring
it up to an acceptable standard prior to turning the highway over to the
village.
(Res. 125, passed 9-15-1975)
STOP AND THROUGH STREETS
§ 70.20 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by
ordinance as "through streets" are hereby declared to be through streets.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street
and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to
constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic
officer.
   (C)   See
Ch. 74, Sch. I for applicable through and stop streets.
(2001 Code, § 24-3-1)
§ 70.21 ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys
designated as one-way streets or alleys by ordinance, in any direction other
than that so designated. See
Ch. 74, Sch. V for designated one-way streets and alleys.
(2001 Code, § 24-3-2) (Ord. 05-11-07, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208
§ 70.22 STOP STREETS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance at one or more
entrances thereto and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so
obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at the intersection is
controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event, the directions of the
police officer shall be complied with. See
Ch. 74, Sch. I for designated stop intersections.
(2001 Code, § 24-3-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302
§ 70.23 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, in obedience to the
sign, shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and if
required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
   (B)   After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as
to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across
or within the intersection. See
Ch. 74, Sch. III.
(2001 Code, § 24-3-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.24 POSTING SIGNS.
   Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop and yield right-
of-way streets, all one-way streets and alleys, and all stop intersections.
(2001 Code, § 24-3-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-304
§ 70.25 SCHOOL CROSSING ZONES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a school crossing
sign where one is erected pursuant to this chapter and the State Vehicle Code.
   (B)   The school crossing zones shall be listed in
Ch. 74, Sch. II.
(2001 Code, § 24-3-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
DRIVING RULES
§ 70.35 ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE; RULES OF THE ROAD ADOPTED.
   The State Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11, entitled "Rules of the
Road", as passed, approved and amended by the State General Assembly is hereby
adopted by the village and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within
the corporate limits of the village except for the following changes, deletions
and omissions:
   (A)   Omissions. Omit ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-207, 11-208.1, 11-208.2,
11-209.1, 11-302, 11-303, 11-310(f), 11-313, 11-401 to and including 11-416,
11-500 to and including 11-502, 11-602, 11-603, 11-604, 11-606(b), 11-608, 11-
1419 and 11-1422.
   (B)   Changes and additions.
      (1)   Change ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904(a) to read: "Preferential
right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop or yield signs as
authorized by this Code."
      (2)   Change ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416(a) to read: "Any person who
shall willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any
other person in lawfully driving and traveling upon or along any highway within
this state or who shall offer for barter or sale, merchandise on said highway
so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a violation of this Code."
(2001 Code, § 24-4-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.36 DRIVING RULES.
   (A)   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker.
      (1)   Traffic-control signals, signs or markers owned by the village
shall be possessed only by the village's employees, police officers,
contractors or their employees engaged in highway construction, contract or
work upon the roadways or public ways approved by the village.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to possess
such a traffic-control signal, sign or marker without lawful authority.
   (B)   General speed restrictions. The speed limits on the various streets
shall be approved by the Village Board. See
Ch. 74, Sch. IV.
   (C)   U-turns prohibited. No driver of a vehicle shall make a "U-turn" on
any street or at any intersection of any streets in the village where they are
prohibited.
(2001 Code, § 24-4-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-313 and 11-604
§ 70.37 SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   No driver or owner of any motor vehicle shall operate or permit
operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside the
vehicle from 75 or more feet when the vehicle is being operated or parking upon
a street, highway or roadway unless the system is being operated to request
assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.
   (B)   This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
(2001 Code, § 24-4-3) (Ord. 05-11-1, passed 11-21-2005) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.38 EXCESSIVE NOISE; STOPPED VEHICLE.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when the motor vehicle is stopped,
unreasonably accelerate the engine thereof with the gears of the vehicle in
neutral, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(2001 Code, § 24-4-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.39 WHEELS; EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall when the motor vehicle is stopped,
accelerate the engine with the gears of the vehicle in neutral and while so
accelerating the engine, shift the gears of the vehicle into a forward or
reverse movement, thereby causing an unreasonably loud noise with the drive
wheels of the vehicle.
(2001 Code, § 24-4-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.40 SQUEALING TIRES.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall cause the wheels of the vehicle to spin
violently, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(2001 Code, § 24-4-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-505
§ 70.41 EXCESSIVE NOISE WHILE DRIVING.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when operating the vehicle, accelerate
the vehicle or rapidly stop the vehicle causing an unreasonably loud noise.
(2001 Code, § 24-4-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.42 COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKING.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated at or upon any public
highway located within 1,000 feet of any area of the Village of Argenta that
contains any single-family or multi-family dwelling units, any compression
engine brake on any vehicle for any reason. For purposes of this section, a
COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKE is defined as any mechanical exhaust device
designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle by converting
engine power to compressed air which results in additional, excessive, loud or
explosive noise from such vehicle.
(Ord. 15-05-18-05, passed 5-18-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES
§ 70.55 ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE; EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES ADOPTED.
   The State Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq., entitled
"Equipment of Vehicles", as passed, approved and amended by the State General
Assembly, is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated as fully as if set
out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within
the corporate limits of the village.
(2001 Code, § 24-5-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-605, 12-605.1 and 12-
605.2
§ 70.56 MUFFLER.
   (A)   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless the vehicle is
provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the use of a
cut-out is prohibited.
   (B)   No muffler shall cause an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(2001 Code, § 24-5-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-602
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of §
70.37 shall be fined $250.
   (C)   (1)   Settlement of fines:
         (a)   Tickets issued for violations of the following sections of the
Motor Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5) may be settled as herein provided:
            1.   6-1 - Overtime parking.
            2.   6-4(A)(1)(a) - Stopping, standing or parking on the roadway
side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of street.
            3.   6-4(A)(1)(b) - Stopping, standing or parking on a sidewalk.
            4.   6-4(A)(1)(c) - Stopping, standing or parking within an
intersection.
            5.   6-4(A)(1)(d) - Stopping, standing or parking on a crosswalk.
            6.   6-4(A)(1)(e) - Stopping, standing or parking/safety zone.
            7.   6-4(A)(1)(f) - Stopping, standing or parking alongside or
opposite street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would create obstruction.
            8.   6-4(A)(3)(a) - Parking within 50 feet of nearest rail of
railroad crossing.
            9.   6-4(A)(3)(b) - Parking where official signs prohibit parking.
            10.   6-4(A)(3)(c) - Parking in yellow zones.
            11.   6-4(E) - Improper parking.
 
             Fine After 7 Days After 21 Days
Each offense $10  $20          $40
 
         (b)   Tickets issued for violations of the following sections of the
Motor Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5) may be settled as herein provided:
            1.   6-2 - Parking for sale or repair.
            2.   6-4(A)(1)(g) - Stopping, standing or parking on any bridge or
other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
            3.   6-4(A)(1)(h) - Stopping, standing or parking on any railroad
tracks.
            4.   6-4(A)(1)(i) - Stopping, standing or parking at any place
where official signs prohibit stopping.
            5.   6-4(A)(1)(0) - Stopping, standing or parking on any
controlled-access highway.
            6.   6-4(A)(1)(k) - Stopping, standing or parking in the area
between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers.
            7.   6-4(A)(1)(l) - Stopping, standing or parking in any alley that
is open and maintained.
            8.   6-4(A)(2)(a) - Standing or parking in front of a public
driveway.
            9.   6-4 (A)(2)(b) - Standing or parking within 15 feet of a fire
hydrant.
            10.   6-4 (A)(2)(c) - Standing or parking within 20 feet of a
crosswalk.
            11.   6-4(A)(2)(d) - Standing or parking within 30 feet upon the
approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control-
signal located at the side of the roadway.
            12.   6-4(B) - Moving vehicle not lawfully under a person's
control.
 
             Fine After 7 Days After 21 Days
Each offense $25  $50          $75
 
         (c)   Tickets issued for violations of the following sections of the
Motor Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5) may be settled as herein provided:
            1.   6-3 - Parking on private property without the consent of
property owner.
            2.   6-4(A)(2)(e) - Standing or parking within 20 feet of the
driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly
sign-posted).
            3.   7-2 - Abandoned vehicle within village.
            4.   7-3 - Leaving of partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked
or junked vehicle on street.
            5.   7-5 - Storing unlicensed vehicle.
 
             Fine After 7 Days After 21 Days
Each offense $50  $75          $100
 
         (d)   Tickets issued for violations of the following sections of the
Motor Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5) may be settled as herein provided:
            1.   6-4(D)(1) - Oversized vehicle parking public/private property.
            2.   6-4(D)(2) - Trailer parking.
 
             Fine After 7 Days After 21 Days
Each offense $75  $100         $150
 
         (e)   If any ticket is not settled as provided in this section, fines
shall be imposed upon conviction, as elsewhere set out herein.
      (2)   Enforcement through legal action.
         (a)   Any person, firm or corporation in whose name a citation
alleging a violation enumerated in this code is issued, and who shall neglect
or refuse to pay the citation after written notice, shall be indebted to the
village in the amount specified herein, unless and until a complaint is filed
in circuit court.
         (b)   In the event the village brings legal action for the enforcement
of any provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code herein, the village may assess a
legal fee of $50 if settlement is reached prior to initial court appearance,
and $75 if settlement or judgment is obtained after a court appearance. This
fee shall be in addition to any other fines, fees, penalties or costs as
provided by this division (C) or state law.
         (c)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $75 and no more
than $750.
   (D)   Any person found to be in violation of §
70.42 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75 and not more than $750.
(Ord. 05-11-1, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 06-22-06-01, passed 12-19-2005; Ord. 14-
05-18-05, passed 5-18-2015)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Time limit parking
   
71.02   Parking for sale or repair
   
71.03   Private property
   
71.04   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
   
71.05   Parking for the disabled
   
71.06   Towing cars away
   
71.07   Prima facie proof
   
71.08   Snow removal area
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 TIME LIMIT PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of
the amount of time designated by law and so posted.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-1) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 PARKING FOR SALE OR REPAIR.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except when emergency
repairs are necessary.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-2) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-3) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-
control devices, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 20 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad tracks;
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any controlled-access highway;
         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers; or
         (l)   In any alley that is open and maintained.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle (whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers) and where to do so would reduce
the usable roadway to less than 18 feet:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted); or
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking.
      (3)   Parking a vehicle (whether occupied or not, except temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers):
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking; or
         (c)   In yellow zones.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
   (C)   
Chapter 74, Sch. I and
Sch. II shall list all applicable no-parking zones.
   (D)   Truck and oversized vehicle parking prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall park any motor vehicle which has a width greater
than seven feet, a height greater than eight feet, or a length greater than 20
feet or any Second Division vehicle licensed for an F classification or higher,
as defined by § 3-815 of the State Motor Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
3-815):
         (a)   Upon any residential street, alley or public way except for the
purpose and time period reasonably necessary to load and unload the same;
notwithstanding, the parking of the vehicle shall be prohibited after the hour
of 10:00 p.m. or before the hour of 6:00 a.m. on any day.
         (b)   Upon public or private property within the village with the
motor running for a continuous period in excess of 30 minutes.
      (2)   The parking of detached trailers or detached semi-trailers is
prohibited on streets, alleys and public ways at any time.
   (E)   No persons shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway in any other
manner than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of
traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the
edge of the regularly established grass or curb line delineating the side of
the road, except that upon those streets which have been marked or signed for
angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by
those marks or signs. Where parking spaces are delineated by painted lines on
the pavement, it shall be unlawful to stand or park a vehicle other than
entirely within the parking space so delineated.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-4) (Ord. 05-12-19-04, passed 12-19-2005) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-815
§ 71.05 PARKING FOR THE DISABLED.
   (A)   Designated parking. Certain parking spaces within the confines of the
village shall be designated for use by disabled persons' vehicles only and will
be posted with appropriate signs to that effect.
   (B)   Use of designated disabled parking. The use of designated disabled
parking locations, duly posted and signed shall to that effect, be open to any
vehicle which bears the appropriate disabled state registration plate issued by
the Secretary of State for the state, or a valid disabled parking permit issued
by another governmental agency or which bears a disabled card furnished in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.1 et seq. furnished by the
village.
   (C)   Application for state disabled registration plate. The issuance of an
state disabled motor vehicle registration plate shall be made with the
Secretary of State of the state at any facility provided and approved for that
purpose by the Secretary of State.
   (D)   Penalty. Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter in a posted
designated disabled space which does not bear a state disabled registration
plate, or a valid disabled parking permit issued by another governmental agency
of a village disabled registration card will be ticketed and the vehicle will
be removed in accordance with departmental policies and in accordance with ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302. The registered owner of the vehicle as ascertained
by the registration plates of the vehicle will be presumed to be in control of
the vehicle and will be fined $200. The same registered owner will be held
liable for the cost of removal of the vehicle and must pay that cost, plus
storage charges, if any, prior to the release of the vehicle.
   (E)   Disabled parking areas. Those places designated as "disabled parking
spaces" are listed in
Chapter 74, Sch. III.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.2 and 11-1301.3
§ 71.06 TOWING CARS AWAY.
   The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are
hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car, boat, trailer or other vehicle illegally
parked in any place where the parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic
hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the
movement of any emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in any
public street or other public place for a period of 24 hours.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-6)
§ 71.07 PRIMA FACIE PROOF.
   The fact that a vehicle which is illegally parked or operated is registered
in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that the person
was in control of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-7)
§ 71.08 SNOW REMOVAL AREA.
   The following streets are hereby determined to be snow removal areas on
which the parking or leaving of any vehicle shall be prohibited after a
snowfall of at least two inches or more and prior to the completion of snow
removal: North Street between E. Walnut and East Water Street and on Elm Street
between Pennsylvania Street and 160 E. Elm Street.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-8) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation of §
71.08 shall be towed by the proper authorities and the registered owner shall
be liable to the village for all expenses incurred by the village as a result
of the towing and/or any storage of the vehicle and in addition thereto shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $75 nor more than $750, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each day a violation occurs or continues.
(2001 Code, § 24-6-8)
CHAPTER 72: SNOWMOBILES
Section
   
72.01   Operation
   
72.02   Regulation
§ 72.01 OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles as defined and regulated by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 40, §§ 1-1 et seq.
may be operated on all village streets and highways under village control and
jurisdiction.
(2001 Code, § 24-8-1)
§ 72.02 REGULATION.
   All snowmobiles shall be operated and licensed in accordance with all state
statutes and regulations in effect from time to time including, but not limited
to, those regulations promulgated by the State Department of Conservation.
(2001 Code, § 24-8-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 73: GOLF CARTS/UTILITY TASK VEHICLES (UTVs)
Section
   
73.01   Policy
   
73.02   Definitions
   
73.03   Operation authorized
   
73.04   Permits
   
73.05   Permit applications
   
73.06   Required equipment
   
73.07   Unlawful acts
   
73.08   Revocation or modification of permits
   
73.09   Appeal
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted in the interest of public safety and
transportation efficiency.
   (B)   All persons operating golf carts/UTVs must be observant of, and
attentive to, the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers,
other motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians.
   (C)   All persons who operate or ride golf carts/UTVs on village roadways do
so at their own risk and peril.
   (D)   The village disclaims any liability under any theory of liability for
permitting golf carts/UTVs to be operated on village roadways.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any terms
not otherwise defined in this chapter shall have the meaning as set forth in
the State Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.
   GOLF CART. A gas or electric-powered vehicle specifically designed and
intended for the purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf
clubs or maintenance equipment while engaged in the playing of golf,
supervising the play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a
public or private golf course.
   OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS. One person per bucket seat, three people per bench
seat, not to exceed four occupant maximum per golf cart/UTV, with all persons
seated while golf cart/UTV is in motion.
   REQUIRED EQUIPMENT. Golf cart/UTV equipment as defined in §
73.06 below.
   UTILITY TASK VEHICLE (UTV).  Any motorized off-highway device designed to
travel primarily off-highway, 64 inches or less in width, having a
manufacturer’s dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less, traveling on four or more
non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for
steering control.
   VILLAGE ROADWAYS. The portion of a village road, street, alley or right-of-
way improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel or parking
located within the village, with a speed limit of 30 mph or less. The term
VILLAGE ROADWAY does not include national or state highways or any portion of
State Route 48, any village sidewalk or village parks (other than parking
lots).
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 09-07-20-09, passed 7-20-2009; Ord.
14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.03 OPERATION AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The operation of motorized golf carts/UTVs by permit is hereby
authorized on village roadways. During all times of operation, a golf cart/UTV
shall have its headlights and tail lamps lighted and shall follow the occupancy
requirements, speed limit restrictions, and all other provisions herein. Golf
carts/UTVs must yield right-of-way to all overtaking vehicles at all times.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall authorize use of golf carts/UTVs on any
federal or state highway. Operation of motorized golf carts/UTVs is subject to
all applicable provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes and the ordinance
herein.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.04 PERMITS.
   (A)   Authorization to operate a motorized golf cart/UTV on village streets
is by permit only.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued by the Village Inspector under the direction
and authority of the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Any person holding a valid, current driver's license may apply for a
permit.
   (D)   All permits shall expire annually on January 1, unless renewed. The
fee for a permit shall be $10.
   (E)   The Village Board of Trustees may amend the permit fee from time to
time by resolution or ordinance.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.05 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Each application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart/UTV on the
village roadways shall include:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   Other information as the Village Board of Trustees may from time to
time require;
   (C)   The Village Inspector shall conduct an inspection of the golf cart/UTV
prior to issuance of the permit to assure that the golf cart/UTV has all
required equipment; and
   (D)   In addition, each permit application, whether for an initial permit or
a renewal, shall be accompanied by evidence of a liability insurance policy.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.06 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   The following equipment is required on any motorized golf cart/UTV during
operation upon the roadway of any street:
   (A)   A slow moving vehicle emblem securely mounted on the rear of the golf
cart/UTV as required of other slow moving vehicles by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
12-709;
   (B)   A rearview mirror, properly mounted on the golf cart/UTV so as to
reflect to the operator a view of the street for a distance of at least 200
feet to the rear of the golf cart/UTV;
   (C)   Brakes and brake lights;
   (D)   Steering apparatus;
   (E)   A headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front;
   (F)   A tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100 feet from
the rear; and
   (G)   Turn signals; front and rear.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.07 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a golf cart/UTV on village roadways
where:
   (A)   The operator does not have in his possession a valid, current and un-
revoked, state-issued driver’s license;
   (B)   The operator does not have in his possession a valid, current and un-
revoked permit issued to the operator by the village;
   (C)   The motorized golf cart/UTV is being operated during inclement weather
or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other condition, or at
any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on
the roadway at a distance of 500 feet;
   (D)   The motorized golf cart/UTV is not equipped with the required
equipment described under §
73.06 above;
   (E)   The operator does not have proof of current insurance coverage as
provided in §
73.05 above;
   (F)   The operator fails to observe all traffic laws and regulations, except
when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to golf carts/UTVs;
   (G)   The operator is under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other
intoxicating compounds, or any combination thereof, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, §§ 11-500 through 11-502;
   (H)   The operator does not have the headlight and tail lamps lighted;
   (I)   The motorized golf cart/UTV is traveling at a speed greater than 20
mph;
   (J)   The golf cart/UTV is being operated on sidewalks or village parks,
other than parking lots;
   (K)   The golf cart/UTV is being operated on a federal or state highway,
other than to cross State Route 48 at intersections in a path 90 degrees to
State Route 48;
   (L)   The golf cart/UTV is being operated on a street with a speed limit of
over 30 mph;
   (M)   The motorized golf cart/UTV is being operated in an unsafe or reckless
manner; or
   (N)   Operation of the golf cart/UTV violates any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.08 REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   A permit issued under §
73.05 above may be revoked or modified at any time by the village if there is
evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart/UTV
on the village roadways.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the commission of any of the violations
described in §
73.06 above constitutes evidence that the violator cannot safely operate a
motorized golf cart/UTV on the village roadways.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.09 APPEAL.
   Any person whose permit to operate a motorized golf cart/UTV has been
revoked may appeal the revocation to the Village Board of Trustees. Appeals
shall be submitted in writing to the Board of Trustees within 20 days of the
date of revocation.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $120 nor more than $300 for each offense. In
addition to the aforementioned penalties, all court costs, which shall include
all costs incurred by the village in prosecuting said case, shall be
recoverable from anyone convicted of a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-04-06-02, passed 4-6-2009; Ord. 14-12-01-9, passed 12-1-2014)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Stop intersections
   
II.   School crossing zones
   
III.   Yield right-of-way intersections
   
IV.   Speed zones
   
V.   One-way streets
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
70.22, the following streets are hereby designated as stop intersections, to-
wit:
   (A)   One- and two-way stops.
Through Street Stop Street (Direction)
Through Street  Stop Street (Direction)
Broadway Street Main Street (North Bd.)
E. East Street  All School Driveways
Elm Street      Kenwood Street (South Bd.)
Elm Street      Melrose Street (South Bd.)
Elm Street      Short Street (Both)
Elm Street      Warren Street (Both)
Main Street     All school driveways
Main Street     Claremont Street (East Bd.)
Main Street     Park Street (Both)
Main Street     Prairie Street (Both)
Main Street     Water Street (Both)
 
Through Street Stop Street (Direction)
Through Street Stop Street (Direction)
North Street   Broadway Street (Both)
North Street   Claremont Street (Both)
North Street   East Street (Both)
North Street   Elm Street/Water Street Alley (West Bd.)
North Street   I.C.R.R. Alley (West Bd.)
North Street   Park Street (West Bd.)
North Street   Prairie Street (Both)
North Street   Walnut Street (Both)
North Street   Water Street (West Bd.)
Route 48       All intersecting streets
 
   (B)   Two- and three-way stops.
 
Through Street           At Stop Street (Direction)
Walnut Street (East Bd.) At Main Street (North Bd.)
 
   (C)   Four-way stops.
 
East Street    Main Street
Elm Street     North Street
Kenwood Street Prarie Street
Kenwood Street W. East Street
Kenwood Street Walnut Street
Main Street    Elm Street
Warren Street  E. East Street
 
(2001 Code, Schedule A) (Ord. 11-03-08-03, passed 3-08-2011)
SCHEDULE II. SCHOOL CROSSING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
70.25, the following school crossing zones are hereby established, to-wit:
   (A)   Northwest corner of 565 North Main;
   (B)   Northwest corner of 500 North Main; and
   (C)   East side of 500 North Main to control northbound traffic.
(2001 Code, Schedule B)
SCHEDULE III. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
70.23, the following streets are hereby designated as one- or two-way yield
right-of-way intersections, to-wit:
Street/Direction Location
Street/Direction            Location
Charles Street (North Bd.)  E. Broadway Street
Charles Street (South Bd.)  E. Park Street
Emerson Street (North Bd.)  E. Broadway Street
Emerson Street (South Bd.)  E. Park Street
Hannabell St. (North Bd.)   E. Broadway Street
N. Short Street (North Bd.) E. Walnut Street
S. Short Street (South Bd.) E. Water Street
W. Walnut Street (Both)     Melrose Street
 
(2001 Code, Schedule C)
SCHEDULE IV. SPEED ZONES
   In accordance with the provisions of §
70.36(B), the following streets are hereby designated as speed zones, to-wit:
 
Street             Limit  Location
County Highway #25 40 mph From south of State Route 48 to the corporate limits
Elm Street         30 mph Entire street
Main Street        30 mph Entire street
North Street       30 mph Entire street
 
(2001 Code, Schedule D) (Ord. passed - -)
SCHEDULE V. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The following streets within the village are designated as one-way streets:
 
Street        Traffic   Location
Claremont St. Eastbound Between Kenwood Street on the west and North Street on
                        the east
 
(Ord. 05-11-07, passed 11-7-2005)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   No parking zones
   
II.   Limited parking zones
   
III.   Handicapped parking zones
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
71.04(C), the following streets are hereby designated as no parking zones, to-
wit:
Street/Side Location
Street/Side               Location
Main Street (east)        From Walnut Street south 100 feet
Main Street (east)        From Walnut Street north 100 feet
Main Street (west)        From Walnut Street north 100 feet
Main Street (west)        From Walnut Street south 100 feet
North Street (east)       From Walnut Street south 30 feet
North Street (west)       From 171 N North Street, north 50 feet
South North Street (west) From Elm Street south 30 feet
Walnut Street (north)     From North Street west 30 feet
West Elm Street (south)   From North Street west 30 feet
 
(2001 Code, Schedule E)
SCHEDULE II. LIMITED PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
71.04(C), the following streets are hereby designated as no parking zones, to-
wit:
 
Street/Side             Location
Broadway Street (north) In the 200 block
Main Street (east)      Between signs
Main Street (west)      Between signs
North Street (west)     Post office for 15 minutes maximum
Walnut Street (both)    Between signs
 
(2001 Code, Schedule F)
SCHEDULE III. HANDICAPPED PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   Generally. In accordance with the provisions of §
71.05(E), the following streets and areas are hereby designated as handicapped
parking spaces, to-wit:
 
Street/Lot          Location
Community building  As marked
West Prairie Street Church parking; two spaces as marked
 
(2001 Code, Schedule H)
   (B)   Handicapped child signs. In accordance with the provisions of §
70.24, the following streets and areas are hereby designated as handicapped
child areas.
 
Location                                Two-Way Yield Signs as Marked
                                        The driver of a vehicle approaching a
                                        "Handicapped Child Area" sign, in
                                        obedience to that sign, shall slow down
Corner of 250 East Elm Street and North to a speed reasonable for the existing
Short Street                            conditions and if required for safety
                                        to stop. After slowing or stopping, the
                                        driver shall proceed with caution if
                                        there is no immediate hazard.
 
(2001 Code, Schedule (A))
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ANIMALS
         
91.   FAIR HOUSING
         
92.   GENERAL NUISANCES
         
93.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
94.   FIREWORKS
         
95.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
         
96.   RADIO; COMMUNICATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Regulations
   
90.01   Short title
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Injury to property
   
90.04   Manner of keeping
   
90.05   Keeping barking dogs and crying cats
   
90.06   Cruelty to animals prohibited
   
90.07   Exhibiting wild or vicious animals
   
90.08   Health hazard
   
90.09   Limitation on number of dogs and cats kept
   
90.10   Animals in the village
Dogs
   
90.25   Definitions
   
90.26   Dogs to be inoculated; tags affixed to collars
   
90.27   Inoculation performed by licensed veterinarian; issuance
   
90.28   Duration of inoculation
   
90.29   Specifications for tag
   
90.30   Exhibition of certificate upon request
   
90.31   Strays
   
90.32   Impoundment of dogs running at large or unlicensed dogs; citation of
owner or keeper
   
90.33   Notice and citation to owner or keeper of impoundment
   
90.34   Obstructing Animal Control Warden
   
90.35   Impoundment of dogs which have bitten persons
   
90.36   Impoundment
   
90.37   Charges for impoundment
   
90.38   Village pound designated
   
90.39   Disposition of dogs deemed nuisances
   
90.40   Female dog with other dogs
Vicious and Dangerous Dogs
   
90.55   Definitions
   
90.56   Unlawful to maintain
   
90.57   Owner's responsibility
   
90.58   Dog permitted to leave premises
   
90.59   Injunction
   
90.60   Liability of owner or dog attacking or injuring person
   
90.61   Right of entry; inspections
Urban Chickens
   
90.75   Definitions
   
90.76   Permit required
   
90.77   Number and type of chickens allowed
   
90.78   Zoning districts allowed
   
90.79   Non-commercial use only
   
90.80   Enclosures
   
90.81   Odor and noise impacts
   
90.82   Predators, rodents, insects and parasites
   
90.83   Feed and water
   
90.84   Waste storage and removal
   
90.85   Chickens at large
   
90.86   Unlawful acts
   
90.87   Nuisances
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 90.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Animal Control Code.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-1)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The veterinarian licensed by the state and appointed pursuant
to this code or his or her duly authorized representative.
   ANIMAL. Any animal, other than humans, which may be affected by rabies.
   ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN. Any person appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
Village Board to perform duties enforcing this chapter or any animal control
official appointed and acting under authority of the County Board.
   AT LARGE. Any dog shall be deemed to be AT LARGE when it is off the property
of its owner and not under the control of a responsible person.
   CAT. Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
   CONFINED. Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his or her
agent, to an escape-proof building or other enclosure away from other animals
and the public.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of
the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by
its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe possesses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or companion animal or a dog that, without
justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury.
   DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. The Department of Agriculture of the state.
   DOG. All members of the family Canidae.
   HAS BEEN BITTEN. Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person
or animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection of an anti-rabies vaccine approved
by the Department.
   KENNEL. Any establishment wherein any person engaged in the business of
boarding, building, buying, grooming, letting for hire, training for a fee or
selling dogs; provided, however, that the ownership of dogs which are a part of
the household shall not constitute the operation of a kennel. KENNEL shall not
include any animal control facility, any kennel, pound or training facility
operated by any subdivision of local, state or federal government, any humane
society or veterinary hospital.
   LEASH. A cord, rope, strap or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength
to keep the dog or other animal under control.
   LICENSED VETERINARIAN. A veterinarian licensed by the state in which he or
she engages in the practice of veterinary medicine.
   OWNER. A person having a right of property in a dog or who keeps or harbors
a dog, or who has a dog in his or her care, or who acts as its custodian, or
who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him
or her.
   POUND. Any facility approved by the Administrator and licensed as such by
the Department of Agriculture for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and
used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs or
other animals.
   REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. A printed form prescribed by the Department for
the purpose of recording pertinent information as required by the Department
under this code.
   RESTRAINT. A dog is under RESTRAINT within the meaning of this code if he or
she is controlled by a leash; at "heel" beside a responsible person; within a
vehicle being driven or parked on the streets; or within the property limits of
his or her owner or keeper.
   SHADE. Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June
through September.
   SHELTER. As it applies to dogs, a moisture-proof structure of suitable size
to accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat, made of durable
material with a solid floor raised at least two inches from the ground and with
the entrance covered by a flexible, wind-proof material. The structure shall be
provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide insulation
and protection against cold and dampness.
   UNOWNED STRAY DOG. Any dog not on the premises of the owner or keeper or
under control by leash or other recognized control methods, and which does not,
at that time and place, bear a current rabies inoculation tag issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, by means of which, by reference to records
of current registration certificates, the Administrator or his or her deputies
or assistants may determine the name and address of the owner or keeper
thereof, or some other means of identification from which the Administrator or
his or her deputies or assistants may directly determine the name and address
of the owner or keeper thereof.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten any
person or which has behaved in such a manner that the person who harbors the
animal knows or should reasonably know that the animal is possessed of
tendencies to attack or bite persons.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake or other
reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other animal or any bird of
prey which can normally be found in the wild state.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 510, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.
§ 90.03 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the dog or cat
to go upon any sidewalk, parkway or private lands or premises without the
permission of the owner of the premises and break, bruise, tear up, crush or
injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any manner
whatsoever, or to defecate thereon, and the owner thereof shall be liable.
   (B)   Waste products; accumulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit a dog or cat to be on property, public or private, not owned or
possessed by that person unless the person has in his or her immediate
possession an appropriate device for scooping excrement and an appropriate
depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle located upon
property owned or possessed by that person. This section shall not apply to a
person who is visually or physically handicapped.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-3) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 MANNER OF KEEPING.
   (A)   Pens, yards or runs. All pens, yards, runs or other structures wherein
any animal is kept shall be of a construction so as to be easily cleaned and
kept in good repair.
   (B)   Fences. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall
be securely constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair
and shall not be allowed to become unsightly.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-4) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 KEEPING BARKING DOGS AND CRYING CATS.
   (A)   Harboring. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep or
harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which
habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, or in a manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the
neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Those dogs and cats are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   Petitions of complaint. Whenever any person shall complain to the
Police Department that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat
which habitually cries or howls is being kept by any person in the village, the
Police Department shall notify the owner of the dog or cat that a complaint has
been received and that the person should take whatever steps are necessary to
alleviate the howling, yelping or crying.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-5) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Cruelty to animals prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture,
abuse or cruelly beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by an act, omission or
neglect, cause or inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering,
injury or death to any animal, whether the animal belongs to that person or to
another, except that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals. Any unwanted animals should be delivered to the County
Animal Control Facility for proper disposal.
   (B)   Food and shelter.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any animal to
fail, refuse or neglect to provide the animal with food, potable water, shade
or shelter, or to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such animal in hot,
stormy, cold or inclement weather, or to carry any such animal in or upon any
vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner.
      (2)   The terms used in this section shall comply with §
90.02 above.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-6) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 EXHIBITING WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on
his or her premises any wild or vicious animal as described in this chapter for
display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This
section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions or circuses.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any
wild animal as a pet, unless a permit is granted by the Department of Natural
Resources of the state.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal
within the village. Any animal which is found off the premises of its owner may
be seized by any police officer or humane officer and upon establishment to the
satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction of the vicious character of
the animal, it may be killed by a police officer or humane officer; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to animals under the control of a
law enforcement or military agency nor to animals which are kept for the
protection of property, provided that the animals are restrained by a leash or
chain, cage, fence or other adequate means from contact with the general public
or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or implied permission of
the owner or occupant.
   (D)   The licensing authority may issue a temporary permit for the keeping,
care and protection of any infant animal native to this area which has been
deemed to be homeless.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-7) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 HEALTH HAZARD.
   The Mayor shall have the power to issue an order prohibiting the keeping of
any animal, fowl or bird which is deemed to be a nuisance or pose a health
hazard to the general public.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-8) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS KEPT.
   (A)   Nuisance.
      (1)   The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats in the village
for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many instances, is
detrimental to the healthful and comfortable life for which those areas were
created.
      (2)   The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats is, therefore,
declared to be a public nuisance. The terms "dog" and "cat" shall be construed
as provided in §
90.02 above.
   (B)   Limitation; exception.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than
five dogs and/or five cats within the village, with the exception that a litter
of pups, a litter of kittens or a portion of a litter may be kept for a period
of time not exceeding five months from birth.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment
wherein dogs or cats are kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes or
boarding.
   (C)   Kennels. In the areas where kennels are permitted, no kennel shall be
located closer than 200 feet to the boundary of the nearest adjacent
residential lot.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-9) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 ANIMALS IN THE VILLAGE.
   (A)   Certain prohibitions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter no
person shall keep within the village any cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine,
goats, chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese or other livestock.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply in areas of the village that
are zoned agricultural in nature, nor shall this section apply to livestock
brought in to the village for the purpose of being shipped out of the village.
   (C)   Powers of Police Chief. The Police Chief shall have the power to issue
an order prohibiting the keeping of any animal, fowl or bird which is deemed to
pose a health hazard to the general public.
   (D)   Rabbits. No more than two rabbits may be kept per household, providing
the rabbits are properly housed in a suitable cage and are not allowed to run
at large.
(2001 Code, § 3-1-10) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5
DOGS
§ 90.25 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this subchapter shall comply with §
90.02 above, unless otherwise provided in this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-1)
§ 90.26 DOGS TO BE INOCULATED; TAGS AFFIXED TO COLLARS.
   (A)   (1)   Each calendar year or at intervals as may hereafter be
promulgated by the Department of Agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog
four months or more of age shall cause the dog to be inoculated against rabies.
      (2)   The owner or keeper of the dog shall cause a serially numbered tag
evidencing the inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by the
dog.
   (B)   Every owner or keeper of a dog, regardless of age, shall cause the dog
to wear a collar or harness and shall affix thereto a metallic or other
suitable tag inscribed with the name, address and phone number, if any, of the
owner or keeper of the dog.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-2)
§ 90.27 INOCULATION PERFORMED BY LICENSED VETERINARIAN; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The inoculation of dogs required by §
90.26(A) above shall be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice
his or her profession in this state.
   (B)   Upon performing the inoculation, the veterinarian shall issue to the
owner or keeper a certificate showing that fact and shall also deliver to the
owner or keeper a metallic or other suitable tag to be attached to the collar
or harness of the dog, which tag shall also certify to the fact of the
inoculation against rabies.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-3)
§ 90.28 DURATION OF INOCULATION.
   The inoculation performed under the provisions of §
90.27 above shall be effective until the expiration of the calendar year in
which the vaccination was performed or the expiration of that period of time as
may be promulgated by the Department of Agriculture.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-4)
§ 90.29 SPECIFICATIONS FOR TAG.
   The tag issued under the provisions of §
90.27 above shall be in a form as shall be determined by the Department of
Agriculture.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-5)
§ 90.30 EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE UPON REQUEST.
   At any reasonable time upon request of any member of the Police Department
or village employee, the owner or keeper of any unmuzzled dog shall exhibit his
or her certificate issued under the provisions of §
90.27 above, showing the inoculation against rabies of any dog owned or
controlled by him or her.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-6)
§ 90.31 STRAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any animal to run at large in the village at any
time and the owner of the animal shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §
10.99. Any animal running at large may be impounded as hereinafter provided.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-7) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.32 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE OR UNLICENSED DOGS; CITATION OF
OWNER OR KEEPER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the employees and officers of the Police
Department as shall be designated for that purpose by the Mayor to take up and
impound in a place as may be designated and set apart for that purpose, any dog
found running at large or unlicensed in the village, contrary to any of the
provisions of this chapter or other regulations of the village.
   (B)   When dogs are found running at large or unlicensed and their ownership
is known to the designated employee(s), the dogs may be impounded at the
discretion of the employee(s), but the employee(s) may cite the owner of the
dogs to answer charges of violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Any dog permitted to run at large within the village is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
   (D)   Any impounded dog which shall not be redeemed within seven days shall
be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the pound keeper.
   (E)   The Village Board may establish a reasonable fee by motion for each
day that a dog is housed in the pound.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-8)
§ 90.33 NOTICE AND CITATION TO OWNER OR KEEPER OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   In case of impounding and where the owner or keeper of the dog is disclosed
by any tax or license tag worn by it or is otherwise known to the officers
impounding the same, the designated official shall make reasonable attempts to
contact the owner, informing him or her of the impounding of his or her dog and
shall cite the owner or keeper of the dog to answer charges of violation of
this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-9)
§ 90.34 OBSTRUCTING ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN.
   Any person(s) who shall bring any dog into the village for the purpose of
causing the same to be impounded or any person who shall resist, hinder or
molest the Animal Control Warden or police officer while engaged upon the
duties imposed upon them by this chapter or any person who shall break into the
dog pound and release or deliver any dog therefrom without having first paid
the fees herein specified, upon conviction of any part of this chapter shall be
fined according to §
10.99.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-10)
§ 90.35 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS.
   (A)   Any dog which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person so as
to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be immediately taken, impounded and kept
separated from other dogs for ten days. If, during that period, the dog
develops symptoms of illness, a veterinarian shall be called to diagnose its
condition. If the symptoms disclosed are such as to indicate the presence of
rabies, the dog shall be destroyed in such a manner, however, as to preserve
intact the head, which shall thereupon be detached and immediately sent to the
diagnostic laboratory of the Department of Agriculture. In case the dog cannot
be safely taken up and impounded, it may be shot, care being taken to preserve
the head intact which shall thereupon be immediately detached and be delivered
to the diagnostic laboratory of the Department of Agriculture.
   (B)   If, at the expiration of the ten days, no symptoms of rabies have
developed in the dog so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the owner upon
payment of the redemption fees and charges specified by this chapter; provided,
however, that in case any dog so impounded for biting a person shall have
previously bitten any person, the dog shall be humanely destroyed by the pound
keeper. After having been notified that his or her dog has bitten or otherwise
injured any person, the owner or keeper thereof shall not, under any
circumstances, permit the animal to be at large unless securely muzzled.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-11)
§ 90.36 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Those persons charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter may employ any
method found practical and humane in capturing and impounding any dog found
running at large.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-12)
§ 90.37 CHARGES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   Prior to the release of an impounded animal the owner of any animal
impounded under the provisions of this subchapter must pay in full all charges,
costs and expenses incurred by the village or by any person or organization
which keeps the animal during the period it is impounded, in addition to any
fine or penalty assessed by reason of a violation of this chapter and pursuant
to §§
90.55 through
90.61 below.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-13)
§ 90.38 VILLAGE POUND DESIGNATED.
   The Village Board designates the county pound as the official village pound.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-14)
§ 90.39 DISPOSITION OF DOGS DEEMED NUISANCES.
   Any dog which may, in any manner, continually disturb the quiet of any
person or neighborhood or shall destroy or in any manner injure any animal,
plant, shrub or other property not on the premises of its owner or keeper is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the dog shall be taken up and impounded
and may be redeemed or disposed of in the manner provided for under this code.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-15)
§ 90.40 FEMALE DOG WITH OTHER DOGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any female dog, while in heat, to consort with any
other dog or dogs in an indecent manner in any place of public view within the
village and the owner of the animal shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in §
10.99.
(2001 Code, § 3-2-16) Penalty, see §
90.99
VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS
§ 90.55 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed or
unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places.
   ENCLOSURE.
      (1)   A fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog within the
enclosure.
      (2)   The ENCLOSURE shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure.
   FOUND TO BE VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   The county veterinarian, Animal Control Warden or a law enforcement
officer has conducted an investigation and made a finding in writing that the
dog is a vicious dog as defined below and, based on that finding, the county
veterinarian or an Animal Control Warden has declared in writing that the dog
is a vicious dog; or
      (2)   The circuit court has found the dog to be a vicious dog as defined
in below and has entered an order based on that finding.
   IMPOUNDED. Taken into the custody of the public pound in the village or town
where the vicious dog is found.
   VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property.
      (2)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals.
      (3)   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a
generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks
upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or
with special equipment.
      (4)   Any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation.
      (5)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a "dangerous dog"
upon three separate occasions.
      (6)   No dog shall be deemed VICIOUS if it bites, attacks or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement
or guard duties. VICIOUS DOGS shall not be classified in a manner that is
specific as to breed.
      (7)   If a dog is found to be a VICIOUS DOG, the dog shall be subject to
enclosure.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-1) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.56 UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which
has been found to be a vicious dog unless the dog is at all times kept in an
enclosure.
   (B)   The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure
are:
      (1)   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary
care for the dog; or
      (2)   To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a
tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length, and
shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the
dog.
   (C)   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the Animal Control Warden, or
the police and shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction
by lethal injection.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.57 OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the
circuit court in the county in which the animal was impounded within seven
working days, the dog may be humanely dispatched. A dog found to be a vicious
dog shall not be released to the owner until an Animal Control Warden approves
the enclosure as defined in this section.
   (B)   No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-3) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.58 DOG PERMITTED TO LEAVE PREMISES.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by permitting
any dangerous dog or other animal to leave the premises of its owner when not
under control by leash or other recognized control methods. Guide dogs for the
blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, and
sentry, guard or police-owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, an
attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as
expected. To qualify for exemption under this section, each dog shall be
currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with this chapter. It shall
be the duty of the owner of the exempted dog to notify the village of changes
of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the
village advised of the location where the dog will be stationed. The Animal
Control Warden shall provide Police and Fire Departments with a categorized
list of the exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify the departments of any
address changes reported to him or her.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-4) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.59 INJUNCTION.
   (A)   The Village Attorney, or any citizen of the village in which a
dangerous dog or other animal exists, may file a complaint to enjoin all
persons from maintaining or permitting such, to abate the same, and to enjoin
the owner of the dog or other animal from permitting same to leave his or her
premises when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
   (B)   Upon the filing of a complaint in the circuit court, the court, if
satisfied that this nuisance may exist, shall grant a preliminary injunction
with bond in an amount as the court may determine enjoining the defendant from
maintaining the nuisance. If the existence of the nuisance is established, the
owner of the dog or other animal shall be in violation of this subchapter, and
in addition the court shall enter an order restraining the owner from
maintaining the nuisance and may order that the dog or other animal be humanely
dispatched.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-5) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.60 LIABILITY OF OWNER OR DOG ATTACKING OR INJURING PERSON.
   If a dog, or other animal, without provocation, attacks or injures any
person who is peaceably conducting himself or herself in any place where he or
she may lawfully be, the owner of the dog or other animal is liable in damages
to the person for the full amount of the injury sustained.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-6) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.61 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTIONS.
   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and making
inspections hereunder, the Animal Control Warden, or an authorized
representative, or any officer of the law may enter upon private premises to
apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a dangerous dog or other animal, or a
dog or other animal thought to be infected with rabies. If, after request
therefor, the owner of the dog or other animal shall refuse to deliver the dog
or other animal to the officer, the owner shall be in violation of this
subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 3-3-7) Penalty, see §
90.99
URBAN CHICKENS
§ 90.75 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHICKEN. A member of the subspecies gallus gallus domesticus, a domesticated
fowl.
   PERMITTED TRACT OF LAND. The tract of land as identified by the application
upon which a permit is granted for keeping chickens pursuant to this
subchapter.
   PERMITEE. An applicant who has been granted a permit to raise, harbor or
keep chickens pursuant to this subchapter.
   PERMITTING OFFICER. The Mayor or his or her designee.
   SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING. Any building that contains only one dwelling unit
used, intended, rented, leased, let or hired to be occupied for living
purposes.
   TRACT OF LAND. A property or a zoned lot that has one single family dwelling
located on that property or zoned lot.
   URBAN CHICKEN. A chicken kept on a permitted tract of land pursuant to a
permit issued under this subchapter.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 90.76 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall raise, harbor or keep chickens within
the Village of Argenta limits without a valid permit obtained from the
Permitting Officer under the provisions of this subchapter. Permits are issued
for a period of one year and must be renew annually.
   (B)   Application. In order to obtain a permit, an applicant must submit a
completed application on forms provided by the Permitting Officer, and pay all
fees required by this subchapter. The application fee is $10.
   (C)   Requirements. The requirements to the receipt of a permit include:
      (1)   All requirements of this subchapter are met;
      (2)   All fees, as may be provided for from time to time the Board of
Trustee resolution, for the permit are paid in full;
      (3)   All judgments in the village’s favor and against the applicant have
been paid in full;
      (4)   The tract of land to be permitted shall contain on one single
family dwelling occupied and used as such by the permittee; and
      (5)   The applicant has provided notice to the residents of all
immediately adjacent dwellings of the applicant’s intent to obtain a permit.
   (D)   Issuance of permit. If the Permitting Officer concludes as a result of
the information contained in the application that the requirements for a permit
have been met, then the Officer shall issue the permit.
   (E)   Denial, suspension, revocation, non-renewal. The Permitting Officer
may deny, suspend, revoke, or decline to renew any permit issued for any of the
following grounds:
      (1)   False statements on any application or other information or report
required by this section to be given by the applicant;
      (2)   Failure to pay any application, penalty, reinspection or
reinstatement fee required by this section or Board of Trustee resolution;
      (3)   Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in
the time specified in the notice;
      (4)   Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation/
remediation plan by the Permitting Officer, or designee; or
      (5)   Failure to comply with any provision of this subchapter.
   (F)   Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a
permit shall be in writing, delivered by ordinary mail or in person to the
address indicated on the application. The notification shall specify reasons
for the action.
   (G)   Effect of revocation, and the like. When an application for a permit
is denied, or when a permit is revoked, the applicant may not re-apply for a
new permit for a period of one year from the date of the denial or revocation.
   (H)   Appeals. No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked, or not renewed
without notice and an opportunity to be heard is given the applicant or holder
of the permit. In any instance where the Permitting Officer has denied,
revoked, suspended, or not renewed a permit, the applicant or holder of urban
chicken may appeal the decision to the Mayor, or designee other than the
Permitting Officer within ten business days of receipt by the applicant or
holder of the permit of the notice of the decision. The applicant or holder of
the permit will be given an opportunity for a hearing. The decision of the
officer hearing the appeal, or any decision by the Permitting Officer which is
not appealed in accordance with this subchapter shall be deemed final action.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.77 NUMBER AND TYPE OF CHICKENS ALLOWED.
   (A)   The maximum number of chicken allowed is six per tract of land
regardless of how many dwelling units are on the tract.
   (B)   Only female chickens (hens) are allowed.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013; Ord. 15-03-16-03, passed 3-16-2015)
§ 90.78 ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED.
   Permits will be granted only for tracts of land located in residential (R1)
districts as identified on the current Zoning Map on file with the Village of
Argenta.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 90.79 NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY.
   A permit shall not allow the permittee to engage in chicken breeding or
fertilizer production for commercial purposes.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 90.80 ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times.
Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during non-
daylight hours.
   (B)   Enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor-free, neat and sanitary
condition at all times.
   (C)   Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens must provide adequate
ventilation and adequate sun and shade and must be impermeable to rodents, wild
birds and predators, including dogs and cats.
   (D)   Henhouses and chicken tractors.
      (1)   Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be designed to provide safe
and healthy living condition forthe chickens with a minimum of four square feet
per bird while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the
neighborhood.
         (a)   A henhouse or chicken tractor shall be enclosed on all sides and
shall have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at
night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird proof
wire of less than one inch opening.
         (b)   The materials used in making a henhouse or chicken tractor shall
be uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of
the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any
windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap,
waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited. Henhouses and
chicken tractors shall be well maintained.
      (2)   Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens shall only be located
in the rear yard or side yard and within the required setbacks as required by
the Zoning Code.
      (3)   Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens must be located at
least ten feet from the property line and at least 25 feet from any adjacent
residential dwelling, church, school or place of business.
   (E)   Any enclosed chicken pen shall consist of sturdy wire fencing. The pen
must be covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.81 ODOR AND NOISE IMPACTS.
   (A)   Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related
disturbances shall not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted
tract of land.
   (B)   Noise from chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the boundaries of
the permitted tract of land at the property boundaries to disturb persons of
reasonable sensitivity.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.82 PREDATORS, RODENTS, INSECTS AND PARASITES.
   The permittee shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of
predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites.
Chickens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in
unhealthy conditions to human habitation may be removed by an Animal Control
officer.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 90.83 FEED AND WATER.
   Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times.
The feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds and predators.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 90.84 WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL.
   All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof
or lid over the entire structure. No more than three cubic feet of manure shall
be stored on the permitted tract of land. All other manure not used for
composting or fertilizing shall be removed. The henhouse, chicken tractor,
chicken pen and surrounding area must be kept free from trash and accumulated
droppings. Uneaten feed shall be removed in a timely manner.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 90.85 CHICKENS AT LARGE.
   The permittee shall not allow the permittee’s chickens to roam off the
permitted tract of land. No dog or cat or other domesticated animal which kills
a chicken off the permitted tract of land will, for that reason alone, not be
considered a dangerous or aggressive animal or the village’s responsibility to
enforce its animal control provisions.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 90.86 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in violation of
any provision of this subchapter or any other provision of the Village of
Argenta Municipal Code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of property
to allow chickens to be kept on the property in violation of the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (C)   No person shall keep chickens inside a single family dwelling unit,
multi-family dwelling unit(s) or rental unit.
   (D)   No person shall keep a rooster.
   (E)   No person shall keep chickens on a vacant or uninhabited tract of
land.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.87 NUISANCES.
   Any violation of the terms of this subchapter that constitutes a health
hazard or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is
a nuisance and may be abated under the general nuisance abatement provisions of
the Village of Argenta Code §
92.03.
(Ord. 13-07-01-08, passed 7-1-2013)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Settlement of fines. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
code, citations issued for violations of the following sections of this chapter
may be settled as follows:
 First Offense Second Offense Third Offense
                                                                 First        Second       Third
                                                                 Offense      Offense      Offense
Running at large/returned to owner; §                           $75          $100         Impoundment
90.31
Running at large/not returned to owner /impounded; §            County animal control fines apply
90.31
Running at large/dangerous or vicious dog; §                    Impounded, with running at large fees
90.31                                                            and county animal control fines to
                                                                 apply
No rabies tag/name tag; §                                       $25          $30          $50
90.26
No rabies vaccination/registration; §                           $50          $75          Impoundment
90.26
Noise nuisances; §                                              Verbal       $25          $40
90.05                                                            warning
                                                                 Veterinarian Veterinarian
                                                                 or           or
                                                                 impoundment  impoundment
                                                                 if no        if no        Impoundment/
                                                                 vaccination; vaccination: other fines
Bite or bite report;                                             see above    see above    and
90.35                                                            (other fines (other fines penalties as
                                                                 may apply as may apply as provided by
                                                                 consistent   consistent   this code
                                                                 with the     with the
                                                                 provisions   provisions
                                                                 of this      of this
                                                                 code)        code)
Transport/handling for impoundment                               $25 per trip
Injury to property/nuisance; §                                  Verbal       $25          $75
90.03                                                            warning
                                                                 Verbal
Improper enclosure for dangerous/vicious dog §§                warning with
90.55 through                                                    appropriate  $100         $150
90.61                                                            offense fees
                                                                 if
                                                                 applicable
                                                                                           $100+
                                                                 Verbal       $50 +        possible
Husbandry; §                                                    warning or   possible     impoundment
90.06                                                            impoundment  impoundment  and court
                                                                                           case with
                                                                                           fees
Unsanitary pet area/excess amount of fecal material in area; §  Verbal       $25          $75
90.03                                                            warning
*Settlement of fine is contingent upon vaccination and registration being obtain within 48 hours of the
time the citation is issued. Failure to obtain a vaccination and registration within 48 hours
constitutes non-compliance and subjects violator to second offense and $75 fine. Failure to obtain a
vaccination and registration within 48 hours of the second offense constitutes a third offense and will
result in impoundment.
 
   (B)   Enforcement through legal action.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation in whose name a citation alleging a
violation enumerated in this code is issued, and who shall neglect or refuse to
pay the citation after written notice, shall be indebted to the village in the
amount specified herein, unless and until a complaint is filed in circuit
court.
      (2)   In the event the village brings legal action for the enforcement of
any provisions herein, the village may assess a legal fee of $75 if settlement
is reached prior to initial court appearance, and $125 if settlement or
judgment is obtained after a court appearance. This fee shall be in addition to
any other fines, fees, penalties or costs as provided by this section, or state
law.
      (3)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $75 and no more
than $750.
(2001 Code, § 3-4-17) (Ord. passed 3-19-2007)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Short title
   
91.02   Purpose and declaration of policy
   
91.03   Construction
   
91.04   Definitions
   
91.05   Discriminatory terms
   
91.06   Refusals to deal
   
91.07   Withholding housing
   
91.08   Advertisements
   
91.09   Advertisements; causing or permitting
   
91.10   Signs and notices
   
91.11   Exemptions
   
91.12   Limitations
   
91.13   Refusals of offers
Specific Provisions
   
91.30   Signs and notices
   
91.31   Discrimination in lending
   
91.32   Refusals to deal in lending
   
91.33   Coverage
   
91.34   Representation
   
91.35   Other violations
   
91.36   Complaints
   
91.37   Hearings by Village Board
   
91.38   Enforcement
   
91.39   Remedies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Fair Housing Code of
the village.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-1)
§ 91.02 PURPOSE AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village and the purpose of
this subchapter, in the exercise by the village of its police and regulatory
powers for the protection of the public safety for the health, morals, safety
and welfare of the persons in and residing in the village, and for the
maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the
village, to secure to all persons living or desiring to live in the village a
fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy housing without
discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-2)
§ 91.03 CONSTRUCTION.
   This subchapter shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms
and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy stated in §
91.02 above and the special purposes of the particular provision involved.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-3)
§ 91.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the village
which is arranged, designed or used as a home, residence or living quarters of
one or more individuals.
   HOUSING. Includes any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the
village, which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied as a home, residence or living quarters of one or more
individuals, groups or families, and includes any vacant land within the
village which is zoned and intended to be used for the construction of any such
building or structure.
   LEASE. Includes sublease, assignment or rent (or rental), and includes any
contract to do any of the foregoing.
   LENDING INSTITUTION. Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association, other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans
or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying or
selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by
title to a security interest in real estate, but shall not include any
religious institution or organization nor any charitable or educational
organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or
organization.
   NATIONAL ORIGIN. Includes the national origin of an ancestor.
   OWNER. Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any dwelling or housing, or who holds legal or
equitable title to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real
estate cooperative which owns any dwelling or housing.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, legal representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated
organizations, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and
fiduciaries.
   PURCHASE. Includes any contract to purchase.
   REAL ESTATE AGENT. Any real estate broker, and real estate salesperson, and
any other person who, as employee or agent or otherwise, engages in the
management or operation of any dwelling or housing.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person licensed as a real estate broker in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or required
thereby to be so licensed.
   REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON. Any person licensed as a real estate salesperson in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or required
thereby to be so licensed.
   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION. The purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any
dwelling or housing, and an option to do any of the foregoing.
   SALE. Includes any contract to sell, exchange or to convey, transfer or
assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real estate.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 775, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.
§ 91.05 DISCRIMINATORY TERMS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any owner or other person to sell or lease a dwelling or housing on terms,
conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race,
color, religion or national origin.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.06 REFUSALS TO DEAL.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any owner or other person to refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform
any sale or lease of any dwelling or housing, because of the race, color,
religion or national origin of any party, to the sale or lease, or of any
member of the family of any such party, or of any person using or occupying or
intending to use or occupy the dwelling or housing, or of any person using or
occupying any dwelling or housing in the area in which the dwelling or housing
is located.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.07 WITHHOLDING HOUSING.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any owner, real estate agent or other person to represent to any person
that any dwelling or housing is not available for inspection, purchase, sale,
lease or occupancy when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to withhold
housing from any person because of race, color, religion or national origin.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.08 ADVERTISEMENTS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any owner or other person to publish or circulate a statement,
advertisement or notice of an intention to sell or lease any dwelling or
housing in a manner that is unlawful under this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.09 ADVERTISEMENTS; CAUSING OR PERMITTING.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any owner, real estate agent or other person to cause any person to
circulate or publish a statement, advertisement or notice that the owner or
other person intends to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that
is unlawful under this chapter, or to consent thereto.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.10 SIGNS AND NOTICES.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any owner or other person to post or erect, or cause any person to post or
erect, any sign or notice upon any dwelling or housing, indicating an intent to
sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this
chapter.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.11 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not apply to the rental of any room or dwelling
unit in any owner-occupied dwelling which consists of more than one but less
than five dwelling units.
   (B)   As used herein, the term DWELLING UNIT means one or more rooms which
are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family or one
individual.
   (C)   The term owner includes the spouse or any lineal descendant or
ancestor of the owner.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-11)
§ 91.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall require an owner to offer property to
the public at large before selling or renting it, providing he or she complies
with all other provisions of this subchapter. Nor shall this subchapter be
deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenants or
buyers for any reason other than religion, race, color or national origin.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall require an owner to offer property
for sale or lease or to show his or her property to any person if that person
is not negotiating for the purchase or lease of the property in good faith.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-12)
§ 91.13 REFUSALS OF OFFERS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any real estate agent or other person to refuse to receive or to fail to
transmit a bona fide offer for the purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any
dwelling or housing because of the race, color, religion or national origin of
the person making the offer.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
§ 91.30 SIGNS AND NOTICES.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any real estate agent or other person to post or erect, or cause or permit
any person to post or erect, any sign or notice upon any dwelling or housing,
other person, indicating an intent to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in
a manner that is unlawful under this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.31 DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any lending institution, in making, agreeing to make, arranging or
negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds for the purpose of financing the
purchase or sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation
or repair of any dwelling or housing, to offer, seek or agree to terms,
conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race,
color, religion or national origin.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.32 REFUSALS TO DEAL IN LENDING.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any lending institution to refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform
any agreement to lend or guarantee the loan of funds for the purchase, sale,
construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any
dwelling or housing because of the race, color, religion or national origin of
any party to the agreement or of any member of the family of any such party, or
of the residents of the area in which the dwelling or housing is located.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.33 COVERAGE.
   This subchapter shall apply, respectively, to every real estate agent who,
within the village, performs any function as the real estate agent but does not
maintain an office or place of doing business within the village, and this
subchapter applies to every real estate agent and lending institution who
maintains an office of place of doing business within the village; provided,
however, that the provisions of this subchapter shall not be so construed as to
prohibit a real estate broker or real estate agent on behalf of the owner, from
inquiring into and reporting upon qualifications of any prospective buyer or
tenant with respect to limitations or exclusions other than those of race,
color, religion or national origin.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-19)
§ 91.34 REPRESENTATION.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any person, for the purpose of inducing any other person to enter into a
real estate transaction with the person, his or her principal or his or her
agent:
   (A)   To represent that a change has occurred, will occur or may occur with
respect to the race, color, religion or national origin in composition of the
owners or occupants in any block, neighborhood or area in which the dwelling or
housing (which is the subject of the real estate transaction) is located; or
   (B)   To represent that a change with respect to the race, color, religion
or national origin in the composition of the owners or occupants in any block,
neighborhood or area will result in lowering of property values, or in an
increase in criminal or anti-social behavior, or in a decline in the quality of
schools, in the block, neighborhood or area.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.35 OTHER VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this subchapter
for any person:
   (A)   To aid, abet, incite or coerce a person to engage in unlawful housing
practice;
   (B)   Willfully to interfere with the performance of a duty or the exercise
of a power by the village Board or one of its members or representatives; or
   (C)   Willfully to obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the
provisions of this subchapter or an order issued thereunder.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.36 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provisions of
this subchapter may file with the Village Board a written, verified complaint
setting forth his or her grievance.
   (B)   The complaint shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the complaint;
      (2)   The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is
brought, if known to the complainant; and
      (3)   The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this
subchapter; and the complaint shall state the name and address of all persons
believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged facts.
   (C)   After the filing of any complaint, the Village Board shall serve a
copy of the complaint on the party or parties charged.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-22)
§ 91.37 HEARINGS BY VILLAGE BOARD.
   (A)   (1)   The hearing shall be conducted by the Village Board upon due and
reasonable notice to all parties.
      (2)   The Village Board shall have power to administer oaths and to take
sworn testimony.
      (3)   Any party alleged to have violated this subchapter shall be
entitled to be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call
witnesses in his or her own behalf and to cross-examine witnesses.
   (B)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Village Board shall render the
complainant a decision.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-23)
§ 91.38 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Village Board shall be empowered to order any person found to be
engaging in an unfair housing practice to cease and desist from the practice,
upon such terms as shall be necessary and proper for the enforcement of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The Village Board shall be empowered at the conclusion of proceedings
held under this section, to direct the Village Attorney to do any one or more
of the following:
      (1)   To institute and prosecute proceedings to enforce, against any
person found in violation of this subchapter, the fine provided for in §
91.39;
      (2)   To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction:
         (a)   For an order restraining any person from violating any provision
of this subchapter; and
         (b)   For such other or further relief as may seem to the court
appropriate for the enforcement of this subchapter and the elimination of
violations hereof.
      (3)   To petition or institute proceedings with the Department of
Registration and Education for the purpose of causing the Department to revoke,
suspend or refuse to renew the license granted by the Department to any real
estate broker or real estate salesperson found to have violated any provision
of this subchapter; and/or
      (4)   In the case of any unlawful housing practice or violation of this
subchapter by any person in the course of performing under a contract or
subcontract with the state or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or
with the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, to
petition or institute proceedings with the contracting agency for the purpose
of causing it to terminate the contract or any portion thereof, either
absolutely or on condition of compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (C)   The Village Board may issue the cease and desist orders and may direct
that action by the Village Attorney, as shall be necessary for the enforcement
of this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-24)
§ 91.39 REMEDIES.
   Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of this
subchapter who has exhausted the remedies provided in §
91.38 above of this subchapter may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
for appropriate relief from the violation, including:
   (A)   An order compelling compliance with this subchapter;
   (B)   An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have violated
any provision of this subchapter from the sale, lease, exchange, transfer,
conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing which is the subject of the
violation;
   (C)   An order requiring specific performance of any contract for the sale,
lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing
or any person who, in violation of this subchapter, refuses or fails to perform
the contract;
   (D)   Compensatory damages; and
   (E)   Other and further relief as may seem to the court appropriate for the
enforcement of this subchapter and the elimination of violations hereof.
(2001 Code, § 13-1-25)
CHAPTER 92: GENERAL NUISANCES
Section
Generally
   
92.01   Specific nuisances enumerated
   
92.02   Nuisances detrimental to health generally
   
92.03   Notice to abate
   
92.04   Abatement of nuisance by village; unknown owner
   
92.05   Failure to comply with notice
Weeds
   
92.15   Definition
   
92.16   Height
   
92.17   Notice
   
92.18   Service of notice
   
92.19   Abatement
   
92.20   Lien
   
92.21   Payment
   
92.22   Foreclosure of lien
Garbage and Debris
   
92.35   Accumulation prohibited
   
92.36   Notice to person
   
92.37   Service of notice
   
92.38   Abatement
   
92.39   Lien
   
92.40   Payment
   
92.41   Foreclosure of lien
Building as Nuisance
   
92.55   Building condition; nuisance
   
92.56   Time limit
   
92.57   Notification
   
92.58   Dangerous and unsafe building defined
   
92.59   Standards for repair, vacation or demolition
   
92.60   Dangerous and unsafe buildings; nuisances
   
92.61   Duties of the Attorney
   
92.62   Liens
   
Appendix A:   Nuisance Violation Notice
   
Appendix B:   Notice; Unlawful Growth
   
Appendix C:   Unlawful Garbage and/or Debris
   
Appendix D:   Letter of Notice; Dangerous and Unsafe Building
GENERALLY
§ 92.01 SPECIFIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be against the health, peace
and comfort of the village, for any person, firm or corporation within the
limits of the village to permit the following; but the enumeration of the
following nuisances shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Filth. To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any
place, to the prejudice of others;
   (B)   Deposit of offensive materials. To throw or deposit any offal or other
offensive matter, or the carcass of any dead animal in any water course, lake,
pond, spring, well or common sewer, street or public highway;
   (C)   Corruption of water. To corrupt or render unwholesome, or impure, the
water of any spring, river, stream, well, public or private, pond or lake, to
the injury or prejudice of others;
   (D)   Highway encroachment. To obstruct or encroach upon public highways,
private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places and ways to burying
places;
   (E)   Manufacturing gunpowder. To carry on the business of manufacturing
gunpowder, nitroglycerine or other highly explosive substances, or mixing or
grinding the materials therefor, in any building within 300 feet of any
building erected at the time the business may be commenced;
   (F)   Powder magazines. To establish powder magazines near incorporated
towns, at a point different from that appointed according to law by the
corporate authorities of the town, or within 800 feet of any occupied dwelling
house;
   (G)   Noxious odors. To erect, continue or use any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals, or of the public;
   (H)   Unlawful advertising. To advertise wares or occupations by painting
notices of the same on, or affixing them to fences or other private property,
or on rocks or other natural objects without the consent of the owner, or if in
the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities;
   (I)   Bodies of water. To create any condition, through the improper
maintenance of a swimming pool or wading pool, or by causing any action which
alters the condition of a natural body of water, or ground surface so that it
harbors mosquitoes, flies or other animal pests that are offensive, injurious
or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public;
   (J)   Storing debris. To store, dump or permit the accumulation of debris,
refuse, garbage, trash, including but not limited to, tires, buckets, cans,
wheelbarrows, garbage cans or other containers in a manner that may harbor
mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents, nuisance birds or other animal pests that
are offensive, injurious and dangerous to the health of individuals or the
public;
   (K)   Discarded materials. To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery and
materials to remain around any oil or gas well, or fail to fill any holes,
cellars, slush pits and other excavations made in connection with any such well
or to restore the surface of the lands surrounding any such well to its
condition before the drilling of any such well, upon abandonment of any such
oil or gas well;
   (L)   Underground wells. To permit any salt water, oil, gas or other wastes
from any well drilled for oil, gas or exploratory purposes to escape to the
surface, or into a mine or coal seam, or into any underground fresh water
supply, or from one underground stratum to another;
   (M)   Harassment. To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about
to sell or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property, or
is about to buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real
property, when the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person's
attempt to sell, buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers to
a person's sale, purchase or lease of a residence or other real property;
   (N)   Business. To establish, maintain and carry on any offensive or
unwholesome business or establishment within the limits of the village or
within the distance of one mile beyond the village limits;
   (O)   Filthy premise conditions. To keep or suffer to be kept in a foul,
offensive, nauseous or filthy condition, any chicken coop, cow barn, stable,
cellar, vault, drain, privy, sewer or sink upon any premises belonging to or
occupied by him or her, or any railroad car, building, yard, grounds and
premises belonging to or occupied by him or her;
   (P)   Expectorate. To expectorate on any public sidewalk or street, or other
public building or floor or walk of any public vehicle or hall;
   (Q)   Litter on streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or
allow trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, wire, dirt, rock,
stone, glass, brick, lumber, wood or litter of material objects of any size or
description to fall upon the streets of the village, or to be thrown by any
person, or to throw from a moving vehicle and to remain thereon;
   (R)   Accumulation of junk and trash. To deposit or pile up, place garbage,
refuse or trash, including but not limited to, rags, old rope, paper, iron,
brass, copper, tin, aluminum, ashes, garbage, refuse, hazardous waste, plastic,
brush, litter, weeds, slush, lead, glass bottles or broken glass upon any lot,
piece or parcel of land or upon any public or private alley, street or public
way within the village;
   (S)   Rodents. To cause or permit any condition or situation to exist that
shall attract, harbor or encourage the infestation of rodents;
   (T)   Bringing nuisances into the village. To bring into the village, or
keep therein for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose,
any dead or live animal or any matter, substance or thing which shall be a
nuisance or which shall occasion a nuisance in the village, or which may or
shall be dangerous or detrimental to health;
   (U)   Offensive liquids. To keep nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or
substance or any liquid or substance likely to become nauseous, foul, offensive
or putrid, or permit any such liquid to be discharged, placed, thrown or to
flow from or out of any premise into or upon any adjacent premises or any
public street or alley, nor permit the same to be done by any person connected
with the premises; and
   (V)   Generally. To commit any act which is determined by the Village Board
to be a nuisance or is otherwise declared a nuisance by any other state
statute, rule or regulation.
   (W)   No person shall dump any debris including, but not limited to
household garbage, lumber, tires, metal, furniture, mattresses, hazardous waste
or plastic upon the village property that has been designated as the “village
burn pile”. This area near the east end of Broadway Street is only for the use
of village residents or tree trimming services doing business for a village
resident. This burn area is only for the disposal of yard waste, which includes
trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, and grass,
shrubbery and yard trimmings.
(2001 Code, § 25-1-1; Ord. 12-06-02-2, passed 6-2-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.02 NUISANCES DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH GENERALLY.
   No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises or part
thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the village if the
use, keeping or maintaining shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
(2001 Code, § 25-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   Whenever the Village Board, Mayor or Police Chief finds that a
nuisance exists, he or she shall direct the Village Clerk to mail (certified)
to the party responsible for the nuisance and to the party on whose property
the nuisance exists a written notice ordering that the nuisance be abated
within a reasonable time.
   (B)   The notice to abate shall contain:
      (1)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
      (2)   The location of the nuisance;
      (3)   A statement of what condition or state of affairs must be achieved
in order for the nuisance to be deemed abated;
      (4)   A statement suggesting how the abatement might be accomplished;
      (5)   The date by which abatement must be completed; and
      (6)   A statement indicating that if the nuisance is not abated by the
date prescribed this village will abate the nuisance and assess the costs
against the property and/or impose a fine.
(2001 Code, § 25-1-3)
§ 92.04 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY VILLAGE; UNKNOWN OWNER.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor or other designated official to proceed at
once upon the expiration of the time specified in the notice to cause the
nuisance to be abated; provided, however, that whenever the owner, occupant,
agent or person in possession or control of any premises in or upon which any
nuisance may be found in unknown or cannot be found, the Chief of Police or a
designated representative shall proceed to abate the nuisance without notice.
In either case, the expense of the abatement shall be paid by the person who
may have created or suffered the nuisance to exist, in addition to any penalty
or fine.
(2001 Code, § 25-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   If the person notified to abate a nuisance shall neglect or refuse to comply
with the requirements of the notice by abating the nuisance within the time
specified, the person shall be guilty of a violation of this subchapter. The
village shall not be required to issue another notice where the condition or
violation is at first abated, but later resumed and/or repeated.
(2001 Code, § 25-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-60-2 and ILCS Ch. 720, Act
5, §§ 47-5, 47-10 and 47-15
WEEDS
§ 92.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEEDS. Includes, but is not limited to the following: burdock, rag weed
(giant), rag weed (common), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common
milk weed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarters,
wild lettuce, curled dock, smartweeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, wild
hemp, Johnson grass, grass and all other noxious weeds as defined by the
statutes of the state.
(2001 Code, § 25-2-1)
§ 92.16 HEIGHT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants,
other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a
height exceeding ten inches anywhere in the village.
   (B)   Any plants, weeds or grass exceeding that height are hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
(2001 Code, § 25-2-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.17 NOTICE.
   (A)   The Police Department or any other person so designated by the Mayor
may issue a written notice for removal of weeds or grass.
   (B)   The weeds or grass shall be cut by the owner or occupant within five
days after the notice has been duly served.
   (C)   Only one written notice shall be issued. Subsequent offenses that
occur during the same year shall be abated by the village at the owner’s
expense and/or a citation may be issued.
(2001 Code, § 25-2-3; Ord. 14-07-21-3, passed 7-21-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.18 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Service of the notice provided for herein may be effected by handing the
same to the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his
or her household of the age of 15 years or older found on the premises, or by
mailing the notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided,
that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner's address cannot be obtained,
then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(2001 Code, § 25-2-4)
§ 92.19 ABATEMENT.
   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days, the
Mayor or other designated official may proceed to abate the nuisance, keeping
an account of the expense of the abatement, and the expense shall be charged
and paid by the owner or occupant.
(2001 Code, § 25-2-5)
§ 92.20 LIEN.
   (A)   Charges for the weed or grass removal shall be a lien upon the
premises.
   (B)   A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service shall be presented to the owner.
   (C)   If this bill is not paid within 30 days of submission of the bill, a
notice of lien of the cost and expenses thereof incurred by the village shall
be recorded in the following manner:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the
village and shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and expense is
incurred.
(2001 Code, § 25-2-6)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-20-6 and 11-20-7
§ 92.21 PAYMENT.
   (A)   Notice of the lien claim shall be mailed certified return receipt or
personally delivered to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the
general taxes on the property for the last preceding year.
   (B)   The notice shall be delivered or sent after the cutting of weeds on
the property.
   (C)   The notice shall state the substance of this section and the substance
of any ordinance of the municipality implementing this section and shall
identify the property, by common description, and the location of the weeds to
be cut.
   (D)   Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has been
filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the
lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record in the same manner
as filing notice of the lien.
   (E)   All lien and release filing fees shall be paid by the owner of the
property.
(2001 Code, § 25-2-7)
§ 92.22 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   (A)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed or grass cutting charges
may be sold for non-payment of the same and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens.
   (B)   The foreclosure shall be in the name of the village after the lien is
in effect for 60 days.
(2001 Code, § 25-2-8)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-20-6 and 11-20-7
GARBAGE AND DEBRIS
§ 92.35 ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit any garbage or trash to accumulate on his or her
premises or private property. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it
shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of real estate to refuse or neglect
to remove the garbage or debris.
(2001 Code, § 25-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.36 NOTICE TO PERSON.
   The Mayor or other designated official may issue a written notice for
removal of garbage or debris. The garbage or debris shall be removed by the
owner or occupant within five days after the notice has been duly served.
(2001 Code, § 25-3-2)
§ 92.37 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Service of notice provided for herein may be effected by handing of the same
to the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his or
her household of the age of 15 years or older found on the premises, or by
mailing the notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided,
that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner's address cannot be obtained,
then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(2001 Code, § 25-3-3)
§ 92.38 ABATEMENT.
   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days, the
Mayor or other designated official may proceed to abate the nuisance, keeping
an account of the expense of the abatement and the expense shall be charged and
paid by the owner or occupant.
(2001 Code, § 25-3-4)
§ 92.39 LIEN.
   (A)   Charges for the removal shall be a lien upon the premises.
   (B)   A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service shall be presented to the owner.
   (C)   If this bill is not paid within 30 days of submission of the bill, a
notice of lien of the cost and expenses thereof incurred by the village shall
be recorded in the following manner:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the
village and shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and expense is
incurred.
(2001 Code, § 25-3-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-13 and ILCS Ch. 720, Act
5, § 47-10
§ 92.40 PAYMENT.
   (A)   Notice of the lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises
if his or her address is known.
   (B)   Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has been
filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the
lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record in the same manner
as filing notice of the lien.
(2001 Code, § 25-3-6)
§ 92.41 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   (A)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges may be sold non-payment
of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
   (B)   The foreclosure shall be in the name of the village, after lien is in
effect for 60 days.
   (C)   Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two years after
the date of filing notice of lien.
(2001 Code, § 25-3-7)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-13 and ILCS Ch. 720, Act
5, § 47-10
BUILDING AS NUISANCE
§ 92.55 BUILDING CONDITION; NUISANCE.
   The Building Inspector or his or her designated representative shall report
to the Village Board when any building or structure in the village is in a
dangerous condition and constitutes a nuisance. Hereinafter, all references to
Building Inspector shall include "his or her designated representative".
(2001 Code, § 25-4-1)
§ 92.56 TIME LIMIT.
   The owner of the building shall repair or alter it so as to make it safe
within 90 days from the time the notice is served upon him or her in the manner
provided by law.
(2001 Code, § 25-4-2)
§ 92.57 NOTIFICATION.
   The Building Inspector, with the approval of the Village Board, shall place
a notice on all "dangerous and unsafe buildings", which notice shall read as
follows:
"This building has been found to be a dangerous and unsafe building by the
village officials. This notice shall remain on this building until it is
repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been
given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, or
person or persons in whose name or names such building was last assessed, and
all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land
records of the County Recorder of Deeds. It is unlawful to remove this notice
until such notice is complied with."
(2001 Code, § 25-4-3)
§ 92.58 DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE BUILDING DEFINED.
   All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed "dangerous and unsafe buildings".
   (A)   Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
   (B)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 31% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50% of damage or
deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
   (C)   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used.
   (D)   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare
of the occupants or the people of the village.
   (E)   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause
sickness or disease, so as to cause injury to the health, morals, safety or
general welfare of those living therein.
   (F)   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate
to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who
live or may live therein.
   (G)   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means
of communication.
   (H)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may
fall and injure members of the public or property.
   (I)   Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of
this village.
   (J)   Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building
Code of this village, or any provision of the Fire Prevention Code, or any
other ordinances of the village.
   (K)   Those vacant buildings with unguarded openings shall be deemed to
constitute a fire hazard and to be unsafe within the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (L)   Those buildings which are uncompleted or abandoned.
(2001 Code, § 25-4-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.59 STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION.
   The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building
Inspector in ordering repair, vacation or demolition.
   (A)   If the "dangerous and unsafe building" is in such condition as to make
it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants,
it shall be ordered to be vacated.
   (B)   If the "dangerous and unsafe building" can reasonably be repaired so
that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this subchapter, it
shall be ordered repaired.
   (C)   In any case where a "dangerous and unsafe building" if 50% damaged or
decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be
demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this subchapter, it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a "dangerous and unsafe building" is a fire
hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this subchapter, or any
ordinance of the village, or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. (See
"Non-Conforming Uses" of the Zoning Code, as adopted in
Ch. 153.)
(2001 Code, § 25-4-5)
§ 92.60 DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE BUILDINGS; NUISANCES.
   All dangerous and unsafe buildings within the terms of this subchapter are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or
demolished as hereinbefore or hereinafter provided.
(2001 Code, § 25-4-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.61 DUTIES OF THE ATTORNEY.
   The Village Attorney shall apply to the circuit court for an order
authorizing the demolition, repair or vacation of dangerous and unsafe
buildings or uncompleted or abandoned buildings when notices have not been
complied with and when requested to do so by the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 25-4-7)
§ 92.62 LIENS.
   (A)   The cost of repair, demolition, vacation or enclosure shall be
recoverable from the owner or owners of the real estate and shall be a lien
thereon, which lien shall be subordinate to all prior existing liens and
encumbrances; provided that within 180 days after the cost and expense is
incurred, the village or person performing the service by authority of the
village, in his or her or its own names, shall file notices of lien in the
office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
   (B)   The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
therefor;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the
village.
   (C)   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons
interested in the property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall
be released by the village or person in whose name(s) the lien has been filed
and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of
mortgages or mechanics of lien. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced
within three years after the date of filing notice of lien.
(2001 Code, § 25-4-8)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-1
APPENDIX A: NUISANCE VIOLATION NOTICE
TO:   ________________________
   ________________________
   ________________________
   You are hereby notified that the Police Chief or his or her representatives
has determined that the property owned by you (and/or occupied by you, as the
case may be) located at _____________, located within the Municipality,
contains an unlawful nuisance(s) as defined by §
92.01 follows:
                                                                                      
   You are required pursuant to §
92.03 to abate and remove any nuisance(s) within five (5) days from the date of
this notice as follows:
   If you wish to appeal this notice, then the appeal shall be made to the
Village Hall by: ___________ _____________________________.
   If the nuisance is not abated by the date prescribed and/or if no request
for hearing is made within the time prescribed, this Municipality will abate
the nuisance and assess the costs against the property and/or impose a fine as
provided by §§
10.99,
92.04 and
92.05 of this code of ordinances.
Dated this _____ day of _________________, ____.
________________________________
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA
NOTE: The penalty to abate said nuisance(s) may be as high as $750.00 per
violation plus the cost of the cleanup, as provided by §
10.99.
APPENDIX B: NOTICE; UNLAWFUL GROWTH
TO:   ________________________
   ________________________
   ________________________
   You are hereby notified that __________________________ has determined that
property owned by you (and/or occupied by you, as the case may be) at
___________________, located within the Village Limits, contains unlawful weed
growth as defined by §§
92.15 and
92.16 of the code of ordinances.
   You are required to remove all growth within five (5) days from the date of
this Notice.
   If you refuse or neglect to remove such growth, the authorities of this
Municipality may provide for the removal thereof. The cost of such growth
removal shall be paid by you.
_________________________________
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA
Dated this _________day of ________________________, ________.
APPENDIX C: UNLAWFUL GARBAGE AND/OR DEBRIS
TO:   ________________________
   ________________________
   ________________________
   You are hereby notified that the ___________________________________________
has determined that property owned by you (and/or occupied by you, as the case
may be) located at ____________________________, located within the Village
Limits contains garbage and/or debris as defined by §
92.01 of the code of ordinances; specifically
                                                                                                                              .
   You are required to remove all such material within five (5) days from the
date of this Notice.
   If you refuse or neglect to remove such garbage and/or debris, the corporate
authorities of this Municipality may provide for the removal thereof. The cost
of the garbage and/or debris removal shall be paid by you.
_____________________________________
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA
Dated this _______ day of _________________, _________.
APPENDIX D: LETTER OF NOTICE; DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE BUILDING
TO:   ________________________
   ________________________
   ________________________
   You, as owner(s) of the property lawfully described below, are hereby
notified by the undersigned Village of Argenta, Illinois that said property has
upon it a building which is:
      [ ] Dangerous and/or unsafe
      [ ] Uncompleted and/or abandoned
   The lawful property shall be described as
_______________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________.
(legal description)
located at
_____________________________________________________________________.
(address)
   Unless such building is put into safe condition or demolished within ninety
(90) days of the receipt of this notice, the Village shall apply to the Circuit
Court for an order authorizing such action to be taken by the Village with
respect to the above described building. Any costs incurred by the Village to
restore the building to a safe condition or to demolish the building shall be
recovered from the owner(s) of the above described property pursuant to ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-31-1, Illinois Compiled Statutes.
____________________________________________
Dated at ___________________, this ________ day of ___________, ______.
(SEAL)
                     ___________________________________
                     VILLAGE OF ARGENTA
CHAPTER 93: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Department Established
   
93.001   Department established
   
93.002   Committee on Streets
General Regulations
   
93.015   Undermining
   
93.016   Open doors
   
93.017   Repairing sidewalks and the like
   
93.018   Stairway; railing
   
93.019   Closing street
   
93.020   Signs across street
   
93.021   Vehicles on sidewalks
   
93.022   Deposits on sidewalks
   
93.023   Obstructing street
   
93.024   Rainwater drains
   
93.025   Building materials in street
   
93.026   Merchandise on public street
   
93.027   Encroachments
   
93.028   Posting bills
   
93.029   Signs on poles
   
93.030   Injury to new pavements
   
93.031   Barbed wire fences
   
93.032   Burning on public streets
Trees and Shrubs
   
93.045   Planting
   
93.046   Planting trees in right-of-way
   
93.047   Removal
   
93.048   Injury
   
93.049   Advertisements or notices
   
93.050   Dangerous trees
   
93.051   Wires
   
93.052   Gas pipes
Excavations
   
93.065   Permit required
   
93.066   Applications
   
93.067   Fees
   
93.068   Bond
   
93.069   Deposit
   
93.070   Manner of excavating
   
93.071   Sidewalks
   
93.072   Restoring surface
   
93.073   Supervision
   
93.074   Protective measures and routing of traffic
   
93.075   Clearance for vital structures
   
93.076   Protection of traffic
   
93.077   Relocation and protection of utilities
   
93.078   Abandonment of substructures
   
93.079   Protection of adjoining property
   
93.080   Placement of excavated material
   
93.081   Cleanup
   
93.082   Protection of watercourses
   
93.083   Breaking through pavement
   
93.084   Depth of structures
   
93.085   Backfilling
   
93.086   Trenches in pipe laying
   
93.087   Prompt completion of work
   
93.088   Urgent work
   
93.089   Emergency action
   
93.090   Noise, dust and debris
   
93.091   Preservation of monuments
   
93.092   Inspections
   
93.093   Location records
   
93.094   Liability of persons to village for damage
   
93.095   Excavations
Street Improvements
   
93.110   Sidewalks
   
93.111   Curbs and gutters
   
93.112   Storm sewers
Culverts
   
93.125   Obstruction of drain or storm sewer
   
93.126   Permit for culvert
   
93.127   Application for permit
   
93.128   Termination of permit
   
93.129   Type of culvert
   
93.130   Cost of installation
   
93.131   Backfill cost
   
93.132   Replacement cost
Driveways
   
93.145   Permits required
   
93.146   Fee
   
93.147   Grade surface
   
93.148   Specifications
   
93.149   Breaking curb; bond required
   
93.150   Repair
   
Appendix A:   Excavation Permit
   
Appendix B:   Application for Culvert/Driveway Permit
DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED
§ 93.001 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is hereby established a department of the municipal government
which shall be known as the Street Department.
   (B)   A Street Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Village Board.
   (C)   The Street Superintendent may also be appointed the Superintendent of
Water.
(2001 Code, § 33-1-1)
§ 93.002 COMMITTEE ON STREETS.
   (A)   The Village Board Standing Committee on Streets shall exercise a
general supervision over the affairs of the Street Department.
   (B)   It shall ascertain the needs and conditions thereof and shall, from
time to time, report the same to the Mayor and Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 33-1-2)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 93.015 UNDERMINING.
   No person shall undermine in any manner, any street or any other ground or
real estate situated in the village or belonging to any private person.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.016 OPEN DOORS.
   No person shall open or allow to remain open any door, any gate or the
grating of any vault belonging to the premises occupied by him or her, on any
street, alley or sidewalk in the village for any purpose, except the taking in
and removing goods; and any person allowing the grating to remain open shall
warn passers-by of the danger.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.017 REPAIRING SIDEWALKS AND THE LIKE.
   Whenever any sidewalk, pavement or cellar door on the same becomes worn out
or out of repair, or is torn up or broken and uneven, it shall be the duty of
the Street Superintendent to immediately report that fact to the Mayor or
Street and Alley Committee, and upon verbal or written order from either of
them, to give notice to the party owning the adjoining property to repair the
sidewalk or cellar door without delay.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-3)
§ 93.018 STAIRWAY; RAILING.
   Steps or stairways leading into any building shall not extend from the wall
of the building onto any pavement or sidewalk, and in that case, the person
making or causing to be made the passage shall erect a railing on the side of
the stairs toward the street to prevent persons from falling into the street.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-4)
§ 93.019 CLOSING STREET.
   Whenever public safety or the improvement or repair of any street, alley or
public place requires it, the Mayor may order any street, alley or public place
temporarily closed to traffic and the placing of signs indicating that the
street, alley or public place is closed by order of the Mayor. Whenever the
signs are so placed, no person shall ride or drive upon or cross the street,
alley or public place, or in any manner, destroy, deface or remove any such
sign.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-5)
§ 93.020 SIGNS ACROSS STREET.
   No person shall place any sign, advertisement or banner over any or across
any street, alley or sidewalk in the village, unless he or she has written
approval of the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-17
§ 93.021 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on or over any sidewalk, except in
crossing the same to go into a yard or parking lot.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.022 DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit, on any public sidewalk, any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any
glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or
property.
   (B)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width is not thereby reduced
to less than four feet, and provided that no such article shall remain on the
walk for more than 30 minutes.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.023 OBSTRUCTING STREET.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit any material on any street which may
be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any grass
clippings, or to cause a lawn mower to blow grass clippings onto a street, or
any other articles such as glass which may cause injury to any person, animal
or property.
   (B)   No person shall place or cause to be placed or erected on any public
ground, or in any public street, alley or sidewalk in the village, any debris,
materials or obstruction, except as may be permitted by this code.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act. 5, § 11-80-3
§ 93.024 RAINWATER DRAINS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of any
storm water drain or any drainage pipe in either a natural or human-made ditch
without having first obtained a permit therefor. Applications for the permits
shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by a statement as
to the purpose of the drainage pipe, the premises to be served and the
specification of the pipe to be installed.
   (B)   The application shall be referred to the Street Superintendent and no
permit shall be issued unless he or she shall have found that the village code
would be complied with by the installation of the storm water drain or drainage
pipe, and that the installation of the storm water drain or drainage pipe would
not interfere with, overload, obstruct or otherwise adversely affect the
existing storm water drainage system within the village.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of any
storm water drain which discharges water onto any sidewalk or street in the
village.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.025 BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET.
   (A)   The Street Superintendent may move any obstruction on any street or
sidewalk of the village, but before doing so, he or she shall notify the person
responsible therefor to remove the obstruction within a reasonable time after
being notified.
   (B)   Any person engaged in erecting a building or fence or improving any
lot on the street may deposit materials thereon and contiguous to the length of
time as may be necessary for the work.
   (C)   The obstruction shall not extend to more than one-half of the width of
the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the improvement and the gutter shall
always be left free and unobstructed. At night, the person shall keep an
illuminated warning light on the material.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-11)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-3
§ 93.026 MERCHANDISE ON PUBLIC STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any street,
sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise
for sale; or to write or make any signs or advertisements on any such
pavements, unless written permission is granted by the Mayor.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-3
§ 93.027 ENCROACHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.028 POSTING BILLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, utility pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door or gate without
the consent, in writing, of the owner of the curbstone, flagstone, sidewalk,
tree, lamppost, utility pole, hydrant, private wall, door or gate.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.029 SIGNS ON POLES.
   No person shall nail, tack, paste, paint or fasten, or cause to be nailed,
tacked, painted or fastened, any sign or any other foreign substance or
material onto any telephone, telegraph, electric light, or any street or
traffic sign located on any sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds, or
injure or deface any such pole or post.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.030 INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or
destroy any newly-laid sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by a warning
sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft, newly-laid pavement.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.031 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or
in part of barbed wire, or with any similar material designed to cause injury
to persons, or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere within three
feet of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public way or place
unless the barbs or charged wire are at least eight feet above the level of the
public place.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.032 BURNING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or
other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys in the
village.
(2001 Code, § 33-2-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
TREES AND SHRUBS
§ 93.045 PLANTING.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public street or
parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit therefor.
Applications for the permits shall be made to the Street Superintendent and
shall be referred by him or her to the Village Board. All trees and shrubs so
planted shall be placed subject to the directions and approval of the Village
Board.
(2001 Code, § 33-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.046 PLANTING TREES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any bushes, trees, shrubs or other plants on
the right-of-way of any public street, including the space on the right-of-way
between the sidewalk and the adjacent street pavement without permission from
the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 33-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.047 REMOVAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub or
portion thereof in any street, parkway or other public place without having
first secured a permit therefore.
   (B)   Applications for permits shall be made to the Street Superintendent
and shall be referred by him or her to the Village Board before permission
shall be granted.
(2001 Code, § 33-3-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.048 INJURY.
   It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in a public place
as is provided in this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 33-3-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.049 ADVERTISEMENTS OR NOTICES.
   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree
or shrub in any street, parkway or other public place.
(2001 Code, § 33-3-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.050 DANGEROUS TREES.
   (A)   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the municipality at a height less than eight feet or in such a way as
to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on the public place shall be
trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which the
tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. All existing trees and
shrubs that obstruct vision on or off right-of-way shall be maintained by the
owner.
   (B)   Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or
across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on
which the tree grows or stands.
   (C)   The Street Superintendent may, at the owner's expense, trim or remove
any tree or shrub so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall
be done away with.
(2001 Code, § 33-3-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.051 WIRES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to attach any wires or rope to any tree or shrub
in any public street, parkway or other public place without the permission of
the Village Board.
   (B)   Any person or company given the right to maintain the poles and wires
in the streets, alleys or other public places in the municipality shall, in the
absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep the wires
and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in places so far as may
be possible and shall keep all the trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject
to the supervision of the Street Superintendent so that no injury shall be done
either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their conduct.
(2001 Code, § 33-3-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.052 GAS PIPES.
   Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the municipality shall, in
the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep those
pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs.
(2001 Code, § 33-3-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 93.065 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tunnel under or
to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public place in the
village without having obtained a permit as is herein required or without
complying with the provisions of this subchapter or in violation of or variance
from the terms of any such permit.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.066 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for permits shall be made to the Clerk and shall describe the
location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose
therefor, and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual excavating work;
and the name of the person, firm or corporation for whom or for which the work
is being done, and it shall also contain an agreement that the applicant will
comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-2)
§ 93.067 FEES.
   The fee for the permit(s) shall be as follows; however, the Village Board
may waive the fees in this section:
   (A)   Excavation in asphalt or portland cement concrete pavement or surface:
$0.25 per square foot;
   (B)   Excavation in brick pavement or surface: $0.25 per square foot;
   (C)   Excavation in oil treated street surface: $0.25 per square foot; and
   (D)   Excavation in untreated or unimproved street or surface: $0.25 per
square foot.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-3)
§ 93.068 BOND.
   No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has filed
with the Clerk a bond in the sum of $50,000, conditioned to indemnify the
village for any loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or
because of the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing any such
tunnel or excavation. The bond shall have as surety a corporation licensed to
do business in the state as a surety company. The Village Board may waive the
bond provided for herein.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-4)
§ 93.069 DEPOSIT.
   No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has
deposited with the Clerk a cash deposit in the sum of $250 if no pavement is
involved, and $1,000 if the excavation is a paved area, to insure the proper
restoration of the ground and laying of the pavement, if any. From this deposit
shall be deducted the expense of the village of relaying the surface of the
ground or pavement and of making the refill if this is done by the village or
at its expense and the balance shall be returned to the applicant without
interest after the tunnel or excavation is completely refilled and the surface
or pavement is restored. The Village Board may waive the deposit in this
section.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-5)
§ 93.070 MANNER OF EXCAVATING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation or tunnel in any way
contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper
bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and in
excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any
portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface.
   (B)   No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making
of the excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons
maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the village department or
officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or
affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before the pipes,
cables or conduits shall be disturbed. No unnecessary damage or injury shall be
done to any tree, shrub or the roots thereof.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.071 SIDEWALKS.
   If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users. The temporary sidewalk is subject to inspection by the Street
Superintendent and shall not be open for use until approved by him or her.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-7)
§ 93.072 RESTORING SURFACE.
   Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or tunnel in or under
any public street, alley or other public place in the village shall restore the
surface to its original condition if there is no pavement there. Refills shall
be properly tamped down, and any bracing in the tunnel or excavation shall be
left in the ground. Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street
shall be repaired and the surface re-laid by the applicant in compliance with
the regulations of the village and under the supervision of the Street
Superintendent.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.073 SUPERVISION.
   The Street Superintendent shall, from time to time, inspect or cause to be
inspected all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street,
alley or other place in the village to see to the enforcement of the provisions
of this code. Notice shall be given to him or her at least ten hours before the
work of refilling any such tunnel or excavation commences.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-9)
§ 93.074 PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND ROUTING OF TRAFFIC.
   It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation in or
upon any public place to place and maintain barriers and warning devices
necessary for the safety of the general public.
   (A)   Barriers, warning signs and lights shall conform to the requirements
of all applicable provisions of this code. Warning lights shall be electrical
markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each
day to sunrise of the next day.
   (B)   Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient
intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety.
Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not to replace
light sources.
   (C)   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as nearly normal as
possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to
the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. When traffic
conditions permit, the Street Superintendent may, by written approval, permit
the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time
prescribed by him or her if, in his or her opinion, it is necessary. The
written approval may require that the permittee give notification to various
public agencies and to the general public. In those cases, the written approval
shall not be valid until the notice is given.
   (D)   Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the
construction operation to alert traffic within a public street and cones or
other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic in accordance with
the instructions of the Street Superintendent.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-10)
§ 93.075 CLEARANCE FOR VITAL STRUCTURES.
   The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere
with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates,
underground vaults, valve housing structures and all other vital equipment as
designated by the Street Superintendent.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-11)
§ 93.076 PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC.
   The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic
at all street intersections where possible and safe crossing for pedestrians at
intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation is made across any
public street, alley or sidewalk adequate crossing shall be maintained for
vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the
excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at
least one-half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along the sidewalk
line.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-12)
§ 93.077 RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without
the written consent of the Street Superintendent and the owner of any facility.
If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by
its owner. The facility owned by the village shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of the work is borne by the permittee. The cost of
moving privately-owned facilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee
unless other arrangements are made with the person owning the facility. The
permittee shall support and protect, by timbers or otherwise, all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by
the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and
protect them under, over, along or across the work. The permittee shall secure
approval of method of support and protection from the owner of the facility.
   (B)   In case of any said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should
be damaged, and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement or devices
are to be considered as part of a substructure, the permittee shall promptly
notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the
agency or person owning them and the expense of the repairs shall be charged to
the permittee. It is the intent of this section that the permittee shall assume
all liability for damage to facilities and any resulting damage or injury to
anyone because of the facility damage and the assumption of liability is a
contractual obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be those
instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning
utility. The village shall not be made a party to any action because of this
section. The permittee shall inform himself or herself as to the existence and
location of all underground facilities and protect the same against damage.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-13)
§ 93.078 ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES.
   Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment of
service lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning, using,
controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after the
abandonment, file with the Street Superintendent a statement in writing giving
in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned. If the abandoned
substructure is in the way or subsequently becomes in the way of an
installation of the village or any other public body, which installation is
pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove the abandoned
substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the course of excavation for
construction of the facility by the village or any other public body.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-14)
§ 93.079 PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   (A)   The permittee shall, at all times, and at his or her or its own
expense, preserve and protect from injury, any adjoining property by providing
proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where,
in the protection of the property, it is necessary to enter upon private
property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the
permittee shall obtain consent from the owner of the private property for that
purpose and if he or she cannot obtain the consent, the Street Superintendent
may authorize him or her to enter the private premises solely for the purpose
of making the property safe.
   (B)   At the permittee's own expense, all buildings, walls, fences or other
property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work shall
be shored up and protected, and the permittee shall be responsible for all
damage to public or private property or highways resulting from failure to
properly protect and carry out the work. Whenever it may be necessary for the
permittee to trench through any lawn area, that area shall be re-seeded or the
sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been
backfilled as required in this subchapter.
   (C)   All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner
calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition
as nearly as possible to that which existed before the work began. The
permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist
in parking street areas without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate
village department or official having supervision of the property.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-15)
§ 93.080 PLACEMENT OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   (A)   All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench
or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such a manner as to eliminate
danger to those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and
so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets
and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as
might be the case in a narrow alley, the Street Superintendent shall have the
authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a
storage site and then re-haul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling.
It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission
and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites.
   (B)   All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as reasonably
possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by the Street
Superintendent, whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or
to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required by the
Street Superintendent to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-16)
§ 93.081 CLEANUP.
   As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned
of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from that work.
All cleanup operations at the location of the excavation shall be accomplished
at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of
the Street Superintendent. From time to time as may be ordered by the Street
Superintendent and in any event, immediately after completion of the work, the
permittee shall, at his or her or its own expense, clean up and remove all
refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work and upon
failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the
Street Superintendent, the work may be done by the Superintendent and the cost
thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for
the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-17)
§ 93.082 PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES.
   The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full
depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of
the curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street,
an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. The
permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt,
slickings or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing
or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its
failure to so provide.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-18)
§ 93.083 BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the Street
Superintendent when the use endangers existing substructures or other property.
   (B)   Saw cutting of portland cement concrete may be required when the
nature of the work or the condition of the street warrants. When required, the
depth of the cut shall not be less than one inch in depth; however, depths
greater than one inch may be required by the Street Superintendent when
circumstances warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the Superintendent
outside the limits of the excavation over cave-outs, overbreaks and small
floating sections.
   (C)   Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations
may be required by the Street Superintendent to confine pavement damage to the
limits of the trench.
   (D)   Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or
joint.
   (E)   Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and
the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
   (F)   Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the center line of the trench.
   (G)   Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the
trench line.
   (H)   Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be
required by the Street Superintendent.
   (I)   The permittee shall not be required to repair pavement damage existing
prior to excavation unless his or her cut results in small floating sections
that may be unstable, in which case the permittee shall remove and pave the
area.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-19)
§ 93.084 DEPTH OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No person shall, without written permission of the Street
Superintendent, install any substructure except manholes, vaults, valve
casings, culverts and catch basins at a vertical distance less than:
      (1)   Streets. Twenty-four inches below the established flow line of the
nearest gutter. If the flow line is not established, then the depth shall be at
a minimum of 24 inches below the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the
traveled portion of the street;
      (2)   Parkway.
         (a)   The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 16 inches below
established gutter grade when the substructure parallels the parkway.
         (b)   The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 12 inches below
the top of the established sidewalk or curb when the substructure is at right
angles to the parkway.
      (3)   Other public places. The minimum depth of any substructure in any
other public place shall be 12 inches below the surface.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to
maintain the specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of grade
in the surface unless the grade in the substructure interferes with the
maintenance of or travel on a public street.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.085 BACKFILLING.
   (A)   Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the soil shall
be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level of
the substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure, backfill material
shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts consistent with the
type of soil involved and the degree of consolidation specified by the Village
Board. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris shall not be used
in the backfill.
   (B)   The number and size of each lift shall be dependent upon the type of
soil involved. The backfill shall be done in a manner that will permit the
restoration of the surface to a density condition not less than that existing
prior to excavation unless otherwise specified. The Street Superintendent may
require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or
registered professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in his or
her opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In
order for the resurfacing to be permitted, the tests must show that the
backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the Village
Board. All expense of the tests shall be borne by the permittee.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-21)
§ 93.086 TRENCHES IN PIPE LAYING.
   The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in
accordance with existing codes and regulations; however, at night no more than
50 feet may be open with proper barriers.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-22)
§ 93.087 PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
   After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with
diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit
and shall promptly complete the work and restore the street to its original
condition, or as near as may be so as not to obstruct the public place or
travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-23)
§ 93.088 URGENT WORK.
   When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public
or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as
emergency work, the Street Superintendent shall have full power to order, at
the time the permit is granted, that a crew of people and adequate facilities
be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that the excavation work
may be completed as soon as possible.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-24)
§ 93.089 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the making of the
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for
the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided
that the person making the excavation shall apply to the Street Superintendent
for such a permit on the first working day after the work is commenced.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-25)
§ 93.090 NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS.
   Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such a manner
as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the
excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., shall not use except in case of emergency as otherwise
provided herein, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient
volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-26)
§ 93.091 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
   Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a
permanent survey benchmark within the village shall not be removed or disturbed
or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in
writing from the Village Board to do so. Permission to remove or disturb the
monuments, reference points or benchmarks shall only be granted upon condition
that the person applying for permission shall pay all expenses incident to the
proper replacement of the monument by the village.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-27)
§ 93.092 INSPECTIONS.
   The Street Superintendent shall make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this subchapter. The Superintendent shall have
the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced the rules and regulations
as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this
subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-28)
§ 93.093 LOCATION RECORDS.
   Every public utility, after the enactment of this subchapter, shall maintain
records showing the location of all of its underground facilities except
relatively minor facilities which connect a particular premises or building to
a facility serving more than one premises or building and except oil or gas-
gathering or field lines. Every public utility shall maintain equipment which
can locate the facilities in the field.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-29)
§ 93.094 LIABILITY OF PERSONS TO VILLAGE FOR DAMAGE.
   If any person violates any provision of this subchapter and any person or
property in consequence thereof is injured or damaged, the person so guilty of
the violation shall be civilly liable to the village in relation thereto, and
no prosecution or other proceeding by the village of that person for any
penalty imposed for a violation shall constitute a bar to that action by the
village for the damages.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-30) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.095 EXCAVATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, or maintains or uses, or
abandons, any open well, cesspool, cistern, quarry, recharging basin, catch
basin, sump, excavation for the erection of any building structure or
excavation created by the razing or removal of any building structure without
covering or surrounding the installation with protective fencing. This section
shall not apply during the course of repair, construction, removal or filling
of any of the structures or conditions herein described while any worker is
present at the location thereof either performing services thereon or as a
watchman to guard the location.
(2001 Code, § 33-4-31) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-80-1 through 11-80-23, Ch.
720, Act 605, § 1
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
§ 93.110 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Grade. No sidewalk shall be built above or below the established grade
of the village and in all cases where no grade is established, any person
building a sidewalk shall build the same according to the instructions of the
Street Superintendent and the Village Board. No one shall build a sidewalk
unless it consist of new construction. No one shall remove or destroy a
sidewalk without replacing the same with a new sidewalk.
   (B)   Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, lay or construct
any sidewalk along any property in the village or along any of the streets,
alleys or public highways thereon, without first filing an application for a
permit with the Village Clerk and approved by the Village Board.
   (C)   Cost to owner. If the funds are available and the Village Board
approves the request, the property owner shall pay one-half of the cost of the
construction, including engineering fees, and thereafter, the sidewalk shall be
maintained by the village.
   (D)   Subdivisions. This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(2001 Code, § 33-5-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-13
§ 93.111 CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   (A)   Request in writing. Any person owning property within the village who
desires to have new curbs and gutters constructed, along the street adjoining
his or her premises shall file a request with the Street Superintendent, giving
the location of the property and the length of the curbs and gutters requested.
All installations shall conform to the requirements of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-80-11 and the Environmental Barriers Act.
   (B)   Cost to owner. If the funds are available and the Village Board
approves the request, the property owner shall pay one-half of the cost of the
construction, including engineering fees, and thereafter, the curbs and gutters
shall be maintained by the village.
   (C)   Approval by Village Board. The approval of the request for
construction of curbs and gutters by the Village Board shall be dependent upon
the approval of funds, priority of projects and continuity of construction for
the best benefit of the village as determined by the Village Board.
   (D)   Subdivisions. This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(2001 Code, § 33-5-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-11
§ 93.112 STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   Description of storm water sewers. Storm water sewers shall be any
pipe or sewer used for the carrying of surface drains, ground waters, roof
leaders or storm waters, rain waters or other waters other than sanitary
sewage.
   (B)   Supervision. The Superintendent of the Street Department shall
supervise all connections made to the public storm sewer system or excavations
for the purposes of installing or repairing the same.
   (C)   Drains. It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public
street or alley or any public drain or tile within the village limits or
reasonable extension thereof or to make a connection thereto without first
obtaining a license from the village to so connect.
   (D)   Requirements; use of storm water sewers. Where a storm water sewer is
accessible in a street, alley or easement to a building or premises abutting
thereon, the surface drains, ground waters, roof leaders, or storm waters shall
be discharged into the storm water sewer unless otherwise authorized by the
village. Under no conditions shall sanitary sewage or wastes or any substance
other than surface waters, ground waters, roof waters or storm waters be
permitted to flow into or be connected to the storm water sewer; and no
sanitary sewer shall be connected to the storm water sewer system.
   (E)   Private sewage system connection. A license fee of $125 is hereby
established for the connection of any sand filter or aerification private
sewage system to a village tile and the fee shall be paid in advance.
(2001 Code, § 33-5-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-7
CULVERTS
§ 93.125 OBSTRUCTION OF DRAIN OR STORM SEWER.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain or storm sewer in any public
street or property.
(2001 Code, § 33-6-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.126 PERMIT FOR CULVERT.
   It shall be unlawful to install any culvert or replace any culvert without
first obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk.
(2001 Code, § 33-6-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.127 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring a permit to install or replace any culvert shall file an
application therefor with the Village Clerk upon a form to be provided for that
purpose. The application and the permit issued pursuant thereto shall be on the
same form which shall be substantially as outlined in
Appendix B below.
(2001 Code, § 33-6-3)
§ 93.128 TERMINATION OF PERMIT.
   All permits shall terminate upon the expiration of one year following the
date of issue.
(2001 Code, § 33-6-4)
§ 93.129 TYPE OF CULVERT.
   (A)   Culverts shall be installed where driveways or walkways cross open
ditches.
   (B)   The material used for the construction of the culverts shall be
reinforced concrete, corrugated steel culvert pipe with a minimum wall
thickness of 16 gauge, corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe with a minimum
wall thickness of 16 gauge, asbestos cement storm drain pipe (Class IV), or of
other material as determined by the Street Department, depending upon the
conditions existing.
   (C)   The culverts shall be of a size, installed at the grade and
constructed with couplings as determined by the Street Superintendent.
   (D)   The person desiring the culvert shall purchase a culvert as provided
herein and shall have it delivered on the site.
   (E)   The village shall install the culvert.
(2001 Code, § 33-6-5)
§ 93.130 COST OF INSTALLATION.
   Any person installing or replacing a culvert shall, at his or her own
expense, construct and install drainage inlet boxes in a form and manner as the
Street Superintendent determines necessary depending on the conditions
existing.
(2001 Code, § 33-6-6)
§ 93.131 BACKFILL COST.
   Any person installing or replacing a culvert shall, at his or her own
expense, provide and place the backfill material as the Street Superintendent
determines necessary to complete the project.
(2001 Code, § 33-6-7)
§ 93.132 REPLACEMENT COST.
   The expense of replacing any culvert shall be borne by the person making
application for the permit to install the same.
(2001 Code, § 33-6-8)
DRIVEWAYS
§ 93.145 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across
any sidewalk in the village without having first obtained a permit therefor.
   (B)   Applications for the permits shall be made to the Village Building
Inspector and shall be accompanied by the fee required.
   (C)   No permit for construction of a driveway for commercial use, or for
the habitual use of other than the owner or occupant of the premises served
shall be issued except upon the order of the Village Clerk.
(2001 Code, § 33-7-1) (Ord. 14-11-03-6, passed 11-3-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.146 FEE.
   The fee for all the construction shall be $25.
(2001 Code, § 33-7-2)
§ 93.147 GRADE SURFACE.
   No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp
depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as nearly
as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to
have the surface finish of any driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk
constructed of materials as to render it slippery and hazardous to pedestrians,
or to have the grade of the portion vary from the grade of the sidewalk or be
other than level.
(2001 Code, § 33-7-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.148 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Driveways and/or an addition to an existing driveway shall be
constructed in compliance with the specifications required by the Street
Superintendent.
   (B)   The width of the driveway may be no wider than the width of the
garage.
   (C)   If there is no garage, the driveway may be no wider than the width of
a two-car garage and must follow zoning ordinances.
(2001 Code, § 33-7-4) (Ord. 14-11-03-7, passed 11-3-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.149 BREAKING CURB; BOND REQUIRED.
   Before a permit can be issued to break a curb in the village for the
installation of a driveway or any other purpose, a bond or cash in the amount
of $100 is required to be posted with the Village Clerk.
(2001 Code, § 33-7-5)
§ 93.150 REPAIR.
   It shall be the duty of the person maintaining the driveway to keep the same
in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free from obstruction and
openings.
(2001 Code, § 33-7-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-2
APPENDIX A: EXCAVATION PERMIT
NAME:   _________________________________________________
FIRM NAME:   _________________________________________________
ADDRESS: _________________________________________________
CITY/VILLAGE: ____________________   STATE: __________   PHONE:
_________________
LOCATION OF PROPOSED EXCAVATION: _____________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
NATURE OF EXCAVATION:
__________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
BONDING COMPANY:
NAME:   _________________________________________________
ADDRESS:   _________________________________________________
CITY/VILLAGE: ____________________   STATE: ________ PHONE: _________________
AMOUNT OF BOND: $___________________
PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE (LIST CITIES AND/OR VILLAGES)
CITY/VILLAGE            CITY/VILLAGE OFFICIAL
1.   ______________________      _______________________________________
2.   ______________________      _______________________________________
3.   ______________________      _______________________________________
4.   ______________________      _______________________________________
   I have read the municipal law with regard to excavations and my firm or
company intends to fully comply with the Street Regulations Code provisions.
_________________________________________________
(Applicant's Signature)
APPENDIX B: APPLICATION FOR CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
   I, _______________________________, do hereby request permission and
authority to construct a culvert/driveway on the right-of-way of the Village in
accordance with the information provided on this application and the
accompanying sketch. (Applicant must prepare a sketch showing location, length
and pertinent details.)
ADDRESS:   _________________________________________________
Pipe material will be:   _________________________________________________
Wall thickness or gauge will be:
_________________________________________________
Type of joint will be:   _________________________________________________
DATED: ________________________________ , 20___. SIGNED:
_______________________
                              (APPLICANT)
CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
APPLICATION      Approved ( )      Disapproved ( )
If disapproved, state reasons:
______________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
DATED: _____________________, 20_____.   SIGNED: _________________________
CERTIFICATION
   The undersigned has inspected the construction and installation set forth
above and finds that the same (is) (is not) in accordance with the permit.
DATED: ______________________, 20_____.   SIGNED: _________________________
CHAPTER 94: FIREWORKS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Prohibition of fireworks sales and display
   
94.03   Display permits
   
94.04   Application fee
   
94.05   Bond
   
94.06   Issuance of display permit
   
94.07   Time requirements
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Refers to fireworks which were formerly classified as
Class C common fireworks and are now classified as Fireworks UN0336, 1.4G under
the regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation.
   FIREWORKS.
      (1)   The same as in the Illinois Fireworks Use Act, ILCS Ch. 425, Act
35, § 1, which, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, is as follows: the term FIREWORKS shall mean and include any explosive
composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared
for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary
exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and
shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the
type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs or other fireworks of
like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any
tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing
combustible substances producing visual effects: provided, however, that the
term FIREWORKS shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices;
trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick
matches", "cigarette loads" and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols,
toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing
twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing
they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when
in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain
less than twenty hundredths grains of explosive mixture; the sale and use of
which shall be permitted at all times.
      (2)   Should the state legislature change the definition of "fireworks"
in the Fireworks Use Act, then the definition contained in this chapter shall
be deemed to be amended in conformance with the definition in state law.
(2001 Code, § 30-3-1)
§ 94.02 PROHIBITION OF FIREWORKS SALES AND DISPLAY.
   Except as permitted by this chapter, the transfer, sale, use or display of
fireworks within the corporate limits of the village is prohibited.
(2001 Code, § 30-3-2)
§ 94.03 DISPLAY PERMITS.
   Any not-for-profit group of three or more persons may obtain a fireworks
display permit for consumer fireworks by complying with the following
procedures:
   (A)   At least one member of the group shall be a resident of the village;
   (B)   All members of the group shall be 18 years of age or older; and
   (C)   At least three members of the group shall sign an application form
provided by the village which will contain the following information, as a
minimum:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the members of the group
applying for the license;
      (2)   The date, time and location of the fireworks display for which a
permit is sought; and
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
supervise the fireworks display, together with evidence that the person is
licensed by the state as a lead pyrotechnic operator.
(2001 Code, § 30-3-3)
§ 94.04 APPLICATION FEE.
   At the time of making application, the group shall submit a license
application fee in the amount of $5, which shall be nonrefundable.
(2001 Code, § 30-3-4)
§ 94.05 BOND.
   Each license application shall be accompanied by proof of insurance in a sum
not less than $1,000,000 conditioned on compliance with the provisions of the
Fireworks Use Act and State Fire Marshal regulations adopted thereunder.
(2001 Code, § 30-3-5)
§ 94.06 ISSUANCE OF DISPLAY PERMIT.
   Permits for fireworks display shall be issued by the Mayor after the Mayor
or his or her designee have inspected the display site and determined that the
displays shall be in full compliance with the rules of the State Fire Marshal,
which shall be based upon nationally recognized standards such as those of the
National Fire Protection Association 1123 guidelines for outdoor displays and
National Fire Protection Association 1126 guidelines for indoor displays and
shall not be hazardous to property nor endanger any person or persons. The
original permit shall be sealed by the Village Clerk and kept in possession of
the supervising person, one copy of each permit shall be kept on file at the
village office. No fireworks display permit issued hereunder shall be
transferable.
(2001 Code, § 30-3-6)
§ 94.07 TIME REQUIREMENTS.
   Application for a fireworks display permit shall be made in writing at least
15 days in advance of the date of the display, and action shall be taken on the
permit application within 48 hours by the Mayor.
(2001 Code, § 30-3-7)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who discharges or displays fireworks
without a display permit shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not less than $75 nor more than $750.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who transfers or sells fireworks to a
person without a display permit, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$75 nor more than $750.
   (C)   Each transfer or sale of fireworks to a person lacking a display
license, or each use or display of fireworks without a display permit
constitutes a separate offense. In addition, any person found guilty of illegal
transfer, sale or display of fireworks shall be ineligible for a village
fireworks display permit for a period of five years.
(2001 Code, § 30-3-8)
CHAPTER 95: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Abandonment of vehicles
   
95.03   Leaving of vehicles on street
   
95.04   Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles
   
95.05   Storing unlicensed vehicles
   
95.06   Vehicles for sale
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle
incapable of being driven in its condition or any vehicle that has not been
moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of a
least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise
so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven by its own motor
power, Further it shall mean any vehicle that may not be legally driven upon
city streets or highways. INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor
vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its
own motor power in order to perform ordinary, service or repair operations.
Such temporary incapacity for ordinary service or repairs shall not exceed 14
days.
   OPEN PRIVATE LAND. An area of land not enclosed by a garage or carport.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY. Any real property within the village which is not a street or
highway.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without
limitations, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, bus, buggy and
wagon.
(2001 Code, § 24-7-1) (Ord. 15-10-05 Ord12, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 95.02 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall abandon a vehicle or part thereof on any highway in
the city.
   (B)   No person shall abandon a vehicle or part thereof on any public
property or open private land.
(2001 Code, § 24-7-2) (Ord. 15-10-05 Ord12, passed 10-19-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.03 LEAVING OF VEHICLES ON STREET.
   (A)   No person shall leave any abandoned vehicle, inoperable motor vehicle,
wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the village nor shall
any person allow any vehicle to remain on any village property, street or
highway while it is offered for sale.
   (B)   No vehicle may be parked on any village property, street, or highway
without a valid license and sticker.
(2001 Code, § 24-7-3) (Ord. 14-11-03-8, passed 11-3-2014; Ord. 15-10-05 Ord12,
passed 10-19-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.04 DISPOSITION OF WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES.
   No person in charge of or control of any property within the village,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any
abandoned vehicle, inoperable motor vehicle, partially dismantled vehicle,
wrecked vehicle or junked vehicle to remain on the property longer than seven
days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the
village for longer than seven days; except that this section shall not apply
with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building or a vehicle on the premises
of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary
to the operation of the business enterprise, providing the business enterprise
is operating under proper zoning and further, providing that the vehicle does
not remain in that place for a time and in a manner so as to become a nuisance;
or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful manner and place by the village. For purposes of this section, NECESSARY
TO THE OPERATION OF SUCH BUSINESS ENTERPRISE means that the vehicle is being
repaired, properly dismantled for complete disposition or awaiting parts to be
repaired, but does not mean that the vehicle is being used as a temporary or
permanent storage facility.
(2001 Code, § 24-7-4) (Ord. 15-10-05 Ord12, passed 10-19-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.05 STORING UNLICENSED VEHICLES.
   No person in charge of or control of any property within the village,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise shall allow more than
one vehicle not displaying current state registration to remain on the property
for a period in excess of 30 days at any one time. Nothing in this section is
intended to permit the storage of vehicles which would otherwise be contrary to
the other provisions of this code.
(2001 Code, § 24-7-5) (Ord. 15-03-02-01, passed 3-2-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 VEHICLES FOR SALE.
   No person in charge of or control of any property zoned residential within
the village, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise shall, for
a period longer than 30 days, place a "for sale" sign or otherwise offer for
sale in any manner any vehicle, nor shall the person allow the same to occur.
(2001 Code, § 24-7-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 96: RADIO; COMMUNICATIONS
Section
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   Channels and frequencies
   
96.03   Antennas
   
96.04   FCC-approved transmitters
   
96.05   Transmitter power output
   
96.06   Amplifiers prohibited
   
96.07   Responsibility for communications
   
96.08   Prohibited communications
   
96.09   Emergency communications
   
96.10   Remote control prohibited
   
96.11   Connection to telephone prohibited
   
96.12   Causing interference prohibited
   
96.13   Inspection of CB station equipment and CB station records
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. The radiating system (for transmitting, receiving or both) and the
structure holding it up (tower, pole or mast) and everything else attached to
the radiating system and the structure.
   CB. Citizens' Band.
   CITIZENS' BAND RADIO SERVICE or CB RADIO SERVICE. Private, two-way, short
distance voice communications service for personal or business activities or
for voice paging.
   CITIZENS' BAND STATION or CB STATION. A radio station transmitting in the CB
radio service.
   CITIZENS' BAND TRANSMITTER or CB TRANSMITTER.
      (1)   An apparatus that converts electrical energy received from a source
into radio frequency energy capable of being radiated; and
      (2)   An apparatus authorized by the FCC, pursuant to an application
filed after September 9, 1976, for use in the operation of a CB station.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   FCC. Federal Communications Commission.
   RADIO FREQUENCY INTERFERENCE. Radio frequency energy which:
      (1)   Is radiated from a CB station; and
      (2)   Interferes with the operation of electronic devices located off the
premises of the CB station.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005)
§ 96.02 CHANNELS AND FREQUENCIES.
   No person may operate a CB radio station on any channel or at any frequency
other than the channels and frequencies authorized by 47 C.F.R. 95.407 which is
adopted herein by reference.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Antennas in fixed locations. Antennas installed at fixed locations
(whether receiving, transmitting or both) must comply with either of the
following:
      (1)   The highest point must not be more than 20 feet higher than the
highest point of the building or tree on which it is mounted; or
      (2)   The highest point must not be more than 60 feet above the ground.
   (B)   Portable antennas. Antennas mounted on hand-held portable units need
not comply with the limitations imposed upon antennas installed at fixed
locations.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 FCC-APPROVED TRANSMITTERS.
   (A)   No person may use a CB transmitter unless that transmitter has a FCC
type-accepted transmitter with a type-acceptance label placed on it by the
manufacturer.
   (B)   No person may make internal modifications to a type-accepted CB
transmitter.
   (C)   No person shall use a CB transmitter type-accepted pursuant to an
application filed with the Federal Communications Commission prior to September
10, 1976.
   (D)   No person may sell a CB transmitter type-accepted pursuant to the
application.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 TRANSMITTER POWER OUTPUT.
   No person shall use a CB station transmitter with a power output exceeding
either of the following values:
   (A)   AM (A3) - Four watts (carrier power); or
   (B)   SSB - 12 watts (peak envelope power)
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.06 AMPLIFIERS PROHIBITED.
   No person may attach the following power amplifiers to a type-accepted CB
transmitter:
   (A)   An external radio frequency power amplifier (sometimes called linears
or linear amplifiers); or
   (B)   Any other device which, when used with a radio transmitter as a signal
source, is capable of amplifying the signal. It shall be presumed that a CB
operator used a linear or other external radio frequency power amplifier if:
      (1)   A linear or other external radio frequency power amplifier is found
in the operator's possession or on the premises from which the CB radio station
transmits.
      (2)   There is evidence that the CB station was operated with more power
than permitted by §
96.05 above.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.07 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMMUNICATIONS.
   The occupants of the premises upon which a CB station is located shall be
responsible for all CB communications made from the CB station and for all CB
equipment kept on the premises.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005)
§ 96.08 PROHIBITED COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   CB station operators shall transmit two-way plain language
communications without codes or coded messages. Operating signals such as "ten
codes" are not considered codes or coded messages.
   (B)   A CB station operator may transmit two-way plain language
communication only to other CB station, the units of the operator's CB station
or to authorized government stations on CB frequencies about:
      (1)   Personal or business activities of the operator or members of the
operator's immediate family living in the operator's household;
      (2)   Emergencies;
      (3)   Traveler assistance;
      (4)   Civil defense activities in connection with official tasks or
drills conducted by, or actual emergencies announced by, the civil defense
agency with authority over the area in which the CB station is located;
      (5)   No person shall transmit one-way communications except for:
         (a)   Emergency communications;
         (b)   Traveler assistance;
         (c)   Brief tests (radio checks); or
         (d)   Voice paging.
      (6)   No person may use a CB station:
         (a)   For any activity which is against federal, state or local law;
         (b)   To transmit obscene, indecent or profane words, language or
meanings;
         (c)   To intentionally interfere with the communication of another CB
station;
         (d)   To advertise or solicit the sale of any goods or services;
         (e)   To transmit music, whistling, sound effects or any material to
amuse or to entertain;
         (f)   To transmit any sound effect solely to attract attention;
         (g)   To transmit the word "Mayday" or any other international
distress signal, except which the CB station is located in a vehicle, the
occupants of which are threatened by grave and imminent danger and in need of
immediate assistance;
         (h)   To communicate with, or to attempt to communicate with any CB
station more than 155.3 miles away (250 kilometers);
         (i)   To advertise a political candidate or political campaign;
         (j)   To transmit a false or deceptive communication; or
         (k)   Transmit communications for live or delayed rebroadcast on a
radio or television broadcast station.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.09 EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS.
   Every CB station operator shall, at all times and on all channels, give
priority to emergency communications.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005)
§ 96.10 REMOTE CONTROL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person may operate a CB station transmitter by radio remote
control.
   (B)   In this section REMOTE CONTROL means the operation of a CB transmitter
from any place other than the premises on which the CB transmitter is located.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.11 CONNECTION TO TELEPHONE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall connect the CB station transmitter to a telephone, except as
permitted by 47 C.F.R. § 95.420.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.12 CAUSING INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a CB station which causes radio frequency
interference with the operation of any electronic device located in the village
and off the premises of the CB station.
   (B)   If a village police officer determines that a CB station is causing
interference with the electronic equipment kept on premises adjacent to the CB
station, the police officer may do any of the following:
      (1)   Order the operator of the CB station and/or the occupant of the
premises on which the CB station is located to cease operation of the CB
station during specified hours or times; and/or
      (2)   Have the CB station equipment inspected by a person certified as
technically qualified to perform transmitter maintenance and repair duties in
the private land mobile services and fixed services by an organization or
committee representative of users in those services.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.13 INSPECTION OF CB STATION EQUIPMENT AND CB STATION RECORDS.
   (A)   A police officer may inspect CB radio station equipment and CB station
records whenever the officer has probable cause to believe that a CB station
operator, or person in possession of CB radio equipment, has interfered with
the operation of electronic equipment of another by means of radio frequency
interference.
   (B)   In the event that the operator or person in possession of CB radio
equipment refuses to permit inspection of the CB radio equipment or CB station
records, the officer may apply for an inspection.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is otherwise specifically provided, shall be fined not more than $500
for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
that a violation occurs.
(Ord. 05-06-06, passed 6-6-2005)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
         
112.   CANNABIS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
Administration
   
110.01   Applications
   
110.02   Persons subject to license
   
110.03   Form of license
   
110.04   Investigations
   
110.05   Fees
   
110.06   Termination of licenses
   
110.07   Building and premises
   
110.08   Change of location
   
110.09   Location
   
110.10   Nuisances prohibited
   
110.11   Working conditions
   
110.12   Inspections
   
110.13   Suspension, revocation of license or permit
   
110.14   Appeal
   
110.15   License to be posted
   
110.16   Business vehicle sticker
Solicitors
   
110.30   Definitions
   
110.31   Certificate of registration
   
110.32   Application for certificate of registration
   
110.33   Issuance and revocation of certificate
   
110.34   Policy on soliciting
   
110.35   Hours
   
110.36   Compliance by solicitors
   
110.37   Uninvited soliciting prohibited
   
110.38   Solicitations on public highways
   
110.39   Fees
Peddlers
   
110.50   License required
   
110.51   Definition
   
110.52   Applications
   
110.53   Investigation of applicants
   
110.54   Fraud
   
110.55   Photographs
   
110.56   Unwanted peddling
   
110.57   Peddlers as nuisance
   
110.58   Duty of police to abate
   
110.59   Exceptions
   
110.60   Fees
   
Appendix A:   Business License Application
   
Appendix B:   Official Business License
   
Appendix C:   Applicant/Field Check; Information Card
ADMINISTRATION
§ 110.01 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for all licenses and permits required by this chapter
shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk in the absence of provision to
the contrary.
   (B)   Each application shall contain:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The permit or license desired;
      (3)   The location to be used, if any;
      (4)   Zoning district, if any;
      (5)   The time covered; and
      (6)   The fee to be paid.
   (C)   Each application shall also contain the number the certificates of
registration required under the Retailer's Occupation Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act
120), Service Occupation Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115) and/or Use Tax Act
(ILCS Ch. 35, Act 105), if applicable. Each application shall contain
additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the
municipal officials in the issuing of the license or permit applied for.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-1)
§ 110.02 PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE.
   Whenever a license or permit is required in this code or in any municipal
ordinance for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or
establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation,
any person, firm or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by
himself or herself or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, he or
she or it is held forth as being engaged in the business, activity or
occupation, or if he or she or it solicits patronage therefor actively or
passively; or if he or she or it performs or attempts to perform any part of
the business, activity or occupation in this municipality.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-2)
§ 110.03 FORM OF LICENSE.
   Every license shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk under
the corporate seal, and no license shall be valid until signed and
countersigned as aforesaid, nor shall any person be deemed to be licensed until
the same shall have been issued to him or her in due form.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-3)
§ 110.04 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where an
investigation or inspection is required by ordinance before the issuance of the
permit or license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be deemed
reasonably necessary or appropriate, the Clerk, within 48 hours shall refer the
application to the appropriate official(s) for the making of the investigation
or inspection.
   (B)   The official(s) to whom the application has been referred shall make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise within ten days after receiving the
application or a copy thereof.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or the County Health Department shall make or
cause to be made an inspection regarding the permits and licenses as relate to
the care and handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the spread of
disease, and the protection of health. (If a Zoning Code is in effect, the
Zoning Administrator shall make or cause to be made any inspections which
relate to compliance with the Zoning Code and other related regulations.) All
other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the
Chief of Police or by some other officer designated by the Mayor.
   (D)   Upon receipt of all related investigative reports, the Clerk shall
forward the reports, together with the application, to the Mayor for evaluation
and determination.
   (E)   If it shall appear to the Mayor that the matters and circumstances
relating to an application require further information before a proper
determination can be made, the application shall be returned to the Clerk for
the inclusion of additional information as may be specified necessary and
appropriate.
   (F)   If, after due consideration of the information contained with the
application and the related investigative reports, the Mayor shall determine
that the matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory, he or she may
disapprove the application, indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, the
Clerk shall be directed to promptly notify the applicant that his or her
application is disapproved and that no license or permit will be issued.
   (G)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related investigative reports, the Mayor shall determine
that the application is satisfactory, he or she shall approve the application.
Thereupon, the Clerk shall be directed to promptly notify the applicant that
his or her application is approved and the license or permit may be issued.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-4)
§ 110.05 FEES.
   In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the Clerk in the amounts prescribed by the corporate authorities.
When an applicant has not engaged in the business or activity until after the
expiration of the current license year, the license fee shall be prorated by
quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the
business or activity has been or will be conducted. Except as otherwise
provided, all license and permit fees shall become a part of the corporate
fund. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license or permit
fee, or part thereof, by reason of death or departure of the licensee or
permittee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by reason of non-use of the
license or discontinuance of the operation or conduct of the licensed
establishment, business or activity.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-5)
§ 110.06 TERMINATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year for this
municipality shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall terminate on April
30 of the following year, where no provision to the contrary is made.
   (B)   The Clerk shall notify all licensees of this municipality of the time
of expiration of the license held by the licensee (if an annual), three weeks
prior to the date of the expiration. Provided, however, that a failure to make
the notification or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse
the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new licensee or a renewal thereof,
nor shall it be a defense in an action based upon operation without a license.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-6)
§ 110.07 BUILDING AND PREMISES.
   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit
shall be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and building to be
used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of this municipality and the state. No license or permit shall be
issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would
involve a violation of this code and/or other applicable regulations of this
municipality.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-7)
§ 110.08 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location of any
permitted act may be changed, provided that ten days' notice thereof is given
to the Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided
further, however, that all applicable ordinances and regulations of this
municipality shall be complied with.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-8)
§ 110.09 LOCATION.
   (A)   No license for the operation of a business or establishment in this
municipality shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business
or establishment in more than one location in this municipality; a separate
license shall be required for each location of a licensed establishment.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the existence of a single location shall
be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or
accessory uses shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or
parcel; shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner; and shall be
an establishment with the same classification.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-9)
§ 110.10 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Generally. No business or establishment, whether licensed or not,
shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact, and no
building, vehicle or structure, yard, lot, premises or part thereof shall be
used, kept, maintained or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health.
   (B)   Unsafe or unhealthful business.
      (1)   No building or structure utilized, constructed or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary, unsafe
or dangerous condition.
      (2)   No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatsoever, which would
be dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection
with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in
this municipality.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-10)
Editor's note:
   The County Health Department should be consulted.
§ 110.11 WORKING CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Health requirements. No owner, lessee, manager or superintendent of
any store, factory, workshop or other place where persons are employed shall
cause or permit the place or any room or part thereof to be overcrowded or
inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness.
   (B)   Sanitation.
      (1)   All the places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition,
free from effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or other nuisance(s); also
as far as practicable, the premises shall be free from all gases, vapors, dust
or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes or otherwise which are
injurious to health.
      (2)   Sufficient washroom facilities for male and female employees shall
be provided and the facilities shall be properly ventilated.
   (C)   Heat required.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the
heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or workshop to maintain a
temperature within the factory or workshop of not less than 62°F without the
undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary
conditions therein; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to
any factory or workshop where the business conducted therein is of a nature
that a higher or lower temperature than 62°F is necessary or expedient for the
work or manufacturing processes of the business.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the
heating plant which furnishes heat to any office, store or other place of
employment to maintain a temperature therein of not less than 62°F, without the
undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary
conditions therein between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from October 1
of each year until June 1 of the succeeding year (Sundays and legal holidays
excepted).
   (D)   Inspection. The Mayor or the Chief of Police shall visit or cause to
be visited all places of employment in this municipality as often as he or she
shall deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this section,
and to have the arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for the health and
safety of the employees.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-11)
§ 110.12 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions
of any ordinance or regulation of this municipality, or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the
premises to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, any
officer or employee of this municipality who is duly authorized to make the
inspection at any reasonable time that the admission or entry is requested.
   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or
regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized
officer or employee of this municipality requesting the same, sufficient
samples of the material or commodity for the analysis upon official request.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may
revoke the license of any owner or operator of a licensed business in this
municipality who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or employee to
make the inspection or to take adequate sample(s) of the commodity, or who
interferes with the officer or employee while in the performance of his or her
duties; provided, however, that no license shall be subject to revocation for
that cause unless the officer or employee has been refused permission to enter
upon the premises in the name of this municipality after having first presented
a warrant authorizing the entry.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-12)
§ 110.13 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   Nuisance. When the conduct or operation of any business or
establishment, whether or not licensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact and
a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the
Mayor shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the
closing of the premises, and the suspension of any license or permit for a
period not to exceed ten days.
   (B)   Hearing. Within eight days after he or she has so acted, the Mayor
shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
or permit should be revoked.
   (C)   Revocation.
      (1)   Licenses and permits issued in this municipality, unless otherwise
provided, may be revoked by the Mayor after notice and hearing as provided in
divisions (D) and (E) below for any of the following causes:
         (a)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
         (b)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of code provisions
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit,
or the premises occupied;
         (c)   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
         (d)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owed to this municipality; or
         (e)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized officer or employee in the performance of his or her
duties in making the inspections, as provided in §
110.12 above.
      (2)   The revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable code regulations of this municipality.
   (D)   Hearing notice. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be sent by
certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his
or her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
   (E)   Counsel. At the hearing, the attorney for the municipality shall
present the complaint and shall represent the municipality. The licensee or
permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit
evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The Mayor shall preside and shall render
the decision.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-13)
§ 110.14 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor regarding the denial of an
application for a business license as provided in §
110.04 above or in connection with the revocation of a license or permit as
provided in §
110.13 above shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Clerk, within ten days after notice of a
denial of an application or a revocation of a license or permit, a written
statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The
Mayor shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on the appeal and
notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee or permittee
in the same manner as provided in §
110.13 above. The decision of the Village Board on the appeal shall be final.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-14)
§ 110.15 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in this
municipality to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the
premises used for the business at all times.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-15)
§ 110.16 BUSINESS VEHICLE STICKER.
   Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis in whole or in part for a
license fee, the Clerk shall furnish the licensee with a tag or sticker for
each vehicle covered by the license and the tag or sticker shall be posted or
affixed in a conspicuous place on each business vehicle.
(2001 Code, § 7-1-16)
SOLICITORS
§ 110.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR. Includes any person who has obtained a valid
certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is
in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in
soliciting.
   RESIDENCE. Includes every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or
structure.
   SOLICITING. Includes any one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description
whatsoever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; and/or
      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or non-profit
association, organization, corporation or project.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-1)
§ 110.31 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined from persons
within this municipality is hereby required to make written application for a
certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. All resident charitable,
non-profit organizations in this municipality which have been in existence for
six months or longer, and the local school district, shall be exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-2)
§ 110.32 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Applications for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a
form provided by the Village Clerk and filed with the Clerk.
   (B)   The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested
on the application, to-wit:
      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at the address; also, business address if other than residence
address; also, Social Security number;
      (2)   Address of place of residence during the past three years if other
than present address;
      (3)   Age of applicant and marital status; and if married, the name of
spouse;
      (4)   Physical description of the applicant;
      (5)   Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association
with whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length of time of
the employment or representation;
      (6)   Name and address of employer during the past three years if other
than the present employer;
      (7)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;
      (8)   Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
      (9)   The date or approximate date of the latest previous application for
a certificate under this chapter, if any;
      (10)   Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under
this chapter ever been revoked;
      (11)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this code or the regulations of any other Illinois municipality
regulating soliciting;
      (12)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the
United States;
      (13)   The last three municipalities where the applicant carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application in this municipality and
the address from which the business was conducted in those municipalities; and
      (14)   Also, additional information as the village may deem necessary to
process the application.
   (C)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (D)   The Village Clerk shall cause to be kept in his or her office an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this chapter and of the denial of
applications.
   (E)   Applications for certificates issued shall be numbered in consecutive
order as filed, and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be
identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was
issued.
   (F)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any
other state or federal law of the United States within five years of the date
of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter, nor to any person whose certificate of
registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-3)
§ 110.33 ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The Mayor, after consideration of the application and all information
obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant does not
possess the qualifications for the certificate as herein required, and that the
issuance of a certificate of registration to the applicant would not be in
accord with the intent and purpose of this code. Endorsement shall be made by
the Chief of Police upon the application of the denial of the application. When
the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate of registration
shall be issued forthwith.
   (B)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by
the Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter, or has made a false material
statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance
of a certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter. Immediately
upon the revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Chief of
Police to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified (return
receipt requested) U.S. mail, addressed to his or her residence address set
forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of the notice, the
certificate of registration shall become null and void. The certificate of
registration shall state the expiration date thereof.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-4)
§ 110.34 POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is declared to be the policy of this municipality that the occupant or
occupants of the residences in this municipality shall make the determination
of whether solicitors shall be or shall not be invited to their respective
residences.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-5)
§ 110.35 HOURS.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this code or not, to engage in peddling as
herein defined prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any weekday or at any
time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.36 COMPLIANCE BY SOLICITORS.
   (A)   It is the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in this
municipality upon which a residence as herein defined is located to first
examine the notice if any is attached and be governed by the statement
contained on the notice.
   (B)   If the notice states "ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS INVITED", then the
solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein provided
for shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the
notice states, "NO SOLICITORS INVITED", then the solicitor, whether registered
or not shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (C)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-7)
§ 110.37 UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person
to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create
any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of the residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the
notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
110.35 above.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.38 SOLICITATIONS ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.
   Charitable organizations shall be allowed to solicit upon public highways
under the following terms and conditions.
   (A)   The charitable organization must be one that is registered with the
attorney general for the state as a charitable organization as provided by "An
Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes,
Providing for Violations Thereof, and Making an Appropriation Therefor",
approved July 26, 1963, as amended.
   (B)   Solicit only at intersections where all traffic from all directions is
required to come to a full stop.
   (C)   Be engaged in a state-wide fund-raising activity.
   (D)   Be liable for any injury to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (E)   Any person so engaged in the solicitation shall be at least 16 years
of age and shall wear a high visibility vest.
   (F)   Solicit only during daylight hours.
   (G)   Any one charitable organization shall be limited to conducting no more
than two solicitations per calendar year.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-10)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006
§ 110.39 FEES.
   Upon making an application for a certificate, the applicant shall pay a
license fee, which shall be as follows: annual license: $50 per person per day.
(2001 Code, § 7-2-11) (Am. Ord. 12-06-04-01, passed 6-4-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-5
PEDDLERS
§ 110.50 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of hawker or peddler of any merchandise, article or thing without
having first secured a license therefor.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.51 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLE. The selling, bartering or exchanging or the offering for sale,
barter or exchange of any tangible personal property upon or along the streets,
highways or public places of this village or from house to house, whether at
one place thereon or from place to place, from any wagon, truck, pushcart or
other vehicle or from movable receptacles of any kind, but shall not include
the delivery of any item previously ordered or the sale of items along delivery
routes where the purchaser has previously requested the seller to stop and
exhibit his or her items. Nor shall PEDDLE be taken to include the solicitation
of orders by sample where the goods are not delivered at the time the order is
taken.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-2)
§ 110.52 APPLICATIONS.
   A person desiring a license may obtain the same by making application with
the Clerk and providing the following information:
   (A)   Name and physical description of applicant;
   (B)   Permanent home and address and local address if operating from such an
address;
   (C)   A brief description of the business and of the goods to be sold;
   (D)   Name and address of the employer, if any;
   (E)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
   (F)   Evidence that the agent is acting on behalf of the corporation he or
she represents;
   (G)   Statement of the applicant's criminal record other than a traffic
record; and
   (H)   The last three municipalities where the applicant carried on business
immediately preceding the date of application to this municipality and the
address from which the business was conducted in those municipalities.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-3)
§ 110.53 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of each application, it shall be referred to the Chief of
Police, who shall investigate the business and moral character of the
applicant.
   (B)   If the facts show the applicant unfit to receive the license, then it
shall be denied.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-4)
§ 110.54 FRAUD.
   No licensed peddler or hawker shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation, whether through himself or herself or through an employee
while acting as a peddler in this municipality, or shall barter, sell or peddle
any goods or merchandise or wares other than those specified in his or her
application for a license.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-6)
§ 110.55 PHOTOGRAPHS.
   Two photographs of the applicant and such of its employees as will be used
in the peddling or merchandising, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the
filing of the application, which pictures shall be two inches by two inches,
showing the head and shoulders of the applicant or its agent(s) and/or employee
(s) in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-7)
§ 110.56 UNWANTED PEDDLING.
   Nothing contained in this chapter, nor the issuance of any license hereunder
shall entitle the licensee to go in or upon any private residence for the
purpose of peddling if the licensee, his or her agents or employees are
directed to depart from the private residence by the owner or person in charge
thereof.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-8)
§ 110.57 PEDDLERS AS NUISANCE.
   The practice of going in and upon private residences, business
establishments or offices in the municipality by peddlers, hawkers, itinerant
merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, without having been requested
or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the
private residences and business establishments or offices for the purpose of
disposing of and/or peddling or hawking of merchandise, is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and is punishable as a violation of this code. No person shall
peddle in a public square.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.58 DUTY OF POLICE TO ABATE.
   The Police Department of this municipality is hereby required and directed
to suppress the same and to abate any such nuisance as described in §
110.57 above.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-10)
§ 110.59 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to persons employed or
representing an established merchant, business firm or corporation located and
regularly doing business in the municipality or to farmers selling any food
items raised or produced by themselves and/or to permanently established
residents who are voters in the municipality or anyone duly licensed.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-11)
§ 110.60 FEES.
   The license fees per person to be charged for licenses to peddle in this
municipality, each payable in advance, are hereby fixed and established as
follows: daily license: $25 per person.
(2001 Code, § 7-3-12)
APPENDIX A: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION
Application No. ___________________   Annual license fee due May 1: $_________
(PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT)
1. Applicants Name: ____________________________________   PHONE
( )________________
2. Applicant's Address:
________________________________________________________________
City ___________________________________ State _______________ ZIP __________
3. Length of resident at above address _______ years ________ months
4. Applicant's Date of Birth ________ / ________ /      Social Security No.
____________________
5. Marital Status ____________________      Name of Spouse
______________________________
6. Citizenship of Applicant
______________________________________________________________
7. Business Name _________________________   PHONE ( ) _________________
8. Business
Address   _________________________________________________________________
City ____________________________ State ______________ ZIP _____________
9. Length of Employment ________ years __________ months
10. All residences and addresses for the last three (3) years if different than
above:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
11. Name and Address of employers during the last three (3) years if different
than above:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
12. List the last three (3) municipalities where applicant has carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
13. A description of the subject matter that will be used in the applicant's
business:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
14. Has the applicant ever had a license in this municipality?      [ ] Yes [ ]
No
If so, when ______________________________________
15. Has a license issued to this applicant ever been revoked?      [ ] Yes [ ]
No
If "yes", explain: _________________________________
16. Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Code, etc.?
                              [ ] Yes [ ] No
If "yes", explain:
_____________________________________________________________________
17. Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony?   [ ]
Yes [ ] No
If "yes", explain: __________________________________
18. LICENSE DATA:   Term of License
________________________________________________
                  Fee for License $______________.________
                  Sales Tax Number
______________________________________________
                  License Classification
___________________________________________
19. LIST ALL OWNERS IF LICENSE IS FOR LOCAL BUSINESS (PERMANENT):
_____________________________________         ______________________________________
_____________________________________         ______________________________________
_____________________________________         ______________________________________
_____________________________________         ______________________________________
APPENDIX B: OFFICIAL BUSINESS LICENSE
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
COUNTY OF MACON      )   SS.
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA   )
ILLINOIS SALES TAX NUMBER   ____________________
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL BECOME GREETINGS:
   WHEREAS _____________________________________________, having complied with
all the requirements of the laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of
the Village of Argenta, Illinois in this behalf made and required license is,
by authority of the Village of Argenta, Illinois given and granted to the
_________________________________________________________________________
to ___________________________________________ at
_____________________________________
in the Village of Argenta, County of Macon, and State of Illinois, from the
______________________
date hereof until the ___________day of __________________, ________, said
____________________
____________________ to be subject to all laws of the State of Illinois and all
ordinances of the Village of Argenta, Illinois, not in conflict therewith,
which are now or hereafter may be in force touching the premises.
(L.S.)
   Given under the hand of the Mayor of the Village of Argenta, County of
Macon, Illinois and the seal thereof, this __________day of
___________________, _________.
___________________________________
MAYOR
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA
COUNTERSIGNED:
____________________________________________
VILLAGE CLERK
VILLAGE OF ARGENTA
(SEAL)
APPENDIX C: APPLICANT/FIELD CHECK; INFORMATION CARD
                                       
______________________________________ ______________________________________
Name                                   Location Date Time
                                       
______________________________________ ______________________________________
Residence Address                      D.L. #
                                       
______________________________________ ______________________________________
Business Address                       Vehicle Color Yr. Body License Info
 
______________________________________ Vehicle Modifications:
Occupation
______________________________________
Social Security Number
_____________________________________
Race         Sex Height
_____________________________________  Action Leading to Check:
Weight       Eyes Hair
______________________________________
Complexion       Date of Birth
                                       Comments:
                                        
                                        
Unusual Features:                       
                                        
                                        
                                        
 
______________________________________ Associates:
Hat            Coat
 
______________________________________
Cap            Jacket
 
______________________________________
Blouse            Dress
 
______________________________________
Shirt            Sweater
 
______________________________________
Skirt            Trousers
 
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Generally
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   Applications
   
111.04   Examination of applicant
   
111.05   Prohibited licensees
   
111.06   Term; fee submitted in advance
   
111.07   Classification; fee; limitation
   
111.08   Nature of license
   
111.09   Limitation of licenses
   
111.10   Display of license
   
111.11   Record of licenses
Regulations; Violations
   
111.25   Hours
   
111.26   Change of location
   
111.27   Stores selling school supplies, lunches and the like
   
111.28   Transporting and the like in motor vehicles
   
111.29   Open liquor; cup-to-go prohibited
   
111.30   Liquor in vehicles; underage
   
111.31   Restricted residential areas
   
111.32   Election days
   
111.33   Unlawful acts
   
111.34   Sanitary conditions
   
111.35   Health permit
   
111.36   Peddling
   
111.37   Disorderly house
   
111.38   Prohibited sales; generally
   
111.39   Persons selling liquor
   
111.40   Unlawful purchase of liquor
   
111.41   Identification required
   
111.42   Transfer of identification card
   
111.43   Posting warning
   
111.44   Exclusionary provision
   
111.45   Inspections
   
111.46   Books and records; available; reasonable notice; maintenance
   
111.47   Restrictions on licensee
   
111.48   Selling false identification
   
111.49   False identification
   
111.50   Underage drinking on streets
   
111.51   Residential drinking
   
111.52   Renting hotel rooms for drinking
   
111.53   Violations
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERALLY
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by human beings. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol
produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing 0.5% or less of alcohol by
volume.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
   CATERER RETAILER. A person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption,
either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as
an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are
sold at a package price agreed upon under contract.
   CLOSE. To shut up so as to prevent entrance or access by any person; and the
entire suspension of business.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state and not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members, through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building of the extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and
employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and
their guests; provided that the club files with the Mayor, at the time of its
application for a license under this chapter, two copies of a list of names and
residences of its members, and similarly files within ten days of the election
of any additional member, his or her name and address; and provided further,
that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting and that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid,
or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation
any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or
its members or guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of the salary as
may be fixed and voted at the annual meeting by the members or by the board of
directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
   CORPORATION. Any corporation, domestic or foreign, qualified to do business
in the state under the "Business Corporation Act" (ILCS Ch. 805, Act 5) of the
state.
(Rule 100.10(b))
   DISTILLED SPIRITS. See SPIRITS.
   EVENT. A single theme.
(Rules and Regulations 100.10(o))
   HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 25 or more
rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of the guests and having one or
more public dining rooms where meals are served to the guests, the sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or
buildings in connection therewith, and the building or buildings, structure or
structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen or dining room
equipment and capacity.
   MANAGER or AGENT. Any individual employed by any licensed place of business,
provided the individual possess the same qualifications required of the
licensee. Satisfactory evidence of the employment will be furnished the
Commission in the form and manner as the Commission shall from time to time
prescribe.
(Rule 100.10(f))
   MAYOR. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner as provided in the ILCS Ch.
235, Act 5, entitled "Liquor Control Act", and all references to LIQUOR
COMMISSIONER shall refer to the MAYOR, unless otherwise provided.
   MEAL. Food that is prepared and served on the licensed premises and excludes
the serving of snacks.
(Rules and Regulations 100.10(n))
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed
and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey
any alcoholic liquor.
   PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE. Any public place where packaged liquors are offered
for sale in the original, unopened container for consumption away from the
premises.
   PARTNER. Any individual who is a member of a co-partnership. CO-PARTNERSHIP
is an association of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners of a business
for profit.
(Rules and Regulations 100.10(d)(e))
   PREMISES/PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place or location where alcoholic beverages
are manufactured, stored, displayed, offered for sale or where drinks
containing alcoholic beverages are mixed, concocted and served for consumption.
Not included are sidewalks, street, parking areas and grounds adjacent to any
such place or location.
(Rules and Regulations 100.10(g))
   PRIVATE FUNCTION. A prearranged private party, function, or event for a
specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation and
not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served in a
room or rooms designated and used exclusively for the private party, function
or event.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any premises enclosed or unenclosed or partly enclosed and
partly unenclosed wherein any service or goods, chattels or merchandise are
offered for sale to the public or any such premises used as a clubhouse, club
room or meeting place. The terms PUBLIC PLACE and PUBLIC PREMISES shall be
interchangeable for the purposes of this chapter.
   RESIDENT. Any person (other than a corporation) who has resided and
maintained a bona fide residence in the state for at least one year and in the
city, village and county in which the premises covered by the license are
located for at least 90 days prior to making application for the license.
(Rule 100.10(a))
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals actually are
served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, the space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAILER. A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE OF RETAIL. Any mean sales for use or consumption and
not for resale in any form.
   SPECIAL EVENT.  An event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or non-profit organization.
   SPECIAL EVENTS RETAILER. An educational, fraternal, political, civic,
religious or non-profit organization which sells or offers for sale beer or
wine, or both, only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated
by a special event retail license.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors and the liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   TO SELL. Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including the beverages when
fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as above defined.
(2001 Code, § 21-1-1)
Editor's Note:
   All references to "rules" refer to Illinois Liquor Commission Rules located
in Title 11, Subtitle A, Chapter 1, Part 100, §§ 100.5 et seq. of the Illinois
Administration Code
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 3.01 et seq.
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale at retail, or conduct any
place for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor within the limits and
territory of this municipality without having a license to do so, issued by the
Mayor of this municipality in the manner hereinafter provided, and a valid
license for such purpose issued by the State Liquor Control Commissioner of the
state.
   (B)   A similar valid license issued by the Mayor of this municipality is
hereby required for and with respect to each building, location and premises,
within the aforesaid territory of this municipality, at or upon which alcoholic
liquor is to be sold or kept or offered for sale at retail.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-1) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to grant and issue licenses to individuals,
firms and corporations to sell at retail and to keep and offer for sale at
retail alcoholic liquors within the limits and territory of this municipality
upon the conditions and in the manner provided by this chapter and by the Act
of the General Assembly of the state, and not otherwise. The license shall be
in writing, signed by the Mayor and attested by the Village Clerk, with the
seal of his or her office affixed thereto.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of a license, the applicant must submit to the Mayor
an application in triplicate, in writing and under oath, stating the following:
      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the
date of incorporation, the object for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers, directors and the name of the person who will be
managing the establishment for which the license is sought, and if a majority
in interest of the stock of the corporation is owned by one person or his or
her nominee, the address and name of the person;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth and if
a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
      (3)   The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed;
      (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the
business of that character or in the case of a corporation, the date on which
its charter was issued;
      (5)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under the license;
      (6)   Whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other
license on premises other than described in the application and the disposition
of the application;
      (7)   The applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
the aforesaid Act of the General Assembly or in this chapter or resolution and
amendments thereto;
      (8)   Whether a previous license issued to the applicant by any state, or
subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked and the
reasons therefor; and
      (9)   That he or she will not violate any of the laws of the state or of
the United States, or any of the provisions of this chapter or resolution and
amendments thereto in the conduct of his or her place of business.
   (C)   In the case of a partnership or corporation, the information and
statements required by this section shall be furnished as to each partner, and
with respect to a corporation, the information and statements required by this
section shall be furnished as to the president of the corporation, the
secretary of the corporation, the directors of the corporation, and with
respect to the person who is to manage the establishment for which a license is
sought.
   (D)   If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by
at least one member of the partnership, firm, association or club, or by the
president and secretary of the corporation.
   (E)   One copy of the application shall be retained by the Mayor, one copy
given to the Chief of Police; the Chief of Police shall endorse on the copies
his or her approval or disapproval of the application and may make further
comments regarding that application. The copies shall be returned to the Mayor
and the endorsement and comment of the Chief of Police shall be considered by
him or her as an aid in deciding whether the license should be issued or
refused.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-2)
§ 111.04 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT.
   The Mayor shall have the right to examine or cause to be examined, under
oath, any applicant for a local license or for renewal thereof, or any licensee
upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner
hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and
records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for
his or her information in the performance of his or her duties, and for that
purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state.
For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Mayor under
this section, he or she may authorize his or her agent to act on his or her
behalf.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-3)
§ 111.05 PROHIBITED LICENSEES.
   No retail license shall be issued by the Mayor to the following:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of this municipality;
   (B)   A person who is not 21 years of age;
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law if the Mayor determines, after investigation, that the person has not been
sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a
house of ill-fame;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality;
   (F)   A person whose license has previously been revoked for cause;
   (G)   A person who, at the time of the application for renewal for any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for the license upon first
application;
   (H)   A co-partnership, if any general partnership thereof or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited partner
interest in the co-partnership would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason;
   (I)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the corporation, would not
be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than the
requirement for citizenship and residence;
   (J)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless it is
a foreign corporation which is qualified under the "Business Corporation Act of
1983" to transact business in the state;
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
   (L)   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor license;
   (M)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (N)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this code or has forfeited his or her bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
   (O)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not rent nor have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued;
   (P)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor
control commissions, any mayor, alderman or member of a city council or
commission, any president of a village board of trustees, any member of a
village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no
such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license may be granted to the
official in relation to premises which are not located within the territory
subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of the license is
approved by the State Liquor Control Commission and the Mayor;
   (Q)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (R)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
the Criminal Code, being ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 28-1(a)(3) to (a)(11) and 28-
3, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed
by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
   (S)   A person to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
federal government for the current tax period; except those persons who are
eligible to receive a license under the Raffles Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15) or
the State Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 20);
   (T)   A co-partnership to which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners
have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the
federal government for the current tax period;
   (U)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of the
corporation has been issued a federal wagering stamp for the current tax
period; or
   (V)   Any premises for which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
federal government for the current tax period.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-4)
§ 111.06 TERM; FEE SUBMITTED IN ADVANCE.
   (A)   Retail liquor licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
12-month period upon the payment of the license fee as hereinafter set forth
unless sooner revoked or suspended. The 12-month period shall be from July 1 to
June 30 of the following year. This may be paid quarterly.
   (B)   The license fee shall be payable in advance by the applicant for a
license at the time the application for a license is submitted to the Mayor as
hereinbefore provided. A licensee may make arrangements to pay the liquor
license fees semi-annually. In the event the license is denied, the license fee
shall be returned to the applicant. The fees shall be deposited in the
Municipal General Fund. The application for a license shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk.
   (C)   Licenses shall state thereon the names of the licensees and the
address and description of the premises for which they are granted and the
dates of their issuance and expiration.
   (D)   With respect to a corporation operating an establishment for which a
liquor license has been issued, should the manager of the establishment change
after the issuance of the liquor license, the corporation must submit the new
manager's name and shall be submitted within 30 days. Continuation of the
license will be contingent upon a background check of the new manager as set
out in this chapter, and all fees shall be waived should the license be changed
only as a result of a change of managers.
   (E)   If for some reason, the manager is not acceptable, the licensee shall
have 30 days to submit a new name before revocation. Failure to provide new
information shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-5)
§ 111.07 CLASSIFICATION; FEE; LIMITATION.
   Every person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the village
shall pay an annual license fee.
   (A)   Class “A” – restaurants. There shall be one retail license which shall
be designated as a Class “A” license. The license shall authorize the licensee
to sell alcoholic liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the licensed
premises on which food is also sold for consumption. In order to qualify for a
license of this class, and in order to remain qualified for any subsequent
renewal of this license, the person applying, or the licensee, must prove to
the satisfaction of the Village Liquor Commissioner that more than one-half of
the gross revenue of the person’s business on the licensed premises has
resulted from the sale of food. A licensee shall be required to maintain such
major percentage of gross revenue from food sales, and his or her business
records may be subjected to audit from time to time for verification of the
maintenance of such major percentage of gross income from food. The annual
license fee for such license shall be $1,500. The total number of restaurant
liquor licenses shall be one to be issued as a Class “A” license.
   (B)   Class “B” – liquor stores. There shall be one retail license which
shall be designated as a Class “B” license. The license shall be a package
liquor license under which the licensee may sell to the general public beer,
wine coolers, wine and distilled spirits in original packages only for
consumption off the premises where sold. The annual license fee for such
license shall be $1,500. The total number of package liquor licenses shall be
one to be issued as a Class “B” license.
   (C)   Class “C” – taverns. There shall be two retail licenses which shall be
designated as Class “C” licenses. The licenses shall authorize the licensee to
sell alcoholic liquor by the drink at retail for consumption on the premises.
The principal purpose of such establishment shall be the operation of a tavern.
The annual license fee for such license shall be $1,500. The total number of
tavern liquor licenses to be issued as a Class “C’ license shall be two.
   (D)   Special events. the Mayor who acts as the Liquor Commissioner shall
have the power to issue a temporary permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages
to be consumed on the premises at a banquet, picnic, bazaar, fair, or similar
private or public assembly where food or drink is sold, served, or dispensed. A
temporary permit shall be issued only to an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or not-for-profit organization which sells or offers for sale
alcoholic beverages only for consumption at the location and on the dates
designated by a special event retail license. The special event retail license
shall be temporary and shall be for a period or not more than four days.
Nothing herein shall relieve the licensee granted the temporary special events
permit from the obligation to acquire any temporary permit from the State
Liquor Control Commission or other licensing agency that the state or federal
law may require. Further, the special event licensee must fulfill any and all
obligations set forth in this chapter including but not limited to dram shop
insurance coverage and any additional special conditions imposed by the
issuance of the license.
   (E)   Class “D” – gaming parlors. There shall be one retail license which
shall be designated as a Class “D” license. The license shall authorize the
licensee to operate an establishment or business whose primary purpose is to
operate video gaming terminals as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act
and in which the sale of foods or snacks and alcoholic beverages is only
incidental to the operation of the video gaming terminals. A Class “D” license
shall not be issued for any premises situated in any residential district
established by this code, nor shall any Class “D” license be issued for any
premises located within 100 feet of another establishment which offers video
gaming terminals.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-6) (Ord. 98-08, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 06-01, passed 5-15-
2006; Ord. 09-09- 08-10, passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 13-07-01-09, passed 7-1-2013;
Ord. 15-08-03 Ord09, passed 8-3-2015; Ord. 24-07-15 Ord03, passed 7-15-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provision, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-1
§ 111.08 NATURE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issued unless sooner revoked
as in this chapter authorized and provided, and shall not constitute property
nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it
be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated.
   (B)   The license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that
executors and administrators of any estate of the deceased licensee and the
trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic
liquor under the order of the court having jurisdiction of the estate and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased, insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of the decedent or the insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration
of the license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of the licensee.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-7)
§ 111.09 LIMITATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Annexing license holders. The restrictions contained in this chapter
shall in no way affect taverns and other businesses) holding retail liquor
licenses, duly licensed by the county, which are located in the territory
annexed to the municipality. Licenses may be issued to them or renewed by the
duly constituted authorities upon annexation; provided that, thereafter, all of
the restrictions and contingencies contained herein shall apply.
   (B)   Destroyed or damaged business. No license shall be held in existence
by the mere payment of fees by any person, firm or corporation for a period
longer than 90 days without a tavern or liquor business for the same being in
complete and full operation. However, if a tavern or liquor business has been
destroyed or damaged by fire or act of God and cannot be rebuilt or repaired
within the 90-day period, then, in that event, the Mayor shall extend the
period of time for which a liquor license may be held by the mere payment of
fees without the tavern or liquor business being in full and complete operation
for an additional 90 days.
   (C)   Expiration. If either of the above stated periods of time passes
without the particular tavern or liquor business returning to complete and full
operation, the license for that particular business shall expire and not be
subject to renewal, unless all other requirements of this chapter shall have
been met.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-8)
§ 111.10 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee under this chapter shall cause his or her license to be
framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-9)
§ 111.11 RECORD OF LICENSES.
   The Mayor shall keep a complete record of all licenses issued by him or her
and shall supply the Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of Police a copy of the same.
Upon issuance or revocation of a license, the Mayor shall give written notice
to these same officers within 48 hours.
(2001 Code, § 21-2-10)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 4-1, 4-5, 6-1, 6-24 and 7-1
REGULATIONS; VIOLATIONS
§ 111.25 HOURS.
   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale at retail, any alcoholic liquor
in this village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on all days.
   (B)   No person shall keep open for business or admit the public to any
premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours
within which the sale of liquor is prohibited. In the case of restaurants,
clubs and hotels, the establishments may be kept open during such hours, but no
alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public during such hours.
      (1)   The times referred to above shall refer to Daylight Savings Time or
when the same is in effect in the village and upon cessation of Daylight
Savings Time, shall be Central Standard Time.
      (2)   All patrons or customers shall leave the premises at the specified
closing time and shall not remain on the premises thereafter.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-1) (Ord. 12-12-07-10, passed 12-7-2012) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-1
§ 111.26 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only on the premises described in the application and license. The location may
be changed only upon the written permit to make the change issued by the Mayor.
No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a
proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the law of this state
and the code of this municipality.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-14
§ 111.27 STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES AND THE LIKE.
   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for the
minors.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-12
§ 111.28 TRANSPORTING AND THE LIKE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall, within this municipality, transport, carry, possess or have
any alcoholic liquor in, upon, or about any motor vehicle in or on any public
street, alley or place, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-4) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.29 OPEN LIQUOR; CUP-TO-GO PROHIBITED.
   The licensee shall not knowingly permit any person to leave his or her
premises with open liquor or in a "cup-to-go".
(2001 Code, § 21-3-5)
§ 111.30 LIQUOR IN VEHICLES; UNDERAGE.
   The presence in a vehicle other than a public vehicle of any alcoholic
liquor shall be prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of and is
being carried by all persons occupying the vehicle at the time of which the
alcoholic liquor is found, except under the following circumstances:
   (A)   If the liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants therein;
or
   (B)   If the vehicle contains at least one occupant over 21 years of age.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-6) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.31 RESTRICTED RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful to establish a retail liquor business within the
municipality in violation of the restrictions of the Zoning Code.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-7) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.32 ELECTION DAYS.
   All the licensees may sell alcoholic liquor at retail, by the drink or in
the original package for consumption either on or off the premises licensed on
the day of any national, state, county or municipal election, including primary
elections during the hours the polls are open within the political area in
which the election is being held and on Sundays; subject to all the remaining
terms, conditions and opening hours and closing hours as set forth in this
chapter.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-8)
§ 111.33 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do or commit any of the following
acts within the village, to-wit:
   (A)   Drink any alcoholic liquors on any public street, alley, sidewalk or
other public way without special permission granted by the Mayor;
   (B)   Drink any alcoholic liquors in any public park, except with the
permission of the Mayor;
   (C)   Drink any alcoholic liquors on any private property without permission
of an owner thereof; and
   (D)   Appear on or in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place, including parks and recreation areas, in an intoxicated condition.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-9) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.34 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage
of the liquor for the sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and
shall be kept in full compliance with the codes regulating the condition of the
premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-10)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 410, Act 650, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 111.35 HEALTH PERMIT.
   Every licensee shall have, at all times, a valid operating permit from the
County Health Department which regulates health standards.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-11)
§ 111.36 PEDDLING.
   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in this municipality.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-12) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.37 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   Any person licensed under this chapter shall not suffer or permit any
disorder, drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games or riotous or
disorderly conduct in any house or premises kept or occupied by him or her for
the sale of liquor.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-13) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.38 PROHIBITED SALES; GENERALLY.
   (A)   No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent
or employee of the licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person
known by him or her to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane or mentally
ill.
   (B)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall sell, give or deliver the alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-14) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16
§ 111.39 PERSONS SELLING LIQUOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to attend any
bar or to sell, draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail
premises.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-15) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-1
§ 111.40 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF LIQUOR.
   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of the alcoholic
liquor or have the alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-16)
§ 111.41 IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   If a licensee or his or her agents or employees believe or have reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before making
the sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive
identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the
performance of his or her official duties.
   (B)   Proof that the defendant/licensee or his or her employees or agent
demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon the written evidence in any
transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be
considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or in any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-17)
§ 111.42 TRANSFER OF IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   (A)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card;
use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under the age of 21
years is forbidden.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-18) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.43 POSTING WARNING.
   In every licensed business where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be
displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed card which shall be
supplied by the Municipal Clerk, and which shall read as follows:
UNDERAGE LIQUOR WARNING
"YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $750 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THIS MUNICIPALITY
IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF
PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR."
(2001 Code, § 21-3-19)
§ 111.44 EXCLUSIONARY PROVISION.
   The possession and dispensing or consumption by an underage person of
alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the
consumption by an underage person under the direct supervision and approval of
the parent or parents of the underage person in the privacy of a home is not
prohibited by this chapter.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-20
§ 111.45 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which
a license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of the Chief of
Police, any police officer, or the Liquor Commissioner for the purpose of
making an inspection of the premises or any part thereof.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-21) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-4
§ 111.46 BOOKS AND RECORDS; AVAILABLE; REASONABLE NOTICE; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and
records available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and
control by the Mayor having jurisdiction over the licensee.
   (B)   The books and records need not be maintained on the licensed premises,
but must be maintained in the state.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-22)
§ 111.47 RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSEE.
   In addition to the restrictions on licensing, the holder of a license is
subject to the following restrictions.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any licensee to accept, receive or borrow money or
anything of value directly or indirectly from any manufacturer or distributor
of alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   No licensee licensed under the provisions of this code shall deny or
permit his or her agents or employees to deny any person the full and equal
enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any
premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to
the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all
citizens.
   (C)   No licensee shall sell liquor to any persons on credit, or in payment
for services rendered but this does not apply to clubs and hotels and liquor
purchased for consumption off the premises.
   (D)   No licensee shall fill or refill in whole or in part any original
package of alcohol with the same or other liquor and no liquor shall be sold
except in original packages.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or delivered in any building
belonging to or under the control of a municipality except in connection with
the operation of an established food service facility or at a site specifically
provided for in the Liquor Control Act and where dram shop insurance coverage
is provided.
   (F)   An established place of business is a prerequisite to the issuance of
a license. Revocation of a license when a licensee ceases to operate the
business before the license expires is within the authority of the Commissioner
on the grounds of non-use.
   (G)   No licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor and no person
shall consume alcoholic liquor on premises where the following acts or conduct
are permitted or occur:
      (1)   The employment or use of any person in the sale or service of
alcoholic liquors or for the entertainment or diversion of others while such
person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view
or to show with less than a fully opaque covering any portion of the breast
below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, buttocks,
vulva or genitals.
      (2)   The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts prohibited by law.
      (3)   The actual or simulated exhibition, displaying, touching or
caressing or fondling of or on, the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
      (4)   The permitting or encouragement of any person to remain in or upon
said premises who exposes to view any portion of the body described in
subparagraphs (G) (1), (2) or (3) hereof.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-23) (Ord. 11-04-04-04, passed 4-4-2011) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 6-5, 6-15, 6-16, 6-17 and 6-
22
§ 111.48 SELLING FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
   Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of 21
years any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of the
age and identity of the person or who sells, gives or furnishes to any person
under the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any other
person is guilty of violating this code.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-24)
§ 111.49 FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
   Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any licensee,
his or her agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of
age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own for
the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise
procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or
who has in his or her possession any false or fraudulent, written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of violating this code.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-25) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16
§ 111.50 UNDERAGE DRINKING ON STREETS.
   The possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under the
age of 21 years is forbidden.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-26) (Ord. 05-12-19-02, passed 12-19-2005) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16
§ 111.51 RESIDENTIAL DRINKING.
   (A)   Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this code where he or she
knowingly permits a gathering at a residence which he or she occupies of two or
more persons where any one or more of the persons is under 21 years of age and
the following factors also apply:
      (1)   The person occupying the residence knows that any person under the
age of 21 is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic beverage;
      (2)   The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under 21
is not otherwise permitted by this code; and
      (3)   The person occupying the residence knows that the person under the
age of 21 leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section where the residence has an owner and
a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-27)
§ 111.52 RENTING HOTEL ROOMS FOR DRINKING.
   Any person who rents a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent
thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that the room shall be used
for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years
shall be guilty of violating this code.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-28)
§ 111.53 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Owner of premises permitting violation. If the owner of the licensed
premises or any person from whom the licensee derives the right to possession
of the premises, or the agent of the owner or person shall knowingly permit the
licensee to use the licensed premises in violation of the terms of this code,
the owner, agent or other person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
code to the same extent as the licensee and be subject to the same punishment.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-1)
   (B)   Acts of agent or employee; liability; knowledge. Every act or omission
of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this
code by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any
licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of the employer or licensee,
and the employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if the
act or omission had been done or omitted by him or her personally.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-2)
   (C)   Revocation of license after conviction. Whenever any licensee shall be
convicted of any violation of this code, the license of the licensee may, in
the discretion of the Mayor, be revoked and forfeited and all fees paid thereon
shall be forfeited, and it shall thereafter be unlawful and shall constitute a
further violation of this code for the licensee to continue to operate under
the license.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-3)
   (D)   Revocation of license when employee convicted. Whenever any officer,
director, manager or other employee in a position of authority of any licensee
under this code shall be convicted of any violation of this code while engaged
in the course of his or her employment or while upon the premises described by
the license, the license shall be revoked and the fees paid thereon forfeited,
both as to the holder of the license and as to the premises, as if the licensee
had himself or herself been convicted.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-4)
   (E)   Misbranding. Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell or in any
way dispose of any alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or
brand known to the trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of
the package or other containers of the alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause any
such act to be done, shall forfeit the alcoholic liquor and the packages and
containers to the state and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties
provided for violation of this code.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-5)
   (F)   Abatement of place used in violation. Every lot, parcel or tract of
land, and every building, structure, tent, railroad car, boat, wagon, vehicle,
establishment or place whatsoever, together with all furniture, fixtures,
ornaments and machinery located thereon, wherein there shall be conducted any
unlawful sale of any alcoholic liquor, or whereon or wherein there shall be
kept, stored, concealed or allowed any alcoholic liquor intended for illegal
sale or to be sold, disposed of or in any other manner used in violation of any
of the provisions of this code, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and
shall be abated as provided by the laws of this state for the abatement of
public nuisances.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-6)
   (G)   Use of premises for one year after revocation. When any license has
been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted for the same premises
for a period of one year thereafter.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-7)
   (H)   Revocation of licenses. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses
granted under this code:
      (1)   In addition to and not limited by the specific penalties set out
for violations of specific articles of this code, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may suspend for 30 days or revoke any liquor license issued under
this code for violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
liquors by any licensee, his or her agent, servant or employee;
      (2)   To suspend or revoke any liquor license if the licensee makes any
false statement or misrepresentation in the application for a license;
      (3)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this code or any rules or regulations adopted by him or her or by
the State Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to
examine the premises of the licensee in connection therewith;
      (4)   To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under
the General Not for Profit Corporation Act or a foreign corporation functioning
as a club in this state under a certificate of authority issued under that Act
has violated this code by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic
liquors without a retailer's license;
      (5)   To receive complaint from any citizen within his or her
jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this Act, or any rules or
regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act
upon the complaints in the manner hereinafter provided; and
      (6)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall also have the power to
levy fines in accordance with §
111.99 below.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-8)
   (I)   Complaint by residents.
      (1)   Any one resident of the municipality shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Liquor Commissioner, stating that a licensee under this code
has been or is violating the provisions of this code or any amendments hereto,
or of any of the statutes of this state, enacted with reference to the control
of liquor. The complaint shall be made in writing and shall be signed and sworn
to by the parties complaining.
      (2)   The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or
regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which
the belief is based. If the Liquor Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation, and that from the facts alleged, there is
reasonable cause for the belief, he or she shall set the matter for hearing,
and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of the hearing
and of the particular charges in the complaint.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-9)
   (J)   Appeals from order of Liquor Commissioner.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, any order or action of a Local
Liquor Control Commissioner levying a fine or refusing to levy a fine on a
licensee, granting or refusing to grant a license, revoking or suspending or
refusing to revoke or suspend a license or refusing for more than 30 days to
grant a hearing upon a complaint to revoke or suspend a license may, within 20
days after notice of the order or action, be appealed by any resident of the
municipality under the jurisdiction of the Liquor Commissioner or any person
interested, to the State Commission.
      (2)   In any case where a licensee appeals to the State Commission from
an order or action of the Liquor Commissioner having the effect of suspending
or revoking a license, denying a renewal application, or refusing to grant a
license, the licensee shall resume the operation of the licensed business
pending the decision of the State Commission and the expiration of the time
allowed for an application for rehearing. If an application for rehearing is
filed, the licensee shall continue the operation of the licensed business until
the denial of the application or, if the rehearing is granted, until the
decision on rehearing.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-11)
   (K)   Subsequent violations in a year.
      (1)   In any case in which a licensee appeals to the State Commission a
suspension or revocation by a Local Liquor Control Commissioner that is the
second or subsequent such suspension or revocation placed on that licensee
within the preceding 12-month period, the licensee shall consider the
suspension or revocation to be in effect until a reversal of the Liquor
Commissioner's action has been issued by the State Commission and shall cease
all activity otherwise authorized by the license.
      (2)   The State Commission shall expedite, to the greatest extent
possible, its consideration of any appeal that is an appeal of a second or
subsequent suspension or revocation within the past 12-month period.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-12)
   (L)   Appeal limitations for subsequent violation. Any appeal of the
decision and findings of the Liquor Commissioner in division (K) above shall be
limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the Liquor
Commissioner. The official record shall be a "certified official record" of the
proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter. A copy of this record shall be filed by the Liquor
Commissioner within five days after notice of the filing of the appeal is
received by the municipality from State Commission:
      (1)   If the appellant pays for the cost of the transcript, the State
Commission shall review the propriety of the order or action of the Liquor
Control Commissioner and shall consider the following questions:
         (a)   Whether the Liquor Commissioner has proceeded in a manner
provided by law;
         (b)   Whether the order is supported by the findings;
         (c)   Whether the findings are supported by substantial evidence in
light of the record.
      (2)   The only evidence which may be considered in the review shall be
the evidence found in the certified official record of the proceeding of the
Liquor Commissioner. No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or
considered. The State Commissioner shall render a decision affirming, reversing
or modifying the order or action review within 30 days after the appeal was
heard.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-13) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 4-4, 7-5, 7-7, 7-9, 7-13,
and 10-2 through 10-7
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Underage drinking on streets. Any person convicted of violating the
provisions of §
111.50 shall be fined the sum of not less than $200.
(2001 Code, § 21-3-26)
   (C)   Revocation or suspension of local license; notice and hearing. The
Liquor Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by him or her if
he or she determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of
the State Liquor Act, any valid ordinance adopted by the municipality, any
applicable rule or regulation established by the Liquor Commissioner or the
State Commission which is not inconsistent with law.
      (1)   Fine as opposed to suspension or revocation. In addition to
suspension and/or revocation, the Liquor Commissioner may levy a fine on the
licensee for the violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $1,000 for each
violation; each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. No more than $10,000 in fines under this section may be imposed
against any licensee during the period of his or her license. Proceeds from the
fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the municipal treasury,
as the case may be.
      (2)   Revocation and suspension; notice. However, no license shall be so
revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a public
hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with a three-day written
notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend. All the hearings shall be open to the public and the Liquor
Commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an
official record of the proceedings. If the Liquor Commissioner has reason to
believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will
immediately threaten the welfare of the community he or she may, upon the
issuance of a written order stating the reason for the conclusion and without
notice or hearing order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven
days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except
that if the licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business
or businesses on the licensed premises the order shall not be applicable to the
other business or businesses.
      (3)   Hearing. The Liquor Commissioner shall, within five days after the
hearing, if he or she determines after the hearing that the license should be
revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for the determination in a
written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of the order
within the five days upon the license. The findings of the Commissioner shall
be predicted upon competent evidence.
(2001 Code, § 21-4-10)
(Ord. 05-12-19-02, passed 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 112: CANNABIS
Section
   
112.01   Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
112.02   Cannabis business regulations
§ 112.01 MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   Tax imposed; rate.
      (1)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the village at the rate of 3%
of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that business.
      (2)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-
22).
   (B)   Collection of tax by retailers.
      (1)   The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be remitted by such
retailer to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department), Any tax required
to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by tins Ordinance and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
      (2)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-09-16-06, passed 9-16-2019)
§ 112.02 CANNABIS BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. Whenever reference is made in this chapter to the
"Illinois Cannabis Act" or the "Cannabis Act" it shall mean the Cannabis
Regulations and Tax Act of Illinois approved June 25, 2019, in force January 1,
2020 (ILCS Ch. 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.). All other words and phrases used
herein shall have the same meaning as the same or similar words or phrases
defined by and used in said Cannabis Regulations and Tax Act, including the
following:
      ACT. The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act of Illinois approved 6-25-19 as
Public Act 101-0027 (ILCS Ch. 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.).
      ADVERTISE. To engage in promotional activities including, but not limited
to: newspaper, radio, internet and electronic media, and television
advertising; the distribution of fliers and circulars; and the display of
window and interior signs.
      CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plan Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, on preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant this incapable of germination.
CANNABIS does not include industrial hemp as defined and authorized under the
Industrial Hemp Act. CANNABIS also means concentrate and cannabis-infused
products.
      CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, dispensing organization: or transporting organization.
      DISPENSARY. A facility operated by a dispensing organization at which
activities licensed by the Act may occur.
      DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation to acquire cannabis from a cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, or another dispensary for the purpose of selling or
dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia,
or related supplies under this Act to purchasers or to qualified registered
medical cannabis patients and caregivers.
      OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL. Ownership of at least 51% of the business,
including corporate stock if a corporation, and control over the management and
day-to-day operations of the business and an interest in the capital, assets,
and profits and losses of the business proportionate to percentage of
ownership.
      PERSON. A natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian, or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
      RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that derives more than 80%
of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and
related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE includes an enclosed workplace that
manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco products, when, as a
necessary and integral part of the process of making, manufacturing, importing,
or distributing a tobacco product for the eventual retail sale of that tobacco
or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco
product is tested, provided that the involved business entity: (1) maintains a
specially designated area or areas within the workplace for the purpose of the
heating, burning, smoking, or lighting activities, and does not create a
facility that permits smoking throughout; (2) satisfies the 80% requirement
related to gross sales; and (3) delivers tobacco products to consumers, retail
establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of its business.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or section of a
larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor,
food, or restaurant license. Rulemaking authority to implement this amendatory
Act of the 95th General Assembly, if any, is conditioned on the rules being
adopted in accordance with all provisions of the Illinois Administrative
Procedure Act and all rules and procedures of the Joint Committee on
Administrative Rules; any purported rule not so adopted, for whatever reason,
is unauthorized.
   (B)   Registration. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
dispensary within the boundaries of the village without first registering with
the Argenta Village Clerk and submitting the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of all persons owning 50% or more of the
dispensing organization;
      (2)   Location of operation;
      (3)   Hours of operation; and
      (4)   A copy of the license issued by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Registration.
   (C)   Regulations and restrictions.
      (1)   Only one dispensary shall be authorized to operate within the
village limits at any time.
      (2)   A Dispensary may only operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:
00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to advertise cannabis or a cannabis infused
product in any form or through any medium:
         (a)   Within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of school grounds, a
playground, a recreation center or facility, a child care center, a public park
or public library, or a game arcade where admission is not restricted to
persons 21 years of age or older;
         (b)   In or on a public transit vehicle or within a public transit
shelter; or
         (c)   On a property owned or operated by the village.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful to permit on-premises consumption of cannabis
at or in a dispensing organization or retail tobacco store.
   (D)   Penalty. A person found to be in violation of any of the provisions
herein shall be fined in an amount not to exceed seven hundred and fifty
dollars ($750) for each offense. Each day of a continuing violation shall be
deemed a separate offense. The penalties authorized herein shall be cumulative,
and the village's pursuit of any one or more penalties shall not be a defense
to another.
(Ord. 20-01-20-01, passed 1-20-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   OFFENSES GENERALLY
         
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
132.   LITTERING OFFENSES
         
133.   TRESPASS
         
134.   OPEN BURNING
         
135.   POSSESSION AND USE OF CANNABIS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES GENERALLY
Section
   
130.01   Meanings of words and phrases
   
130.02   Criminal code adopted
   
130.03   Disturbing/impersonating a police officer
   
130.04   Disturbing the peace/lawful assemblies
   
130.05   Barbed wire and electric fences
   
130.06   Tobacco products; generally; persons under the age of 21
   
130.07   Unlawful conduct on a public way
   
130.08   Renting premises for unlawful purposes
   
130.09   Posting bills
   
130.10   Intoxication in public
   
130.11   Begging
   
130.12   Discharge of firearms or bow and arrow
   
130.13   Games in street
   
130.14   Storage of explosives
   
130.15   Destruction of public property
   
130.16   Curfew
   
130.17   Possession of drug paraphernalia
   
130.18   Scooters, minibikes and toy vehicles
   
130.19   Parental responsibility
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 MEANINGS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases of the ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 5, §§ 2-1 through 2-11; 2-13 through 2-16; 2-19 and 2-20, as approved,
adopted and amended are hereby adopted by the village, as fully as if set out
herein.
(2001 Code, § 27-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-2
§ 130.02 CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The Illinois Criminal Code, being ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, as passed, approved
and amended by the State General Assembly, is hereby adopted by the village;
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the
village; provided, however, the penalties as provided by this chapter shall
apply.
(2001 Code, § 27-1-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-3-2 and 11-1-1
§ 130.03 DISTURBING/IMPERSONATING A POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   Disturbing police officer.
      (1)   No person shall, by violent conduct, disturb any police officer in
the discharge of his or her duties; nor shall any person assault, strike or
fight with any police officers in the discharge of his or her duties or permit
that conduct in or upon any house or premises in the village owned or possessed
by him or her or under his or her management and control.
      (2)   Abusive or vulgar language in the presence of an officer does not
constitute a crime unless the language is directed at the officer and provokes
a breach of the peace.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-1)
   (B)   Impersonation of officer. No person in the village shall falsely
represent himself or herself to be an officer of the village or shall, without
being duly authorized by the village, exercise or attempt to exercise any of
the duties, functions or powers of the village officer, or hinder, obstruct,
resist or otherwise interfere with any village officer in the discharge of the
duties of his or her office.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 32-5.1
§ 130.04 DISTURBING THE PEACE/LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   Disturbing lawful assemblies. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully interrupt or disturb any funeral assembly, funeral procession,
school, any assembly met for the worship of God or any other assembly met for a
lawful purpose by any offensive behavior, or by any disorderly conduct.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-3)
   (B)   Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb the peace of any
individual or private family, or of any lawful congregation within the village
by any noise or amusement, or by vulgar or profane language, or by any
disorderly or unreasonable conduct.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-4) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-2
§ 130.05 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electrically-
charged fence or barbed wire or other sharp, pointed fence below eight feet in
height, except in an agricultural or conservation zone district.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 TOBACCO PRODUCTS; GENERALLY; PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.
   (A)   Sale, purchase, possession and use of tobacco products by persons
under 21 years of age.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         POSSESSION. To have upon one's person or have within the person's
limited control.
         SMOKELESS TOBACCO. Any finely cut, ground, powdered or leaf tobacco
that is intended to be placed in the oral cavity.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any item, product or substance containing or made
from tobacco leaf, including specifically, but without limitation cigarettes,
cigars, snuff and pipe, chewing or dipping tobacco, any electronic cigarettes
or alternative nicotine products.
         USE. To smoke, inhale, ingest, dip or chew tobacco in any of its
forms.
      (2)   Sale by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to sell,
dispense, furnish or otherwise distribute any tobacco product to any person or
business.
      (3)   Providing tobacco products to persons under 21 years of age. It
shall be unlawful for any person, whether acting individually or as an owner,
officer, employee or agent of or on behalf of any persons, firm or corporation,
to sell, give, dispense, furnish or otherwise distribute tobacco product to any
person under 21 years of age.
      (4)   Purchase by persons under 21 years of age. it shall be unlawful for
any person under 21 years of age to purchase or otherwise acquire any tobacco
product.
      (5)   Possession and use by persons under 21 years of age. No person
under 21 years of age shall have in his or her possession or use, any tobacco
product in any of its various forms.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-6)
   (B)   Smokeless tobacco.
      (1)   Sales of smokeless tobacco products to persons under 21. No person
shall sell any smokeless tobacco product to any person under the age of 21.
      (2)   Distribution of smokeless tobacco products to persons under 21. No
person shall distribute or cause to be distributed to any person under the age
of 21, without charge or at a nominal cost, any smokeless tobacco product.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-7) (Ord. 05-11-5, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 19-07-15 Ord05,
passed 7-15-2019) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 680, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 130.07 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ON A PUBLIC WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk or
public way, except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb
line if that standing interferes with the use of the sidewalk by other
pedestrians.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to impede or interfere with another person's use
of a public way.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-8) Penalty see §
130.99
§ 130.08 RENTING PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any unlawful person to rent, use or allow to be
used, any building or property owned by him or her, for any purpose.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 POSTING BILLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, utility pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door or gate without
the consent, in writing, of the owner of the wall, door or gate; provided,
however, that this section shall not prevent posting by proper village and
county officials of election signs, polling place signs and other signs or
placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections, except they may
not be attached to a tree.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-10) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10 INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall, in the village, be found in a state of intoxication or
drunk in any street or other public place or shall be found drunk lying or
roving about the streets, alleys or sidewalks of this village or the private
grounds of any of the inhabitants thereof, or being drunk as aforesaid, shall
disturb the peace, order and quiet of the village, or the peace and quiet of
the citizens thereof by loud and unusual noises, disorderly conduct, indecent
language or behavior or in any other manner.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-11) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-3
§ 130.11 BEGGING.
   No person shall beg within the village.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-12) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-4
§ 130.12 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS OR BOW AND ARROW.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, bow and arrow or air gun in
the village or so that the bullet, arrow, missile or projectile therefrom
enters the village without written permission from the Mayor, provided that
this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law to
discharge a firearm in the performance of his or her duty; nor to prevent any
citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his or her person or
property; nor to prevent the discharge of bow and arrow by students upon school
grounds while under the direct and immediate supervision of teachers or other
school supervisory personnel.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.13 GAMES IN STREET.
   No person shall, upon any village street, fly any kite or play any game of
ball or engage in any amusement or practice having a tendency to injure or
annoy any person passing in the streets or on the sidewalks.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.14 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Nitroglycerine, dynamite and the like. No person shall have, keep,
possess or store at or in any place within the village, any nitroglycerine,
dynamite or giant powder, or any form or combination of any of them.
   (B)   Blasting powder and the like. No person shall keep, possess or store
any gun or blasting powder or any gun or explosive cotton at or in any one
place in the village in any quantity exceeding five pounds.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-15) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-8-4
§ 130.15 DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person in the village shall deface, destroy or in any way, injure any
public property, or any other apparatus of the village.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-16) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.16 CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, highway, or
other public place or way at the following times
      (1)   For persons less than 13 years of age, between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. the following day on any day of the week.
      (2)   For persons at least 13 years of age, but not yet 17 years of age:
         (a)   Between 11:01 p.m. Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and between 11:
01 p.m. Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
         (c)   Between 10:01 p.m. Sunday to Thursday inclusive, and 6:00 a.m.
on the following day.
   (B)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian,
sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult at least 21 years of age approved by the
child's parent, guardian or custodian.
      (3)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         (a)   Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than 17 years of age to perform;
         (b)   A school recreational activity;
         (c)   A religious event;
         (d)   Aan emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or
Article 1, Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois,
or both;
         (f)   An activity conducted by a non-profit or governmental entity
that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the
supervision of one or more adult.
   (C)   A citation for violation of division (A) of this section may be issued
by a Police Officer, the Village Mayor, or any Village Officer, Trustee, or
employee only if he or she reasonably believes that a violation has occurred
and none of the defenses enumerated in division (B) apply.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, custodian, or other
person to permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate
provisions of division (A) of this section. It shall be a rebuttable
presumption that a person has violated this section if someone under 17 years
of age of whom such person has custody or control is present upon any public
assembly, building, business, street or highway, or other public place or
public way in violation of division (A) of this section, and none of the
defenses enumerated in division (B) hereof apply.
   (E)   Any person convicted of a violation of division (D) of this section
shall be fined $200 for the first violation in any 12-month period; $300 for a
second violation in any 12-month period; $400 for a third violation in any 12-
month period; and $500 for each subsequent violation in any 12-month period.
(2001 Code, § 27-2-17) (Ord. 05-11-2, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 25-06-16 Ord03,
passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5
§ 130.17 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CANNABIS. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the State Cannabis Control
Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq.) as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the State
Controlled Substances Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq.) as if that
definition were incorporated herein.
      PARAPHERNALIA. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the State Drug
Paraphernalia Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 600, §§ 1 et seq.) as if that
definition were incorporated herein.
   (B)   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited. It shall be unlawful to
use or knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use
it to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance. This section
shall not apply to persons licensed by the state to engage in an activity
prohibited by this section, or whose conduct is in accordance with the laws of
this state.
(Ord. 05-12-19-03, passed 12-19-2005) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 SCOOTERS, MINIBIKES AND TOY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MINIBIKES. Includes any bicycle, dirt bike or motorcycle with a gas,
diesel or electric engine or motor. This does not include any bicycle, dirt
bike or motorcycle that falls within the ability to be titled, licensed and
registered with the Illinois Secretary of State.
      SCOOTERS. Includes any scooter operated with a gas, diesel or electric
engine or motor. This does not include any scooter that falls within the
ability to be titled, licensed and registered with the Illinois Secretary of
State.
      TOY VEHICLES. Includes any toy vehicle operated by a gas or electric
engine and intended to be used by children.
   (B)   Operation on streets, sidewalks or bike paths. It shall be a violation
of this chapter to operate a scooter or minibike on streets, sidewalks, or bike
paths within the Village of Argenta. It shall be a violation of this chapter to
operate a toy vehicle on streets within the Village of Argenta.
(Ord. 25-10-20 Ord07, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 130.19 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GUARDIAN. A person other than a parent who is legally responsible for the
care and custody of a minor including but not limited to a person with whom the
minor resides on a permanent basis or a GUARDIAN appointed by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
      MINOR. A person under 18 years of age.
      PARENT. The lawful father or mother of a minor, whether by birth or
adoption.
   (B)   Parents and guardians responsible for acts of minors. The parent or
guardian of a minor has a responsibility to continuously exercise reasonable
supervision and control over a minor to prevent the minor from committing or
participating in the commission of any delinquent act. It shall be a violation
of this section for any parent or guardian to fail to exercise reasonable
supervision and control over a minor. It shall be presumed that a parent or
guardian has failed to exercise reasonable supervision and control over a minor
if a minor commits any violation of the Village Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by police officers, or
other designated village officials. Police officers shall have the authority,
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 705, Act 405 and other applicable law, to reasonably stop
and momentarily detain a minor to obtain his or her name, age and address, as
well as the name and address of his or her parent or guardian whenever said law
enforcement officer shall reasonably suspect that the minor is in fact in
violation of any village ordinance. Upon determination that the minor is in
fact in violation of village ordinance, the police officers may direct or
deliver the minor to the residence of his or her parent or guardian, and issue
an appropriate citation to the minor's parent or guardian pursuant to this
section. In the event that a parent or guardian is not home, the village shall
mail the citation or notice of ordinance violation to the minor's residence in
care of the parent or guardian.
   (D)   Restitution. This chapter may be enforced in concert with the Illinois
Parental Responsibility Act ("the Act"), which provides for recovery of funds
as restitution from a parent or guardian for damages caused by a minor (See
ILCS Ch. 740, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.). The Act gives authority to the village to
enforce the liability of such parent or guardian imposed thereunder. It is
acknowledged that the Act allows for recovery of "actual damages" and where the
village serves as plaintiff under the Act, the Act further allows for the
recovery of "reasonable attorney's fees" (See ILCS Ch. 740, Act 115, § 3). Any
damages sought pursuant to this division shall be in addition to any fines
issues in accordance with division (C) above.
(Ord. 25-10-20 Ord06, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of §
130.06(A) pertaining to possession and/or use of tobacco products shall be
fined as follows:
         (a)   First offense: $75;
         (b)   Second offense: $100; and
         (c)   Third and subsequent offense: $150.
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of §
130.06(a) pertaining to sale of tobacco products to a minor or by a minor shall
be fined the sum of not less than $250.
   (C)   Violation of any of the provisions of §
130.16 shall, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
      (1)   First offense: $75;
      (2)   Second offense: $100; and
      (3)   Third or subsequent offense: $150.
   (D)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of §
130.17 shall be fined the sum of not less than $250.
(Ord. 05-11-2, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 05-11-5, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 05-12-
19-03, passed 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Injury to utility wires and poles
   
131.02   Damage or destruction of street signs prohibited
   
131.03   Tampering with public notice
§ 131.01 INJURY TO UTILITY WIRES AND POLES.
   It shall be unlawful to willfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface,
injure or destroy any telegraph or telephone pole, cable television equipment,
post or wire, or any electric light post, pole or electric conductor, wire or
lamp or any other thing connected with the same or belonging thereto, or any
water main, gas main, pipe or hydrant or lamp or lamppost, or anything
belonging to or connected therewith or with any of them.
(2001 Code, § 27-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.02 DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION OF STREET SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner or form, to deface,
disfigure, damage or destroy any of the street signs or parts thereof located
in the village.
(2001 Code, § 27-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and without lawful authority
alter, destroy, deface, remove or conceal any public notice, posted according
to law, during the time for which the notice was to remain posted.
(2001 Code, § 27-3-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9
CHAPTER 132: LITTERING OFFENSES
Section
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Littering prohibited
   
132.03   Prevention of scattering
   
132.04   Receptacles; upsetting or tampering
   
132.05   Sidewalks and alleys free from litter
   
132.06   Owner to maintain private premises
   
132.07   Littering from vehicles
   
132.08   Littering from aircraft
   
132.09   Litter in parks
   
132.10   Handbills
   
132.11   Posting notices prohibited
   
132.12   Construction sites
   
132.13   Loading and unloading docks
   
132.14   Parking lots
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A container of water-tight construction with
a tight-fitting lid or cover capable of preventing the escape of contents
within. Those RECEPTACLES shall have handles or other means for safe and
convenient handling and be of a size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter
generated between collection periods and shall be in compliance with the
regulations promulgated.
   CONSTRUCTION SITES. Any private or public property upon which repairs to
existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing
structures is taking place.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed matter of
literature which is not delivered by the United States mail service, including,
but not limited to, those which:
      (1)   Advertise for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
      (2)   Direct attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
      (3)   Direct attention to or advertise any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material which, if
thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCK. Any dock space or area used by any moving
vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares,
commodities and persons located on or adjacent to any stream, river or land.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. All property including, but not limited to, vacant land or
any land, building or other structure designed or used for residential,
commercial, business, industrial, institutional or religious purposes, together
with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox
and other structures appurtenant thereto.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, lakes, rivers, watercourses or fountains and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
   PUBLIC RECEPTACLES. Any receptacles provided by or authorized by the
village.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-1)
§ 132.02 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit any litter within the village except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in any duly
licensed disposal facility.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.03 PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.04 RECEPTACLES; UPSETTING OR TAMPERING.
   No person shall upset or tamper with a public or private receptacle designed
or used for the deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to be
deposited or strewn in or upon any public place or private premises.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.05 SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS FREE FROM LITTER.
   Persons owning, occupying or in control of any public place or private
premises shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.06 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PRIVATE PREMISES.
   (A)   The owner or person in control of any private premises shall, at all
times, maintain the premises free of litter.
   (B)   The owner or person in control of private premises shall, if public
receptacles are unavailable, maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.07 LITTERING FROM VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person, while the operator of or passenger in a vehicle, shall
deposit litter upon any public place or private premises.
   (B)   No person shall drive or move any loaded or partly loaded truck or
other vehicle within the village unless the vehicle is so constructed or so
loaded as to prevent any part of its load, contents or litter from being blown
or deposited upon any public place or private premises. Nor shall any person
drive or move any vehicle or truck within the village, the wheels or tires of
which carry onto or deposit in any public place or private premises, mud, dirt,
sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.08 LITTERING FROM AIRCRAFT.
   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit any litter within
the village.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.09 LITTER IN PARKS.
   (A)   No person shall deposit litter in any park within the village except
in receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon
any other public place or private premises.
   (B)   Where receptacles are not provided, all the litter shall be removed
from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed
of elsewhere in a lawful manner.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.10 HANDBILLS.
   (A)   Public places. No person shall deposit or sell any handbill in or upon
any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any
public place for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the
receiver, any handbill to any person willing to accept it.
   (B)   Private premises. No person shall deposit or unlawfully distribute any
handbill in or upon private premises, except by handing or transmitting any
handbill directly to the occupant of the private premises.
   (C)   Exemptions for newspapers and political literature. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to the distribution upon private premises only of
newspapers or political literature; except that newspapers and political
literature shall be placed in a manner so as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises.
   (D)   Cleanup. It shall be the responsibility of any person distributing
handbills to maintain the area which they are utilizing free of any litter
caused by or related to the handbill distribution.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.11 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public upon any public place, except
as may be authorized or required by law. No person, except the owner or tenant
shall post any notice on private property without the permission of the owner
or tenant.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.12 CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (A)   Each contractor shall be responsible for the job site so that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public place or other private premises.
   (B)   Litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, deposited as the
result of normal construction process upon any public place or private
premises, shall be removed by the contractor.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.13 LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCKS.
   The person owning, operating or in control of a loading or unloading dock
shall maintain private receptacles for collection of litter, and shall, at all
times, maintain the dock area free of litter in such a manner that litter will
be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public
place or other private premises.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.14 PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Litter receptacles required. Any public place or private premises
containing any provision for parking vehicles shall be equipped with litter
receptacles. The premises shall include, but not be limited to places such as
shopping centers, outdoor theaters, drive-in restaurants, gasoline service
stations, apartment developments, parking lots and any other place where
provision is made for vehicles to stop or park in a designated area for any
purpose.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Premises used for the purpose designated herein shall be
kept in a litter-free condition and all litter shall be removed periodically
from the receptacles.
   (C)   Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the duty and obligation of
all persons using parking areas to use the litter receptacles as hereinabove
provided for the purposes intended and it shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to deposit any litter upon any like parking lot.
(2001 Code, § 27-4-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-15
CHAPTER 133: TRESPASS
Section
   
133.01   Trespass prohibited
   
133.02   Specifically enumerated trespasses; suppression
§ 133.01 TRESPASS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a
trespass within this municipality upon either public or private property.
(2001 Code, § 27-5-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.02 SPECIFICALLY ENUMERATED TRESPASSES; SUPPRESSION.
   Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of §
133.01 above, any of the following acts by any person, firm or corporation
shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of
the provisions of §
133.01 above, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or
from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this
chapter; the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows, to-wit:
   (A)   An entry upon the premises of another, or any part thereof, including
any public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to the premises, or at any point of approach or entry or in violation
of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any owner or
occupant thereof;
   (B)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making
of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof;
   (C)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of
being requested, either orally or in writing to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof; or
   (D)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without
the consent of the person having the right to leave any such vehicle, aircraft
or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having that right.
(2001 Code, § 27-5-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-2
CHAPTER 134: OPEN BURNING
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Burning prohibited
   
134.03   Restrictions on burning of landscape waste
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated
on a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices including such
items as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials and crop residues,
but excluding landscape waste.
   GARBAGE or HOUSEHOLD TRASH. Refuse resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products; including
plastic containers.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE.
      (1)   Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and agricultural
waste.
      (2)   The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush,
weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings.
   OPEN BURNING. The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products
of the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or passing
through equipment for which a permit could be issued under § 9(b) of the
Environmental Protection Act of the state.
(2001 Code, § 27-6-1)
§ 134.02 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to cause, or allow, open burning of agricultural waste,
household trash or garbage.
(2001 Code, § 27-6-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.03 RESTRICTIONS ON BURNING OF LANDSCAPE WASTE.
   The open burning of landscape waste shall be permitted only on the following
conditions:
   (A)   Landscape waste shall be burned on the premises on which the waste is
generated;
   (B)   Landscape waste shall be burned only when atmospheric conditions shall
readily dissipate contaminants;
   (C)   Landscape waste may be burned only if the burning does not create a
visibility hazard on roadways, walkways or railroad tracks;
   (D)   Open burning of landscape waste may only take place during approved
burning hours with a person over 18 years of age in attendance during the
entire period of burning;
   (E)   No open burning of landscape waste shall be permitted on any streets,
roadways, boulevards, ditches or alleys;
   (F)   No open burning shall occur during periods of time when the Fire Chief
or the Chief of Police have determined that atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make the fires hazardous and dangerous; and
   (G)   The burning of landscape trimmings shall only be conducted on Monday
through Saturday between the hours of sunrise and 9:00 p.m. and any fire shall
be completely extinguished by 9:00 p.m. Burning of landscape waste is
prohibited on Sunday. The foregoing shall not prohibit bona fide recreational
fires on non-burn days or after 9:00 p.m. as long as the fires are properly
supervised by a responsible adult over the age of 18 years.
(2001 Code, § 27-6-3) (Ord. 16-02-01 Ord01, passed 2-1-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 135: POSSESSION AND USE OF CANNABIS
Section
   
135.01   Possession and use of cannabis
§ 135.01 POSSESSION AND USE OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   Definitions. Whenever reference is made in this Chapter to the
"Illinois Cannabis Act" or the "Cannabis Act" it shall mean the Cannabis
Regulations and Tax Act of Illinois approved June 25, 2019, in force January 1,
2020 (ILCS Ch. 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.). All other words and phrases used
herein shall have the same meaning as the same or similar words or phrases
defined by and used in said Cannabis Regulations and Tax Act, including the
following:
      ACT. The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act of Illinois approved 605-19 as
Public Act 101-0027 (ILCS Ch. 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.).
      CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plan Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant this incapable of germination.
CANNABIS does not include industrial hemp as defined and authorized under the
Industrial Hemp Act. CANNABIS also means concentrate and. cannabis-infused
products.
      CANNABIS CONTAINER. A sealed, traceable container, or package used for
the purpose of containment of cannabis or cannabis-infused product during
transportation.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where a person could be reasonably expected to be
observed by others. A PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence unless
the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or
other similar social service care on the premises. A PUBLIC PLACE includes, but
is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial
establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls,
public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums,
enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools,
exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming
facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings
and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the State or State subcontract,
healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas,
public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars,
taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and hotels, motels,
resorts, inns, lodges, bed and breakfasts, or other similar public
accommodation that are rented to guests, excluding private residences.
   (B)   Possession and use restrictions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to possess
or use cannabis who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the
Compassionate Use Of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to possess or use cannabis on a school bus,
grounds of a preschool primary or secondary school, unless used by a qualifying
patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use or Medical Cannabis
Pilot Program Act.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to possess or use cannabis in a private
residence used at any time to provide licensed childcare.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful to use cannabis in any motor vehicle, in any
public place or in any other place where smoking is prohibited under the Smoke
Free Illinois Act (see ILCS Ch. 410, Act 82, §§ 1 et seq.).
      (5)   It shall be unlawful to facilitate the use of cannabis by a person
not allowed to use cannabis under the Act.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly use cannabis in close proximity
to anyone under the age of 21 who is not a registered medical cannabis patient
under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful to grow cannabis unless authorized by the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
      (8)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is 21 years or older and a
resident of Illinois to possess more than:
         (a)   Thirty (30) grams of cannabis flower;
         (b)   Five hundred (500) milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-
infused product; or
         (c)   Five (5) grams of cannabis concentrate.
      (9)   It shall be unlawful for a non-resident of Illinois to possess more
than:
         (a)   Fifteen (15) grams of cannabis flower;
         (b)   Two hundred fifty (250) grams of THC contained in a cannabis-
infused product; or
         (c)   Two and one-half (2.5) grams of cannabis concentrate.
      (10)   It shall be unlawful for a person to possess and/or transport
cannabis outside of a private residence without a cannabis container.
      (11)   It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to knowingly permit
his or her residence or any other private property under his or her control, or
any vehicle under his or her control to permit the consumption of cannabis by a
person under the age of 21.
   (C)   Penalty. A person found to be in violation of any of the provisions
herein shall be fined in an amount not to exceed seven hundred and fifty
dollars ($750) for each offense. Each day of a continuing violation shall be
deemed a separate offense. The penalties authorized herein shall be cumulative,
and the village's pursuit of any one or more penalties shall not be a defense
to another.
(Ord. 20-01-20-02, passed 1-20-2020)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   ADOPTION OF CODES
         
151.   MOBILE HOUSING CODE
         
152.   SUBDIVISION CODE
         
153.   ZONING CODE
         
154.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY TELECOMMUNICATIONS OVERLAY DISTRICTS
         
155.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
156.   RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 150: ADOPTION OF CODES
Section
   
150.01   International Property Maintenance Code
   
150.02   International Building Code
   
150.03   International Plumbing Code
   
150.04   National Electrical Code
   
150.05   National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 101) Latest Published
Edition
   
150.06   Modifications, additions, insertions, deletions and changes to the
Life Safety Code
§ 150.01 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code, latest published edition, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the
village for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, including buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of the existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of
the village are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised.
      (1)   Section 101.1 Insert: Village of Argenta.
      (2)   Section 103.5 Insert: The Village of Argenta fee schedule in effect
October 19, 2020 (See fee schedule in building permit packet).
      (3)   Section 104.3 Insert: All fines and penalties are subject to the
approval of the Village Board.
      (4)   Section 107.6 Insert: All fines and penalties will be paid to the
Village of Argenta.
      (5)   Section 111.6.2 Insert: The code official shall take immediate
action in accordance with the Board of the Village of Argenta.
      (6)   Section 302.4 Insert: Ten (10) inches.
      (7)   Section 304.14 Insert: April 15 through October 15.
      (8)   Section 602.3 Insert: October 1 through April 30.
      (9)   Section 602.4 Insert: October 1 through April 30.
(Ord. 09-02-16-01, passed - -2009; Ord. 24-10-21 Ord04, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 150.02 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building Code,
latest published edition, including Appendix Chapters, if any, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code
of the village for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of
all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use
and the demolition of the structures in the village; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Building Code
on file in the office of the village are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised.
      (1)   Section 101.1 Insert: Village of Argenta.
      (2)   Section 1612.3 Insert: Village of Argenta.
      (3)   Section 3412.2 Insert: August 1, 2009.
(Ord. 09-05-18-04, passed 5-18-2009; Ord. 24-10-21 Ord. 04, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 150.03 INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Village Clerk of the village, being marked and designated as the International
Plumbing Code, latest published edition, including Appendix Chapters, if any,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Plumbing Code of the village, regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing
systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the Plumbing Code on file in the office of
the village are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised.
      (1)   Section 101.1 Insert: Village of Argenta.
      (2)   Section 106.6.2 Insert: See fees in Building Code.
      (3)   Section 108.4 Insert: $500.00 per day for each offense.
      (4)   Section 108.5 Insert: $500.00 per day for each offense.
(Ord. 09-05-18-03, passed 5-18-2009; Ord. 24-10-21 Ord04, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 150.04 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Village Clerk of the village, being marked and designated as the National
Electrical Code, latest published edition, including Appendix Chapters, if any,
as published by the National Fire Protection Association, be and is hereby
adopted as the Electrical Code of the village, regulating and governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
electrical systems in the village; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the Electrical Code on file in the office of
the village are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this code.
(Ord. 09-06-15-06, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 11-02-22-02, passed 2-22-2011; Ord.
24-10-21 Ord04, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 150.05 NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION (NFPA 101) LATEST PUBLISHED
EDITION.
   A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Village
Clerk and marked and designated as National Fire Protection Association (NFPA
101) latest published edition, Life Safety Code, be and is hereby adopted for
the control of fire safety and buildings and structures as herein provided; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code, are hereby referred
to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the
modifications, additions, assertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed
in § 150.06 below.
(Ord. 09-01-05-01, passed 1-5-2009; Ord. 24-10-21 Ord04, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 150.06 MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES TO THE
LIFE SAFETY CODE.
   National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 101) latest published edition of
the Life Safety Code is hereby revised in accordance with the provisions of the
Illinois Administrative Code Fire Protection, Title 41, Chapter 1, Part 100, §
100.7.
(Ord. 09-01-05-01, passed 1-5-2009; Ord. 24-10-21 Ord04, passed 10-21-2024)
CHAPTER 151: MOBILE HOUSING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   State requirements adopted by reference
   
151.03   Manufactured Housing and Mobile Home Safety Act adopted
   
151.04   State Department of Public Health adopted; regulations
   
151.05   National Safety Standards
   
151.06   Skirting
   
151.07   Fire extinguishers
   
151.08   Inspection
   
151.09   Off-street parking
   
151.10   Manufactured homes, mobile homes and immobilized homes prohibited
Mobile Home Parks
   
151.25   Compliance with statutes; applicability of subchapter
   
151.26   Planning
   
151.27   Local government requirements
   
151.28   Permits
   
151.29   Inspection of mobile home park
   
151.30   Violation proceedings
   
151.31   Permit required
   
151.32   Plan document
   
151.33   Application
   
151.34   Location
   
151.35   Roadways and parking
   
151.36   Lot size
   
151.37   Miscellaneous restrictions
   
151.38   License fee
   
Appendix A:   Application for Building and Mobile Home Occupancy Permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFIDAVIT. An oath in writing, sworn before and attested by an individual
who has authority to administer an oath.
   APPLICANT.  Any person making application for a license or permit.
   IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOME. A mobile home served by individual utilities,
resting on a permanent perimeter foundation which extends below the established
frost depth with the wheels, tongue and hitch removed and the home secured in
compliance with the Mobile Home Tiedown Act, being ILCS Ch. 210, Act 120, §§ 1
et seq. The foundation shall extend into the ground below the frost line so as
to attach and become a part of the real estate. Materials such as concrete,
mortared concrete block or mortared brick extending into the ground below the
frost line shall satisfy the requirements for a permanent foundation.
   LICENSE. A license certificate issued by the village allowing a person to
operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this code and
the rules and regulations issued hereunder.
   LICENSEE. Any person having a license or permit under this chapter.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure designed for permanent habitation and so
constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location or
subsequent location at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more
persons. The term MOBILE HOME shall only include manufactured homes constructed
after June 30, 1976, in accordance with the Federal "National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974". Provided that any such
structure resting on a permanent foundation with wheels, tongue and hitch
permanently removed shall not be construed as a MOBILE HOME, but shall be an
"immobilized mobile home". A MOBILE HOME should not be confused with a "camping
trailer" or "recreational vehicle".
   MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT. A mobile home which does not have a toilet and bath
or shower facilities.
   MOBILE HOME, DOUBLE-WIDE. Consists of two mobile units joined at the side
into a single home, but kept on their separate chassis for repeated
transportation to a site.
   MOBILE HOME, INDEPENDENT. A mobile home which has self-contained toilet and
bath or shower facilities.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A parcel of land for the placement of a mobile home and the
exclusive use of its occupants.
   MOBILE HOME MODULE. A factory-fabricated building unit transported to a
building site, mounted on a permanent foundation supporting the outside
perimeter walls, and is designed for residential use.
   MOBILE HOME PAD. The part of an individual mobile home space or lot beneath
the mobile home, including the concrete portion of the pad.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of land
upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for two or more
independent mobile homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for
revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of the MOBILE
HOME PARK. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude
the tracts of land from common licensure as a MOBILE HOME PARK if they are
maintained and operated jointly. Neither an immobilized mobile home nor a
motorized recreational vehicle shall be construed as being a part of a MOBILE
HOME PARK.
   MOBILE HOME SALES AREA. A parcel of land used for the display, sale and
repair of new or used mobile homes.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A portion of a mobile home park designed for the use or
occupancy of one mobile home.
   MOBILE HOUSING UNIT. Includes all forms of housing units listed in this
section and as regulated in this code.
   OWNER or OPERATOR. The licensee.
   PERMANENT HABITATION. A period of two or more months.
   PERMIT. A certificate issued by the village, permitting the construction,
alteration or reduction in number of spaces of a mobile home park under the
provisions in this code.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust,
partnership, corporation, person doing business under an assumed name, county,
municipality, the state or any political subdivision or department thereof or
any other entity.
   REVOCATION. To declare invalid a permit or license issued to the applicant
or licensee by this village for an indefinite period of time.
   SITE. The lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent habitation.
   SPACE. Synonymous with MOBILE HOME SPACE.
   SUSPENSION. To declare invalid a permit or license issued to the applicant
or licensee by this village for a temporary period of time with an expectation
of resumption.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 210, Act 115, §§ 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5,
2.7, 2.10
§ 151.02 STATE REQUIREMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The State Mobile Home Park Act (ILCS Ch. 210, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.)
and the Mobile Home Tiedown Act (77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 870), as passed,
approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly are hereby adopted by the
village.
   (B)   The applicable provisions as they pertain to mobile homes and
immobilized mobile homes shall be controlling within the corporate limits of
the village.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-2)
§ 151.03 MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND MOBILE HOME SAFETY ACT ADOPTED.
   The Manufactured Housing and Mobile Home Safety Act, as passed and approved
by the State General Assembly is hereby adopted by the village, the applicable
provisions as they pertain to mobile homes and immobilized mobile homes shall
be controlling within the village.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 430, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 151.04 STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH ADOPTED; REGULATIONS.
   The Manufactured Home Community Code as approved by the State Department of
Public Health (1998) is hereby adopted by the village. The applicable
provisions as they pertain to manufactured home community shall be controlling
within the corporate limits.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-4)
§ 151.05 NATIONAL SAFETY STANDARDS.
   No mobile home, immobilized mobile home or manufactured home shall be
located in the village unless the unit has the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards metal seal affixed thereto.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-5)
§ 151.06 SKIRTING.
   Skirting shall be used to conceal all underpinning, plumbing and support
piers whether on a permanent foundation or otherwise. All skirting shall be
installed on all mobile housing units within 60 days of the placement of the
unit.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-6)
§ 151.07 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (A)   All mobile housing units located in the village shall be equipped with
a fire extinguishing in working order, one in each of the mobile homes, capable
of extinguishing all types of fires.
   (B)   The extinguishers shall be of sufficient size so that they will
reasonably protect the mobile housing units.
   (C)   All fire extinguishers shall be approved by the Fire Chief or his or
her designated representative prior to installation.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-7)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 210, Act 115, § 9.9
§ 151.08 INSPECTION.
   Each mobile housing unit located in the village shall be subject to
reasonable inspection by an official or officials designated by the Village
Board.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-8)
§ 151.09 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Every owner of a mobile housing unit shall provide for a dustless, off-
street parking area of 400 square feet.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-9)
§ 151.10 MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILE HOMES AND IMMOBILIZED HOMES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to locate a manufactured home, mobile home or
immobilized home outside a mobile home park. Nothing herein shall prohibit the
continued use of a mobile home, manufactured home or immobilized mobile home
that was located outside a mobile home park on the effective date of this code.
However, the home shall not be replaced.
(2001 Code, § 23-1-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 151.25 COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTES; APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   Every mobile home park hereafter established in the village shall, at
a minimum, conform to the requirements of:
      (1)   "An Act to Provide for, License, and Regulate Mobile Homes and
Mobile Home Parks";
      (2)   "Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks", State Department of
Public Health, Consumer Protection Division, as now or hereafter amended;
      (3)   This code;
      (4)   Zoning Code, if any.
   (B)   In case of conflict between any provisions of the above, the more
stringent requirement shall prevail.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 210, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 151.26 PLANNING.
   (A)   Any person seeking to establish, operate, alter or expand a mobile
home park shall obtain a permit to construct or a license to operate a mobile
home park.
   (B)   CONSTRUCT OR OPERATE A MOBILE HOME PARK, as used in this code, shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, supplying or maintaining common
water, sewer or other utility supplies or services, or the collection of rents
directly or indirectly from two or more independent mobile homes.
   (C)   All plans shall be submitted to the Village Board or Plan Commission
for approval prior to the granting of a permit.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-2)
§ 151.27 LOCAL GOVERNMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   A permit does not relieve the applicant from complying with this code or
other ordinances applicable thereto.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-3)
§ 151.28 PERMITS.
   The Plan Commission shall review each application and plan documents
submitted. When the application and plan documents are found to be in
compliance with the "Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks", as
promulgated by the State Department of Public Health, the Village Board may
issue the proper permit to construct or alter a mobile home park to the
applicant. Permits shall be valid for one year from date of issue.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-4)
§ 151.29 INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME PARK.
   Upon completion of the proposed construction of a mobile home park or the
proposed alteration of a mobile home park, the applicant shall notify the
Village Clerk in order that an inspection of the complete facilities can be
made.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-5)
§ 151.30 VIOLATION PROCEEDINGS.
   Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension
by the Mayor. However, the Mayor or his or her representative shall first serve
or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be
specified the way or ways in which the licensee has failed to comply with the
statutes, or any rules or regulations promulgated by the village pertaining
thereto. The notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate the nuisance,
unsanitary or objectionable condition, specified in the notice within five days
or within a longer period of time as may be allowed by the Village Board. If
the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the notice within
the time specified or the extended period of time, the Mayor or his or her
representative may revoke or suspend the license.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-6)
§ 151.31 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Each mobile home that locates on a lot in a mobile home park shall secure an
initial building (zoning) permit from the village. All future locations on the
same lot shall be exempt from the fee.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-7)
§ 151.32 PLAN DOCUMENT.
   In order to obtain a permit to construct or an original license to operate a
mobile home park, the applicant shall file with the Village Clerk a written
application and plan documents and the plan documents shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or architect licensed to practice in the state, with
registration seal affixed. Two copies of the plan document shall accompany the
application filed with the Village Clerk to obtain a permit to construct or
alter a mobile home park or an original license to operate a mobile home park,
not previously licensed by the Department. These plans shall include, but not
be limited to, the design and construction criteria set forth herein.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-10)
§ 151.33 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every applicant shall file with the Village Clerk a written
application and plan documents for the proposed construction or alteration of a
mobile home park.
   (B)   The application shall be completed by the applicant and the engineer
or architect and shall include:
      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names
and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names
and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the
present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the
application. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of
incorporation must be filed with the application;
      (2)   The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which
the mobile home park is to be located;
      (3)   The plot plans of the mobile home park, building plans and
specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and the plans and
specifications for new buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in
existing facilities;
      (4)   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters
contained in the application shall be attached; and
      (5)   Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee of $100
for a permit to construct, or an application fee of $25 for a permit to alter
to increase the size of the park.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-11)
§ 151.34 LOCATION.
   (A)   Sites selected for mobile home development shall be well-drained and
free from topographical or geological hindrances and from other conditions
unfavorable to a proper residential environment. The mobile home development
shall not be located near swamps, marshes or other breeding places of insects,
rats and mice. When a good, natural drainage is not available, storm drainage
shall be provided and the drainage shall not endanger any water supply or
surface watercourse.
   (B)   The Village Board may authorize a site survey to ascertain that the
proposed location complied with the above requirements.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-12)
§ 151.35 ROADWAYS AND PARKING.
   (A)   All streets and driveways in every park shall be constructed in
compliance with the Subdivision Code (
Chapter 152 below).
   (B)   All streets in parks constructed shall have a minimum right-of-way of
50 feet and a minimum road width of 32 feet for the purpose of this code, and
shall be considered private streets to be maintained by the park owner or
operator. If a mobile home park has more than 50 units, a wider street may be
required by the corporate authorities.
   (C)   Sidewalks and walkways shall be constructed abutting a street in a
mobile home park and shall be a minimum of four feet in width; provided,
however, there shall be no minimum width requirement for sidewalks for each
individual lot. No portion of a mobile home shall block, in any way, the
pedestrian traffic on the walkways.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-13)
§ 151.36 LOT SIZE.
   The minimum lot size for a mobile home pad shall be 8,000 square feet, with
a minimum frontage of 50 feet.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-17)
§ 151.37 MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No mobile home unit parked in a mobile home park shall be immobilized.
   (B)   Not more than one mobile home unit shall be parked in one space.
   (C)   No travel-trailer shall be permitted in any mobile home park, unless a
special area has been approved for that purpose by the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-18)
§ 151.38 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee per mobile home park shall be $50, and shall be due
and payable on or before May 1 of each year. The Village Clerk shall notify the
owner or operator of the annual fee at least 30 days prior to May 1.
(2001 Code, § 23-2-21)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FOR BUILDING AND MOBILE HOME OCCUPANCY PERMIT
(Execute in Duplicate)                  Application No.
__________________________
Office of the Mayor                     Application No.
__________________________
Village Hall
Argenta, Illinois                     DATE: ________________________, _______
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------
(DO NOT WRITE IN THIS SPACE - FOR OFFICE USE ONLY)
DATE: ____________________, ____   PERM. PARCEL
_____   _____   _____   _____   ______
[ ]   Permit Issued                  Fee Paid to Village Clerk:
[ ]   Permit Denied
[ ]   Application Appealed            $ ____________      DATE: ____________,
_______
                        IF DENIED, CAUSE OF DENIAL:
                        __________________________________________________
                        __________________________________________________
                        __________________________________________________
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------
INSTRUCTIONS TO APPLICANT:  All information required by the application must be
completed and submitted herewith. Applicants are encouraged to visit the
Village Hall for any assistance needed in completing this form.
1.   Name of Owner(s):
______________________________________________________________
                  (Attach additional sheets if necessary)
   Address: _________________________________      PHONE:
________________________
                           (ZIP CODE)
2.   Applicant's Name: _________________________      PHONE:
________________________
   Address: _________________________________
                           (ZIP CODE)
3.   Property interest of applicant:
____________________________________________________
                        (Contract Purchaser, Etc.)
4.   Address of proposed construction or mobile home:
___________________________________
5.   Legal Description (Lot, Block, and Subdivision; attach metes and bounds
description, if necessary).
___________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
Cost of Improvement: $ _____________   Square feet of Improvement
_________________
6.   Proposed construction (check one or more, as necessary):
[ ]   New Building      Type: __________ Brick/Frame      Number of Rooms
______________
[ ]   Alterations or additions to existing buildings (explain):
____________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
7.   Use of existing and proposed structures (if applicable):
Existing Use:
________________________________________________________________________
Proposed Use:
________________________________________________________________________
8.   Two copies of a sketch plat (drawn to approximate scale shall be attached,
showing the following:
   a)   Dimensions and use of all buildings;
   b)   Dimensions of lot;
   c)   Distance of each building from lot lines;
   d)   Distance of principal building from principal buildings on adjacent lot
(s);
   e)   Distance between accessory buildings and principal buildings;
   f)   Distance from lot line to center line of abutting street(s);
   g)   Location [with dimensions] of driveways and off-street parking spaces;
   h)   Location of all easements;
   i)   Location of all underground utilities, including septic tanks, tile
fields and wells.
9.   Application is hereby made for an occupancy permit as required under the
Village Code for the erection, moving or alteration and use of buildings and
mobile homes. In making this application, the applicant represents all of the
above statements and any attached maps and drawings to be a true description of
the proposed new or altered uses and/or buildings. The applicant agrees that
the permit applied for, if granted, is issued on the representations made
herein and that any permit issued may be revoked without notice on any breach
of representation or conditions. (See
Chapter 151)
   It is understood that any permit issued on this application will not grant
right of privilege to erect any structure or to use any premises described for
any purpose or in any manner prohibited by the Village Code, or by other
ordinances, codes or regulations of the Village.
                        APPLICANT: _______________________________________
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
   The plans and specifications submitted with this Application are in
conformity with the district requirements applicable to the subject property.
Changes in plans or specifications shall not be made without written approval
of the Village Board.
   Failure to comply with the above shall constitute a violation of the
provisions of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the Village.
DATE: _____________________________,
_____      _________________________________
                        BUILDING OFFICIAL
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISION CODE
Section
General Provisions; Legislative Intent
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Authority
   
152.003   Jurisdiction
   
152.004   Purpose
   
152.005   Intent
   
152.006   Scope of regulations
   
152.007   Validity of plats
   
152.008   Interpretation
   
152.009   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.020   Administration generally; Plat Officer
   
152.021   Plan Commission
   
152.022   Corporate authority
   
152.023   Engineer to certify
   
152.024   Recorder of Deeds
   
152.025   Records by Village Clerk
   
152.026   Planning Staff
   
152.027   Legal counsel
Procedure
   
152.040   Procedure generally; pre-application conference and investigation
   
152.041   Pre-application procedures
   
152.042   Formal procedures for reviewing preliminary and final plats
Plats and Maps
   
152.055   Compliance with regulations
   
152.056   Location maps
   
152.057   Site analysis maps
   
152.058   Preliminary plats
   
152.059   Final plat
   
152.060   Certified survey
   
152.061   Special subdivision
Design Standards
   
152.075   Conformity to plans
   
152.076   Conformity to natural features
   
152.077   Modifications for unsuitable sites
   
152.078   Street arrangement
   
152.079   Street alignment
   
152.080   Specific street design standards
   
152.081   Local or residential streets
   
152.082   Collector streets
   
152.083   Major streets
   
152.084   Other street requirements
Easements; Blocks
   
152.095   Across lots
   
152.096   Block to block
   
152.097   Drainage easements
   
152.098   Conservation easements
   
152.099   Suitability of blocks
   
152.100   Commercial or industrial uses
Lots; Building Setback Lines
   
152.115   Lot size
   
152.116   Conformity with zoning
   
152.117   Lots abutting water
   
152.118   Corner lots
   
152.119   Abutting a street
   
152.120   Double frontage
   
152.121   Lots at right angles
   
152.122   Setback lines and zoning
Parks, Schools and Public Areas; Drainage
   
152.135   Land may be required
   
152.136   Preservation of natural features
   
152.137   Designation of drainageways
Storm Water Management
   
152.150   Application
   
152.151   Drainage plan drawings
   
152.152   Maximum allowable run-off
   
152.153   Collection of flows
   
152.154   Design formula
   
152.155   Minimum detention outlet size
   
152.156   Detention storage requirement
   
152.157   Detention pond design criteria
   
152.158   Retention pond design criteria
   
152.159   Maintenance responsibilities
   
152.160   Definitions
Required Improvements and Specifications
   
152.175   General requirements
   
152.176   Grading and monumentation
   
152.177   Street improvements
   
152.178   Sidewalks
   
152.179   Curbs
   
152.180   Parkway vegetation
   
152.181   Public utilities
   
152.182   Storm drainage
   
152.183   Dams and impoundment structures
   
152.184   Public water systems
   
152.185   Sanitary sewers
   
152.186   Street lamps
   
152.187   Street signs
Dedications, Easements, Reservations and the Like
   
152.200   Dedications
   
152.201   Easements
   
152.202   Reservations
   
152.203   Vacations
   
152.204   Bonds and financial guarantees
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
152.215   Fees
   
152.216   Variation and relief
   
152.217   Special subdivisions
   
152.218   Amendments
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS; LEGISLATIVE INTENT
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the Land Subdivision
Code of the Village of Argenta.
(2001 Code, § 34-1-1)
§ 152.002 AUTHORITY.
   This code was adopted under authority granted by ILCS Ch. 65.
(2001 Code, § 34-1-2)
§ 152.003 JURISDICTION.
   The plat approval jurisdiction of the village shall include all land within
a mile and a half of the village limits or all land specifically referred to in
the official village plan.
(2001 Code, § 34-1-3)
§ 152.004 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this code is to regulate and control the division of
land within the plat approval jurisdiction of the village to prevent the
subdivision of land for uses to which the land is not suited and to regulate
the manner of subdivision so as to prevent serious hazards and problems to the
citizens of the community.
   (B)   Therefore, the regulations, requirements, standards, procedures,
specifications and controls contained herein are established in order to ensure
proper development of the village and to promote the public health, safety,
convenience, prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the community.
(2001 Code, § 34-1-4)
§ 152.005 INTENT.
   It is intended that this code establish regulations, requirements,
standards, procedure, specifications and controls specifically needed:
   (A)   To provide for the orderly division of land by requiring the proper
description, monumentation and recording of subdivided land;
   (B)   To establish what land areas are and are not eligible for division
into lots and to regulate uses of land to prevent land from being used for
purposes which the land is not suited;
   (C)   To provide for reasonable protection and conservation of those natural
resources (land, air, vegetation and water) upon which the contained
prosperity, safety, health and welfare of the community and surrounding region
may depend;
   (D)   To secure adequate safeguards as part of the subdivision processes to
protect the general public from hazards of flooding, fire, overcrowding and
other problems which could endanger public health or safety;
   (E)   To secure adequate public convenience and safety through regulations
governing the installation, design and location of public streets;
   (F)   To ensure adequate provisions are made for adequate open space,
utilities and other public facilities deemed necessary for general public
health and convenience;
   (G)   To ensure proper development of the community by requiring subdivision
to be developed according to the requirement of all officially adopted village
plans and ordinances and in this respect to require dedication or reservation
of land necessary to comply with these documents;
   (H)   To protect the community's taxable resources by requiring that
subdivision be designed and developed so as not to impose excessive maintenance
burdens on the community, but still allowing for reasonable low development
costs for the developer and general home owners;
   (I)   To prevent scattered development beyond the reasonable service area of
community facilities and utilities; and
   (J)   To provide reasonable and equitable procedures and regulations for
handling all subdivision plats by providing uniform procedures and standards
for observance by both the approving authority and subdivider, and to do this
without causing unnecessary and unreasonable cost to the developer, village or
home owner.
(2001 Code, § 34-1-5)
§ 152.006 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   This code shall govern all divisions of land within the plat jurisdiction of
the village, except the following:
   (A)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access or special utility easements;
   (B)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or
special utility easements and does not reduce the remaining lots size below the
minimum required;
   (C)   The sale of exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land which does not reduce the remaining lot size below the
minimum required;
   (D)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or
special utility easements;
   (E)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyance relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
   (F)   Conveyance made to correct the description in prior conveyances;
   (G)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two parts of a particular parcel or tract of land
recorded on or before July 17, 1959 and not involving any new streets or
easements of access or special utility easements;
   (H)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or special
utility easements; and
   (I)   The sale of a single lot of less than five acres from a larger tract
when a survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided, however, that this
exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same
larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of the
larger tract existing as of October 1, 1973.
(2001 Code, § 34-1-6)
§ 152.007 VALIDITY OF PLATS.
   No subdivision of land or dedication of access of easement serving more than
two lots in the plat jurisdiction of this code made after the effective date of
this code shall be considered valid, entitled to record in the office of County
Recorder of Deeds or eligible for building permits from the village permit
officer, unless made and improved in accordance with the requirements of this
code and representing either a minor subdivision, major subdivision, replat or
special subdivision.
(2001 Code, § 34-1-7)
§ 152.008 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this code shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power
granted by the state statutes.
(2001 Code, § 34-1-8)
§ 152.009 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A right-of-way which affords secondary means of access to properties
abutting upon a street.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot or other parcel of land so
designated on the preliminary plan between which line and the adjacent street,
the erection of an enclosed structure, or of a fence or hedge over three feet
high is prohibited.
   CERTIFIED PLAT. A plat used for recording a minor subdivision or replat as
described in §§
152.055 through
152.061.
   CIRCULATION PLAN. The portion of the village plan providing and planning for
the present and future street and road system for the village.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to a
thoroughfare, including the principal entrance streets of residential
development and the principal circulating streets within such a development.
   CROSSWALK. A public right-of-way located across a block to provide
pedestrian access to adjacent streets or alleys.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet.
   FINAL PLAT. A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as
described in §§
152.055 through
152.061.
   GROSS LAND AREA. The entire area of a development including lots, streets
and alleys, measured to the center line of any bounding streets.
   HALF STREET. A street bordering one or more property lines of a tract of
land in which the subdivider has allocated but part of the ultimate right-of-
way width.
   IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water
main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip, off-street
parking area or other facility for which the village may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development.
   LOT, BUTT. A lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (also called REVERSE FRONTAGE). A lot which has a pair
of opposite lot lines along two substantially parallel streets, and which is
not a corner lot.
   MAJOR STREET. A street of considerable continuity which serves or is
intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting various sections of the
village.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to
a thoroughfare, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
   MINOR STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to
abutting properties and local needs of a neighborhood.
   NET LAND AREA OF THE SUBDIVISION WHICH COULD BE DEVELOPED. The area of land
involved after the street right-of-way has been subtracted.
   OFFICIAL PLAN. The composite of the functional and geographic elements of
the comprehensive village plan, or any segment thereof in the form of plans,
maps, charts and textual material, as adopted by the village.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought
to be subdivided under this code.
   PARKWAY. An unpaved strip of land situated within the street.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of-way across or within a block, for use by
pedestrian traffic whether designated as a pedestrian way, crosswalk or however
otherwise designated.
   PLAN COMMISSION. The Village Plan Commission.
   PRESIDENT. The President of the village.
   PRIVATE STREET. An undedicated street which is privately owned and
maintained.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as
described in §§
152.055 through
152.061.
   ROADWAY. The portion of the street available for vehicular traffic situated
between the curb or combination curb and gutter lines.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street or cross-walkway, paved or otherwise
surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only.
   SHALL. Always mandatory and not merely directory.
   STREET. A right-of-way which affords primary means of access by pedestrians
and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, lane or however otherwise designated.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the property lines delineating a
street.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any owner commencing proceedings under this code.
   SUBDIVISION OF LAND. The division of land or a tract of land into two or
more parts, lots or parcels, any division of land when a new street is involved
for the purpose of sale, transfer of ownership or building development. The
term SUBDIVISION includes resubdivision and the division of a lot or parcel,
any of which is less than ten acres in area.
   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The basic land planning principles established
as guides for the preparation of preliminary plans.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Argenta, Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD. The Village Board of the Village of Argenta, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The Village Engineer of the Village of Argenta, Illinois,
or his or her representative duly appointed by the Village Board.
(2001 Code, § 34-2-1)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.020 ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY; PLAT OFFICER.
   (A)   The Subdivision Code shall be administered by the following bodies and
officials in the manner prescribed herein.
   (B)   The Office of Plat Officer is hereby created, and that officer upon
appointment by the President of the village shall serve for a term of one year
and shall be an ex officio member of the Plan Commission of the village.
   (C)   The duties of the Plat Officer shall be as follows:
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the Plat Officer to meet with the
developers or other parties wishing to subdivide to explain the intent and
regulations of this chapter;
      (2)   The responsibilities of the Plat Officer shall be to approve and/or
to sign maps, replats minor subdivisions and major subdivisions in accordance
with the provisions of this code; and
      (3)   The Plat Officer shall further be responsible for interpreting this
code and his or her judgment, subject to review by the Plan Commission, shall
govern in determining which platting processes shall be required, the minor
subdivision, major subdivision or replat.
(2001 Code, § 34-3-1)
§ 152.021 PLAN COMMISSION.
   Plan Commission is the Plan Commission of the village. It shall be the
responsibility of the Plan Commission to review and make recommendations on all
major subdivision plats.
   (A)   The Plan Commission is hereby empowered to review plats, and make
recommendations for their approval, rejection or conditional approval; to
recommend dedication of public sites when designated in the comprehensive plan;
to recommend standards for construction and to recommend any other requirement
which is in the interest of public welfare.
   (B)   It is further the responsibility of the Plan Commission to hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Plat Officer in the
enforcement of this code and to recommend variances from strict application of
this code when the variances are in the best public interest and which will not
substantially interfere with the general overall standards and requirements of
this code.
   (C)   It is further the responsibility of the Plan Commission to
periodically review and recommend changes in the code.
(2001 Code, § 34-3-2)
§ 152.022 CORPORATE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The corporate authority is the Village Board of the village. It shall
be the authorized body for approving, conditionally approving or denying a
subdivision plat.
   (B)   The corporate authority shall also have the right to adopt or reject
any proposed amendments to the Subdivision Code which the Plan Commission might
submit to it.
(2001 Code, § 34-3-3)
§ 152.023 ENGINEER TO CERTIFY.
   (A)   The Village Engineer is a duly qualified engineer retained by the
Village Board. It shall be the responsibility of the Engineer to certify all
work completed within a subdivision.
   (B)   The corporate authority shall not approve any plat until the report is
received and no plat shall be accepted for final processing until certified by
the engineer as to improvement or that a proper bond has been filed.
(2001 Code, § 34-3-4)
§ 152.024 RECORDER OF DEEDS.
   (A)   Recorder of Deeds is the Recorder of Deeds of Macon County.
   (B)   The Recorder of Deeds shall be responsible for accepting or rejecting
all plats offered for recording in accordance to the provisions of the code.
(2001 Code, § 34-3-5)
§ 152.025 RECORDS BY VILLAGE CLERK.
   The Village Clerk is an appointed official of the village. The Clerk shall
keep records of all plats reviewed by the Plan Commission.
(2001 Code, § 34-3-6)
§ 152.026 PLANNING STAFF.
   Planning staff shall be any qualified land use planner which the corporate
authority may designate to assist them in various village plans.
(2001 Code, § 34-3-7)
§ 152.027 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   (A)   Legal counsel is an attorney retained by the village as their legal
counsel.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of legal counsel to review the bonds
for the subdivision improvements.
(2001 Code, § 34-3-8)
PROCEDURE
§ 152.040 PROCEDURE GENERALLY; PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE AND INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Any person, corporation, firm or agent thereof, intending to subdivide
land within the plat jurisdiction of the village shall proceed according to the
steps outlined in this chapter.
   (B)   This code requires that before the village accepts for review any
preliminary subdivision plat, final plat, plan development zoning plat or any
other survey made for the purpose of dividing land, that the subdivider or his
or her agents shall first meet with the Village Plan Commission for pre-
application conferences and site investigations.
   (C)   The purpose of the pre-application meetings and investigations are as
follows:
      (1)   To determine the proper classification or procedure which the
subdivider should follow in the subdivision of the tract of land in question;
      (2)   To ensure the subdivider fully understands all the provisions of
the Village Subdivision Code and other village codes related to the development
of land;
      (3)   To ensure the subdivider is thoroughly familiar with the standards,
materials and specifications of the village governing the construction of
streets, and other public facilities in the area he or she intends to
subdivide;
      (4)   To find out whether any other village action such as zoning,
annexation or street vacation needs to be taken prior to the development of the
land;
      (5)   To ensure the subdivider will conduct adequate background studies
to allow the subdivider to properly design his or her subdivision and to allow
the village proper information to review the subdivision plan; and
      (6)   To ensure the subdivision will be designated consistent with the
village official comprehensive plans or official village map and to ensure the
subdivider is aware of all the provisions of the plan which would effect the
design of his or her subdivision.
(2001 Code, § 34-4-1)
§ 152.041 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   The following steps set forth the pre-application conference and
investigation procedures in greater detail.
   (A)   Step One: Submittal.
      (1)   A subdivider wishing to arrange for pre-application hearings with
the Village Plan Commission shall submit a written request to the Plan
Commission for pre-application review for the proposed subdivision. The request
shall contain a general description of the location and size of the tract to be
platted; the intent as to character, type and use anticipated for the property
and type of structures to be developed; and in a general manner the extent and
character of the improvements to be made by the subdivider. If appropriate, a
description of any unique hardship or difficulty which might limit the
development of the property under consideration.
      (2)   The subdivider should also submit with the letter a location map
(see §§
152.055 through
152.061) of the property intended to be subdivided.
   (B)   Step Two: Establishment of Meeting Date and Classification.
      (1)   The Village Plat Officer shall then arrange with the Chairperson of
the Plan Commission to have a hearing date set within 30 days. The Chairperson
of the Plan Commission shall then notify the members of the Commission and
staff of the meeting date and a letter should also be sent to the subdivider
formally notifying subdivider of the time and place of the hearing.
      (2)   When the subdivider submits his or her letter to the Village Plat
Officer, the Village Plat Officer shall make a determination of what
classifications subdivision procedure the subdivider should follow and advise
the subdivider as to what additional information the subdivider should submit
to the Village Plan Commission.
      (3)   All lands to be subdivided within the village shall be classified
as one of the following four types of subdivision classifications, a major
subdivision, minor subdivision, special subdivision or replat.
   (C)   Step Three: Site Analysis (Major or Special Subdivisions).
      (1)   If the Village Plat Officer determines that land should be
processed as either a major subdivision or special subdivision the Plat Officer
should inform the subdivider that he or she will be required to submit a series
of maps for the purposes of site evaluations.
      (2)   Specific regulations as to how the maps should be drawn and how
technical information is to be presented is covered in §
152.057.
      (3)   In general, these maps should include:
         (a)   A map of general slope classification and topographic contours;
         (b)   A map of general drainage and high water marks;
         (c)   A map of significant vegetation;
         (d)   A map of general soil types; and
         (e)   In areas to be developed without community water or sewer
systems, tests for ground water supply availability and percolation information
may also be required.
   (D)   Step Four: The Neighborhood Plan and Site Recommendations (Major or
Special Subdivision).
      (1)   For all major subdivisions the Plan Commission staff shall direct
its staff to prepare a general neighborhood plan (Plate IV-I) for the pre-
application conference. The neighborhood plan should cover all areas within a
half a mile of the proposed tract or an area consistent with the standard
neighborhood limits within which the tract lies.
      (2)   This neighborhood plan should include major and collector street
alignments and widths; general location of minor streets; proposed drainage,
conservation and major utility easements; all proposed dedications and
reservations shown on the village's official comprehensive plan or official
map; and general development and design recommendations.
   (E)   Step Five: Site Discussions.
      (1)   The Plan Commission, staff, and subdivider at the pre-application
conference shall discuss the site analysis map and the general neighborhood
plan prepared by the staff. From this discussion the general design concepts
and development plan for the subdivision should be established.
      (2)   Further pre-application meetings may be required by the Commission
when, in the opinion of the Commission, additional site investigations are
necessary for proper review of a subdivision plat for the tract or tracts in
question.
   (F)   Step Six: Commission's Recommendations. Within 15 days after the pre-
application conference, the Commission shall submit to the developer and to the
Village Board in writing, its recommendations as to the development of the
site.
   (G)   Step Seven: Sketch Plan or Preliminary Plan (Optional).
      (1)   In cases of all minor and replats a sketch plan shall be required
and shall be presented at the pre-application conference. In the cases of
special subdivisions or major subdivisions, a submission of a sketch plan is at
the discretion of the subdivider.
      (2)   Where the subdivider feels he or she fully understands the
recommendations of the Plan Commission he or she may proceed to the preliminary
plat sketch without a sketch plan.
      (3)   If the subdivider feels unclear or disagrees with the
recommendations of the Plan Commission he or she may submit a sketch plan in
accordance with regulations of §§
152.055 through
152.061 for further discussion with the Plan Commission and Village Board prior
to his or her engaging in more expensive engineering drawings.
(2001 Code, § 34-4-2)
§ 152.042 FORMAL PROCEDURES FOR REVIEWING PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS.
   After the subdivider has satisfied the pre-application requirements of this
code (§
152.040 above) and after the Plan Commission has concurred with the decision of
the Plat Officer as to the proper classification of the proposed subdivision,
the subdivider then shall proceed to process his or her plat in accordance with
the appropriate classification procedures established by this subchapter. The
following sections, therefore, set the appropriate procedural requirements for
minor subdivisions, replats, major subdivisions or special subdivisions.
   (A)   The minor subdivision.
      (1)   The minor subdivision procedures shall be allowed when in the
determination of the Plan Commission five lots or less will be created; the
subdivision fronts on an existing adequately improved street; does not involve
any new streets; easements of access or the extension of other municipal
facilities; does not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the
parcel or adjoining property; and does not conflict with any provisions of the
official map or other applicable regulations or plans.
      (2)   After the Plan Commission approves the classification of the
proposed subdivision as a minor plat it shall be processed in one step in
accordance with the following procedures:
         (a)   The subdivider shall prepare a certified survey map in
accordance with the regulations set forth in the code in §
152.059 below; and shall file the original linen or Mylar and seven copies of
the map and the letter of application with the Plan Commission, who within a
period of 30 days shall approve, conditionally approve or reject the plat.
         (b)   Before approving or rejecting any plat the Plan Commission shall
submit one copy of the certified survey map to each of the utilities companies
to ascertain whether any utilities easements are required; and one copy to the
tax officer to ascertain whether there are any unpaid taxes. These agencies
within seven days should return their comments. If no answer is received within
15 days it shall be considered that there are no objections to the plat. If the
Commission rejects the subdivision its objections shall be in writing.
         (c)   When a minor subdivision is considered by the Plan Commission,
the Chairperson of the Plan Commission shall sign the plat and within 15 days
submit the original linen and all copies, bearing his or her name, date and
recommendation to the Village Board for final action.
   (B)   Major subdivision. The processing of a subdivision as a major
subdivision shall be required on any parcel of ground not previously platted,
where major street improvements, easements or dedications are required, or
where more than five lots are being created through the subdivision processes.
The major subdivision shall be processed in three steps: the preliminary plat
stage, the construction and inspection stage and the final plat stage. The
following sections set the proper procedures to be followed in each of the
three stages mentioned. A review and approval of each of these stages will be
necessary before the subdivider will be entitled to proceed to the following
stage.
      (1)   Preliminary or tentative plat.
         (a)   A preliminary plat shall be eligible for review when the
subdivider has satisfied the pre-application requirements of this code, when he
or she has paid his or her plat fees and when he or she has submitted to the
Plat Officer (Building Inspector) ten copies of the layout plat, three copies
of the engineering drawings, plus three copies of the proposed deed
restrictions to be established for the proposed lots.
         (b)   The Plat Officer shall notify the Chairperson of the Plan
Commission and a public hearing shall be set within 30 days to review the
preliminary plat, engineering drawings and suggested deed restrictions. The
subdivider also shall be given adequate written notice of meeting. The copies
of the proposed preliminary plat should then be sent to the County Health
Department, appropriate drainage districts, the township board, appropriate
planning staff of the Village Plan Commission, the electric company, the
telephone company, the School Board, and the Village Engineer 15 days prior to
the public hearing. Comments from these agencies should be submitted to the
Village Plan Commission prior to the public hearing. If no comment is received
by the time of the meeting the Commission shall consider the agencies have no
recommendations.
         (c)   At the public hearing the Plan Commission shall recommend
approval, conditional approval or rejection of the proposed plat. Copies of the
recommendation of the Plan Commission and the original linen copy of the plat
shall then be sent to the Village Board and additional copies of the village
action should be sent to the subdivider.
         (d)   After receiving the recommendations of the Village Plan
Commission the village shall act upon the proposed plat within 60 days. If
approved the President of the village shall sign and date the original and
three copies of the plat and also direct the Chairperson of the Plan Commission
to sign and date the plats.
      (2)   Inspection and work certification. Upon approval of the preliminary
plat the subdivider shall meet with the Building Inspector to receive approval
to start work on the public improvement within the subdivision and during
construction shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The subdividing contractor shall be duly certified and bonded by
the village to undertake the work. In the event that the contractor is required
to post his or her bond, the bond should be drawn in accordance with
regulations in village codes;
         (b)   The subdivider shall also submit to the Village Engineer
certifications showing the type materials and amounts used in construction meet
the standard of this code;
         (c)   The subdivider shall also arrange for various inspections of
improvements to be made by the Village Engineer or Inspector at pre-arranged
points during the course of construction as provided for in this code;
         (d)   The design engineer shall also be required to inspect work to
ensure that it conforms to the specifications in the preliminary plat and upon
the works completion shall certify that the work has been completed according
to the engineering and design plans as approved by the village; and
         (e)   Upon proper completion of improvements the Village Engineer or
Inspector shall submit to the Village Board a full report (including an
inspection certification (see §§
152.055 through
152.061) on improvements and certifications thereof. If the engineer finds that
all improvements are installed to the standards agreed upon in the preliminary
plat or if a bond in proper legal form has been submitted (the Village Board,
however, shall not formally accept any dedicated streets until one year after
actual construction, the maintenance during this time shall be the subdivided
responsibility) the development is ready for final platting.
      (3)   The final plat.
         (a)   The final plat shall be ready for review after the Building
Inspector notifies the Chairperson of the Plan Commission that the work has
been completed or adequate bonds have been accepted by the village. The
subdivider shall prepare a final plat and a letter of application in accordance
with this code and shall file five copies of the plat with the Village Building
Inspector.
         (b)   The Village Plan Commission shall then examine the final plat
for its conformance with: the approved preliminary plat; any conditions of
approval of the preliminary plat; the regulations of this code and all other
village ordinances. The Commission then should recommend approval, conditional
approval or rejection of the plat to the Village Board. The Village Board
should act within 60 days on the plat.
      (4)   Recordation. After the final plat has been approved and required
improvements either installed or sureties insuring their installation provided,
the Village Clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the plat attesting
to the approval to be duly executed and the Village Clerk shall record the plat
with the County Register of Deeds. The Register of Deeds cannot record the plat
unless it is offered within 30 days from the date of the last approval.
   (C)   The replat procedures. The replat procedures shall apply when an
alteration, redesign or re-division is proposed for an existing legally
recorded subdivision or part thereof. The replace procedures may be processed
in one or two steps depending upon whether or not it is necessary to vacate or
alter any streets, easements, lots or other public facilities. In the instance
where no public facilities, easements, lot records or other improvements are
involved and where the plan change corresponds with the provisions of the
village comprehensive plan the further subdivision or other alteration of lots
in existing subdivisions shall follow the same procedures as described under a
minor subdivision; in all other instances involving subdivisions classified as
replats the original plat must be vacated according to the following section.
      (1)   Vacation of existing plat. Any person, firm or agent thereof
wishing to have vacated existing lot lines, public streets, highways or alleys
or any easement other than easements granted between individual property owners
shall file a written instrument and plat with the village officials showing
what easements and rights-of-way are to be vacated. Such an instrument and
replat shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission, the County Superintendent of
Highways, the District Engineer of the Department of Public Works and Buildings
of the state and the effected utility companies. The Village Plan Commission
after receiving the comments of these agencies shall make their recommendations
on the plat to the Village Board. If the Village Board concurs with the
vacation, the Village Clerk shall submit the resolution of the Village Board,
the instrument and plat to the County Recorder of Deeds; who then shall
officially record and cancel the entire plat of record or specific portions
thereof.
      (2)   Review of plat. After a vacation of a previous plat has been
approved by the Village Board and recorded in the office of the Macon County
Recorder of Deeds, the subdivider may then submit his or her petition for the
replat of the subdivision involved. The subdivision shall be classified by the
Village Building Inspector as either major, minor or special subdivision and
shall then proceed in accordance with the regulations established for the
classification given to the subdivision.
   (D)   Special subdivisions or planned unit development.
      (1)   Any parcel of land five acres or more can be considered for a
special subdivision when both the subdivider and the Village Plan Commission
concur in the pre-application conference that the land can best be developed as
a planned unit development or a special subdivision.
         (a)   The Plan Commission shall approve the planned development only
if it finds that the planned development satisfies all of the following
standards.
            1.   The planned development is consistent with the comprehensive
plan for the community.
            2.   The planned development is an effective and unified treatment
of the development possibilities on the project site (and the development plan
makes appropriate provision for the preservation of streams and stream banks,
wooded cover, rough terrain and similar areas).
            3.   The planned development shall be in harmony with any existing
or proposed development in the area surrounding the project site.
            4.   The approval of the plan will not represent an increased
maintenance burden on roads, drainage ways and public utilities to the village,
township or county over what these agencies would have to incur if the
subdivision was developed as a standard subdivision.
         (b)   Upon classification of any plat as a special subdivision or
planned unit development by the Plan Commission the subdivider is then eligible
to submit to the Village Building Inspector a letter requesting joint zoning
and subdivision action.
            1.   This letter should also contain an outline of the development
proposals and a copy of a planned development plat drawn in accordance with the
standards in §§
152.055 through
152.061.
            2.   The Building Inspector shall arrange to have a joint meeting
of the Plan Commission and Zoning Board within 30 days of submission of the
plat and give notice to the subdivider of the time and place of the meeting.
         (c)   Except for the granting of special relief, legal notification
and the combined action of the Zoning Board and Plan Commission; the plat shall
then be processed similarly to that of a major plat. (All planned unit
developments must be approved by two-thirds vote of the members present at any
Village Board meeting.)
            1.   Since special subdivisions combine zoning with subdivision
procedures, all hearings shall comply with publication requirements of the
state for zoning hearings.
            2.   There should be therefore a 15-day legal publication given in
advance of a public meeting where special subdivisions are to be reviewed.
      (2)   The Building Inspector, when certifying the work of the planned
unit development, special plat or when issuing building permits for the same,
shall only be allowed to issue permits consistent with the detailed plans shown
on the plat. No building permits may be issued on land with the planned
development subdivision until the final plan for development has been approved.
      (3)   The final plat shall be processed similarly to that of a major
subdivision.
(2001 Code, § 34-4-3)
PLATS AND MAPS
§ 152.055 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   All plats, plans, maps, surveys, certificates, owners' declarations,
engineering specifications and restrictive covenants to be filed for action of
the village shall be prepared in accordance with the regulations contained in
this subchapter.
(2001 Code, § 34-5-1)
§ 152.056 LOCATION MAPS.
   (A)   The maps used for showing the general location of subdivision and its
relationship to surrounding areas shall be at a scale of one inch to 1,000 feet
(it is suggested that the township maps obtainable from either the village or
county planning office would make a good standard base map).
   (B)   The maps shall be prepared similar to the location map below, in this
division (B). The dimensions of the maps shall be adequate to show the true
relationship of the proposed subdivision and the village limits.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b749c3ddf7d605a68b0eacdea624b46c118a85f5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1707.jpg]
 
   (C)   The following information shall be shown on the face of the plat:
      (1)   The outline of the proposed subdivision with the area of the
subdivision cross-hatched;
      (2)   The name and address of the subdivider;
      (3)   A legal description of the proposed subdivision;
      (4)   A north point and graphic scale;
      (5)   The date of submission;
      (6)   The location of surrounding schools, major streets and highways,
shopping and employment centers, and other major facilities;
      (7)   A written statement of how water and sewage treatment will be
handled;
      (8)   The existing zoning on the tract to be subdivided and, surrounding
the tract; and
      (9)   The ownership of surrounding land area.
(2001 Code, § 34-5-2)
§ 152.057 SITE ANALYSIS MAPS.
   (A)   Site analysis maps shall consist of at least four maps, a scale of not
more than one inch equals 200 feet.
   (B)   (1)   The maps may be approximate scaled pencil drawings and shall be
drawn similar to the maps on Plate V-2 in §
152.058 below.
      (2)   
Table V-1 in §
152.058 below shows how information can be inexpensively obtained.
(2001 Code, § 34-5-3)
§ 152.058 PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   (A)   All preliminary plats for major subdivisions shall consist of a
location map, layout plan, engineering specification and proposed restrictive
covenants.
   (B)   The layout map shall be at a scale of one inch equals100 feet and
shall be prepared similar to Plate V-2 found below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b749c3ddf7d605a68b0eacdea624b46c118a85f5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1710.jpg]
 
   (C)   It shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Site analysis maps;
      (2)   Table V-1: availability of information for pre-subdivision data
maps:
         (a)   Map No. 1: Soils.
            1.   In many areas, detailed soil mapping has been completed by the
County Soil and Water Conservation District and is available to interested
landowners.
            2.   In those areas where mapping has not been completed, the
information may be obtained at no cost to the subdivider through the County
Soil and Water Conservation District by means of a conservation agreement.
         (b)   Map No. 2: Slope. Slope information can readily be obtained from
a U.S.G.S. Topographic Map at five foot level and from information contained in
the above soil surveys. Slope data should be expressed in terms of the
following classification:
 
Class % Slope Class % Slope   Class % Slope
A     0-.29   D     4.0-9.9   G     25.0 to 49.9
B     0.3-.99 E     10.0-14.9 H     50+
C     1.0-3.9 F     15.0-24.9
 
         (c)   Map No. 3: Vegetation. Information on significant vegetative
cover can readily be obtained on recent aerial photographs of the site from
actual site inspection. Photos are available in County Regional Plan Commission
office.
         (d)   Map No. 4: Flood Level. Flood plain and flood level information
can readily be obtained from the state water survey, Department of Registration
and Education. Flood information should be shown for the ten-year flood
recurrence and either the 100-year flood recurrence or the maximum flood of
record.
      (3)   Identification and description:
         (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision or title under which it is
to be recorded (not duplicating a name of any plat heretofore recorded in the
county);
         (b)   The names and addresses of the owner;
         (c)   The name and seal of the subdivider, engineer and registered
land surveyor;
         (d)   The legal description of the plat;
         (e)   The north point, graphic (engineering) scale of one inch to 100
feet;
         (f)   The date of preparation; and
         (g)   A note stating "preliminary plat", not to be recorded by the
Recorder of Deeds.
      (4)   Existing conditions:
         (a)   The boundary line of the proposed subdivision shall be clearly
indicated;
         (b)   The total approximate acreage therein;
         (c)   The locations, widths and names of all existing or previously
platted streets or other public ways, showing type of improvements, if any,
railroad and utility right-of-way, parks and other public open spaces,
permanent buildings and structures, easements, section and township lines
within the tract and to a distance of 200 feet beyond the proposed subdivision;
         (d)   The location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts
or other underground facilities within the proposed subdivisions and to a
distance of 200 feet beyond;
         (e)   Topographic data including existing contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet unless a greater interval is required to
properly depict rough terrain. Topographic data shall refer to the United
States Geological North American Datum-Mean Sea Level Elevation. Watercourses,
marshes, rock outcrops, other features significant to the Plan Commission shall
also be shown;
         (f)   Zoning classification for, and adjacent to, the tract; and
         (g)   Overflow area boundary for appropriate water levels. (See §§
152.075 through
152.160.)
      (5)   Subdivision design features:
         (a)   Layout of streets showing right-of-way widths and street names.
Public streets shall be required in all subdivisions;
         (b)   Location and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways, utility
easements, lots and setback lines;
         (c)   Areas intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use,
including, in each, the approximate area in acres;
         (d)   Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots to the nearest foot.
Letters shall not be used for identification of lots or blocks;
         (e)   Minimum front and side-street building lines; with dimensions
indicated;
         (f)   Areas other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and easements
intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use; for each, the approximate
area in acres shall be indicated; and
         (g)   Site data including total acres, number of lots, typical lot
dimensions and area, lineal feet in streets, acres in streets, parks and
similar public or semi-public areas.
      (6)   Protective covenants: all protective covenants for a proposed
subdivision shall accompany the preliminary plan; i.e., type of structures,
architectural controls and the like;
      (7)   Construction plans: as part of the preliminary subdivision plan by
the village, the subdivider prepares and submits construction plans of the
subdivision for approval. They should contain all necessary details, including
cost estimates and be prepared by a registered professional engineer, and
include the following:
         (a)   Cross sections of proposed streets, alleys, crosswalks and the
like, and a profile of each with proposed grades, existing drainage courses,
watershed area and structures, width of roadway, location of sidewalk, type of
roadway surfacing, curbs, planting strips, curb openings, street lights and
traffic signals; and
         (b)   Complete construction plans for utilities including water,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and other facilities.
      (8)   Approval certificate: the plat shall also contain an appropriate
place of signatures of approving bodies and shall be worded similar to example
below:
"The proposed plan of subdivision herein is approved by the Plan Commission.
This is NOT an approval of the final plan."
Village Plan Commission
Dated   _________________________
By:   __________________________________________
   Chairperson
Argenta Village Board
Dated   __________________________
By:   __________________________________________
   President
(2001 Code, § 34-5-4)
§ 152.059 FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or Mylar (sheet size
18 inches by 24 inches within the border) and shall be at a scale of 100 feet
to one inch. Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by
an index sheet showing the entire subdivision.
   (A)   Identification (to be shown on face of final plat):
      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision (must not duplicate others in county),
township, tract and original lot or section number;
      (2)   Control points. All dimensions, angles and bearings are to be
referred to control points, nearest established street line, section lines or
other established point;
      (3)   Lines and boundaries. Center lines and right-of-way lines of
streets, easements and other rights-of-way, natural and artificial water
courses, streams, shoreline corporation lines, and property lines of all lots
and parcels with distances, radii, arcs, chords and tangents of all curves
(nearest one hundredth of a foot), bearings or deflection angles (nearest
second);
      (4)   Street. Name and right-of-way width of each street within proposed
subdivision and those adjoining;
      (5)   Building setback lines accurately shown with dimensions;
      (6)   Lot and block identification. Lots shall be numbered in consecutive
order and when the subdivision is submitted in sections, lots shall be numbered
consecutively as each section is submitted whether or not the sections are
contiguous;
      (7)   Drainage statement.
"We, the undersigned, respectively a Registered Professional Engineer and the
Owner or Owners of the land subdivided hereby, or the duly authorized attorney
of the Owner or Owners, state that to the best of our knowledge and belief the
drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of the
subdivision or any part thereof, or, that if the surface water drainage is
changed, reasonable provision has been made for collection and diversion of
surface waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider or subdividers
have a right to use, and that the surface waters will be planned for in
accordance with generally accepted engineering practices so as to reduce the
likelihood of damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of
the subdivision."
____________________________________________________
Ill. Prof. No. ________________________________________
____________________________________________________
Owner
      (8)   Land for public uses. Show boundaries and identify the use of all
parcels which are to be dedicated or reserved for public use of easements;
      (9)   Monuments. Location and description of those found, set or to be
set;
      (10)   Certification and seal of the registered surveyor to the effect
that the plat represents a survey made by him or her which balances and closes,
and that the monuments shown thereon exist or shall be set as shown, and that
all dimensional and geodetic details are correct;
      (11)   Any special restrictions relating to access control along public
ways or to the provisions of planting strips;
      (12)   Reference to deed restrictions, if any;
      (13)   Certification to the fact that "no part of the property covered by
this plat or subdivision is situated within 500 feet of any drainage or
watercourse serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more"; and
      (14)   The plat shall also contain an appropriate place for signatures of
providing bodies and shall be worded similar to the following example:
Village Plan Commission
Dated __________________
   Approved by:   _____________________________________
         Chairperson
   Attested by:   _____________________________________
         Secretary
Argenta Village Board
Dated __________________
   Approved by:   ______________________________________
         President
   Attested by:   ______________________________________
         Village Clerk
   Dated by   ______________________________________
         Design Engineer
   (B)   Owner declaration and required certificates (to be typed in text of
legal documents accompanying the plat).
      (1)   The owners declaration shall include a statement of ownership,
description and name of subdivision, statements of dedications for public use,
statements prohibiting discrimination, and statements to owners restrictions,
and may include, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Land use and building type;
         (b)   Architectural control;
         (c)   Dwelling type, quality and size;
         (d)   Public utilities;
         (e)   Building location;
         (f)   Nuisances;
         (g)   Temporary structures;
         (h)   Signs;
         (i)   Livestock and poultry;
         (j)   Garbage and refuse disposal;
         (k)   Sod, dirt, and rocks; and
         (l)   Family density of any multiple-dwelling units.
      (2)   The declaration shall be drawn up and shall be notarized upon
submission.
      (3)   Surveyor's certificate shall consist of a statement by the surveyor
as to the accuracy of the survey and shall be drawn up.
      (4)   Certification that no redeemable taxes are outstanding against the
real estate.
      (5)   Approval of the Chairperson of the Plan Commission of the village
and attested by the Secretary of same Commission.
      (6)   Approval of the President of the village and attested by the
Village Clerk.
(2001 Code, § 34-5-5)
§ 152.060 CERTIFIED SURVEY.
   A certified survey for a minor subdivision or replat shall be drawn.
(2001 Code, § 34-5-6)
§ 152.061 SPECIAL SUBDIVISION.
   The preliminary and final plats for special subdivisions shall be prepared
similar to the major subdivision plat and shall include additional information
as necessary.
(2001 Code, § 34-5-7)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.075 CONFORMITY TO PLANS.
   All subdivisions shall be designed to conform to all officially adopted
plans of the village.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-1)
§ 152.076 CONFORMITY TO NATURAL FEATURES.
   (A)   All subdivisions and all areas contained herein shall be so planed to
take advantage of the natural topography of the land so as to economize the
construction of streets and drainage systems; to reduce the overall amount of
grading and disruption of the topsoil and natural vegetation, and to prevent
disruption of surrounding drainage and natural environmental conditions.
   (B)   The village reserves the authority to deny or require modification of
any subdivision or part thereof which because of its natural characteristics or
position cannot afford a reasonable\y pleasant, safe and healthy location for
residents or commercial activities.
   (C)   Some conditions which would make land unsuited for lotting or
development are as follows:
      (1)   Lands lying within, or at less than one vertical foot above the
maximum probable flood level, or where the levels are not available at least
two feet above the greatest flood of record. Filling of stream basins shall
only be allowed when it will have no impedance on natural flood flows and only
by special permit of the Village Board.
      (2)   Land areas with very severe limitations which include limitations
of high permanent water tables, swamps, highly organic soils, and soils subject
to overflows, soils subject to extreme erosion, and soils which in other ways
present hazards to construction.
      (3)   In subdivisions planned for development with individual septic
systems areas with soils having a high seasonal water table, slow or excessive
permeability, and soils subject to excessive frost action.
      (4)   Lands lying on a general overall slope of 25% or more shall be
excluded from development. Lands lying on more than 12% slope shall not be used
for lots which must depend on septic systems for waste disposal.
      (5)   Land proposed to be developed on dependent or individual water
systems which cannot show after reasonable investigations that ground water
adequate to meet the population needs of the subdivision supplies are not
approved.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-2)
§ 152.077 MODIFICATIONS FOR UNSUITABLE SITES.
   (A)   The village also reserves the right to deny platting or require
modifications such as increases in lot size, setback, street locations or the
dedication of open space easements or screening for land areas located adjacent
to facilities or activities which might effect the public health, safety or
general welfare for adjacent residential lots.
   (B)   The following list, which is by no means inclusive, represent some
conditions which might require action by the village.
      (1)   Areas adjacent to heavy industry or rail facilities. (This might
require separation by easement, increased setback from streets or screening.)
      (2)   Lots along major highways. (This might require additional setbacks
or may require frontage roads.)
(2001 Code, § 34-6-3)
§ 152.078 STREET ARRANGEMENT.
   (A)   In any new subdivision the street layout shall conform to the
arrangement width and location of streets as indicated on the village official
map, comprehensive plan, or the neighborhood development plan which was drawn
up as part of the pre-application review.
   (B)   The overall plan in addition should conform to the following
standards:
      (1)   In general, not more than 20% of the total land area of the
subdivision should be in street right-of-way;
      (2)   The resulting street pattern should be properly related to
topography and other natural features for aesthetic and drainage reasons.
Further, the system should be so designed as to allow economic platting of the
best building sites possible;
      (3)   The overall plan should result in proper functional classification
of streets, with spacing of collector and major streets in accordance with
standards contained in this section; and
      (4)   The street system should afford satisfactory access to a public
street to all building lots within the subdivision and provide the advantageous
street service up to all adjoining lands.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-5)
§ 152.079 STREET ALIGNMENT.
   (A)   Street alignment shall be so laid out so as to ensure public safety
and convenience for both vehicular and pedestrian travel.
   (B)   The following standard shall be followed in the alignment of streets.
      (1)   The number of intersections shall be kept to the absolute minimum
necessary to provide reasonable direct traffic flow. No more than two streets
shall converge at any one intersection. The intersection of streets shall be as
near 90% as possible, never less than 70%.
      (2)   Street jogs shall be discouraged and should never be permitted with
centerline offset of less than 150 feet.
      (3)   Reverse curves of major and collector streets shall not have
tangents of less than 100 feet.
      (4)   The number of access points shall be reduced as the functional
classification of the street increases and as travel volume and speed
increases.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-6)
§ 152.080 SPECIFIC STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   The design of streets shall relate to their function classification,
surrounding development density and topography. Major streets shall be designed
in accordance with anticipated traffic flow and desired speed of movement, all
major widths and standards of construction shall be separately approved by the
Village Board after recommendation of the Village Plan Commission and Engineer.
   (B)   The design of the residential streets and collector streets should
conform to the standards of Tables
VI-I,
VII-I (both tables found in §
152.082(A)(7)) and the general standards contained in this section related to
the streets.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-7)
§ 152.081 LOCAL OR RESIDENTIAL STREETS.
   (A)   Local streets shall be designed in accordance with Tables
VI-I and
VII-I (in §
152.082(A)(7)).
   (B)   The function of local streets is to provide direct access to
individual lots.
   (C)   The travel speed should be slow enough to minimize hazards to children
and entering traffic (less than 30 mph).
   (D)   The following standards shall relate to local streets:
      (1)   Local streets shall be so laid out that through traffic is
discouraged; and
      (2)   Local streets should be kept as short as possible and connect as
directly as possible into a collector street.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-8)
§ 152.082 COLLECTOR STREETS.
   (A)   Collector streets shall be designed and laid out in accordance to
Tables
VI-I and
VII-I (both found in §
152.082).
   (B)   The function of collector streets is to collect local traffic and move
it conveniently and directly to the nearest major streets or neighborhood
facilities (schools, churches, shopping and the like).
   (C)   The access to a collector street should be limited to local streets.
The design travel speed for collector streets shall be between 30 to 40 mph.
   (D)   The specific requirements are as follows.
      (1)   Collectors should be spaced approximately one-fourth a mile apart.
      (2)   Residential driveways generally should not be allowed to enter
directly onto collector streets.
      (3)   Collector streets shall be provided with ten-foot crosswalks at
reasonable intervals.
      (4)   Setback on all collector streets shall be increased over minimum
zoning district setbacks in relation to the traffic volume anticipated.
      (5)   Four-foot sidewalks shall be required at least on one side of urban
collector streets, and where required by the corporate authority may be
required on both sides.
      (6)   Where parking and driveway entrances are necessary along collector
streets the pavement width shall not be less than 40 feet. Where no lots face
collector streets, the pavement width may be reduced to 36 feet or less,
depending on the density of adjoining development.
      (7)   Access controls may be required on highly traveled collectors.
Table VI-I Street Design Standards; Urban
Classification Collector Local Cul-de-Sac Countryside
Table VI-I Street Design Standards; Urban
Classification                         Collector Local Cul-de-Sac Countryside
                                                                  1    2  3
1. Right-of-way (feet)                 70        60    60         60   60 80
2. Pavement width (feet)               44        28    28         24   22 36
3. Minimum setback                     35        25               30
4. Type of curb                        V         V
5. Sidewalk width (feet)               2S/4      2S/4  2S/4
6. Minimum sight distance (feet)       250       200              200
7. Minimum grade                       0.5       0.5              0.35
8. Maximum grade                       7-9%      7-9%             7-9%
9. Desired spacing along major traffic 1,300
route (feet)
10. Minimum centerline radius (feet)   350       175              175
11. Maximum cul-de-sac length                          500                500
12. Turnaround radius, cul-de-sac                      44                 50
 
Table VII-I Improvement Standards
Street Type Pavement Type Sub-Base Base Pavement Required Pavement Width
Table VII-I Improvement Standards
             Pavement                                              Required
Street Type  Type        Sub-Base      Base          Pavement      Pavement
                                                                   Width
                                       2 inches of
                                       sand or light 6 inches non-
Local-       1. Portland               gravel        reinforced
residential  cement      -             (required     P.C.C.        22-36 feet
                                       only over     pavement
                                       silt clay
                                       soils)
                         8 inches
Local-       2. Class I  compacted                   2 inch Class
residential  asphalt     base or grade -             I             22-36 feet
                         7 or 8
                         crushed stone
Local-       3. Class I                5 inches bit  2 inch Class
residential  asphalt     -             aggreg. (BAM) I surface or  22-36 feet
                                       base          equivalent
Collector    1. Portland -             3 inches of   7 inches non- 36-40 feet
street       cement                    sand          reinforced
                         10 inches
Collector    2. Class I  crushed stone -             2-1/2 Class I 36-40 feet
street       asphalt     of grade 7 or
                         8
Collector    3. Class I  -             6 inches BAM  5 inches      36-40 feet
street       asphalt                                 Class I
                                       3 inches of
Major                                  sand or light 8 inches non-
arterial     1. Portland               gravel        reinforced    44 feet and
business and cement      -             (required     P.C.C.        greater
industrial                             only over     pavement
road                                   silt clay
                                       soils)
(Asphalt surface not allowed in new construction for major streets or business
and industrial streets, except by special permission of the Village Board)
                                       2 inches of
                                       sand or light 6 inches non-
Countryside  1. Portland               gravel        reinforced
residential  cement      -             (required     P.C.C.        22-36 feet
(rural)                                only over     pavement
                                       silt clay
                                       soils)
                         8 inches
Countryside  2. Class I  compacted                   2 inches B-
residential  asphalt     base of grade -             5 or Class I  22-36 feet
(rural)                  7 or 8                      surface
                         crushed stone
Countryside              3 inches      5 inches bit. 1-1/2 Class I
residential  3. Class I  compacted     aggreg. (BAM) surface or    22-36 feet
(rural)      asphalt     crushed stone base          equivalent
                         grade 7 or 8
 
(2001 Code, § 34-6-9)
§ 152.083 MAJOR STREETS.
   (A)   Major streets shall be designed in accordance to standards established
at time of platting.
   (B)   All major streets shall be not less than 80 feet rights-of-way nor
less than 48 feet pavement.
   (C)   Additional width of parkways shall be required adjacent to residential
areas and on major entryways to the village.
   (D)   The pavement shall be concrete.
   (E)   Sidewalks and curbs shall be provided on all major streets within one
mile of village all the standards shall apply to major streets unless waived by
the Village Plan Commission and Village Board.
      (1)   The access to major streets shall be strictly controlled. No
single-family residential drive shall enter directly into a major street.
      (2)   Streets entering major streets shall be limited to one-fourth mile
intervals.
      (3)   Major streets shall be spaced at one-mile intervals within the
built-up urban area.
      (4)   (a)   Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access
to residential property abutting major streets either by provisions:
            1.   Marginal access streets; or
            2.   By backing lots to the major street and providing access by a
collector, minor or cul-de-sac street one lot depth removed and with a visual
barrier established in a non-access reservation strip along the rear property
line (abutting the major street).
         (b)   These standards are established for the purpose of providing
protection to residential properties and to separate through and local traffic.
         (c)   The specific method used shall be determined by the Village Plan
Commission in the pre-application review.
      (5)   All major streets shall have constructed with access control rights
granted to the village and in commercial areas joint frontage road or shared
access points may be required.
      (6)   All new subdivisions along limited access collector and limited
access major streets shall be arranged to provide access to the highways at
intervals not less than one-fourth mile intervals, except where impractical or
impossible due to existing property divisions or topography. There shall be no
other access to a limited access major street or a limited access collector
street except as noted above. Also, roads and streets within the subdivision
shall be arranged to permit access to adjacent future subdivisions without
encroachment upon this regulation.
      (7)   Commercial and industrial subdivisions along major streets shall be
responsible for special traffic improvements to adjacent major streets. The
improvement shall be as required by the Village Board after recommendations by
the Village Engineer.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-10)
§ 152.084 OTHER STREET REQUIREMENTS.
   At times special roadway types, such as scenic drives, industrial roads,
freeways, half-streets, marginal access and frontage roads may be necessary.
The following requirements govern the situations.
   (A)   Freeways. Whenever a freeway, railroad track or expressway passes
through or adjacent to a proposed subdivision, the Plat Officer may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way, at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park
purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in
appropriate districts. The distances shall also be determined with due regard
for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   (B)   Marginal access road. Marginal access roads should have 24-foot widths
with sidewalks on the development side and curb and gutter where deemed
necessary.
   (C)   Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end
permanently closed shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length. All cul-de-sac
streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall terminate in a
circular turn-around having a minimum outside curb radius of 40 feet.
   (D)   Half streets. In general, half streets should be avoided, but where
they are essential a minimum pavement surface of 20 feet in width shall be
constructed with both curb and sidewalk on the development side.
   (E)   Reserve strips. Reserve ("spite" or "devil") strips controlling access
to streets shall not be permitted. Streets roughly paralleling the subdivision
boundary shall be located not less than one lot depth from the boundary. All
streets intended to provide the subdivision with future means of ingress and
egress shall extend to the subdivision boundary.
   (F)   Streets in flood plains. Elevations of collector or major streets
passing through flood areas shall be at least two feet above the 100-year
recurrence interval flood local and shall be designed to have minimum adverse
effect upon flood flows or velocities. All local streets, other than parkways,
shall be two feet above the 50-year flood level.
   (G)   Private roads prohibited. Private roads and streets shall be permitted
only when the subdivider submits sufficient evidence to the Committee that
there can be no public interest in the private road or street.
   (H)   Alleys and pedestrian ways.
      (1)   Alleys shall be at least 16 feet wide, where permitted, in
residential areas. Alleys at least 22 feet wide shall be provided in commercial
areas unless the areas are otherwise provided with off-street loading space.
      (2)   Pedestrian ways shall be at least 12 feet wide, where permitted,
and a four-foot chain-link fence with a top rail shall be installed at side
boundary lines to within 12 feet of street or alley lines.
      (3)   Dead end alleys shall not be allowed.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-11)
EASEMENTS; BLOCKS
§ 152.095 ACROSS LOTS.
   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet wide.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-13)
§ 152.096 BLOCK TO BLOCK.
   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-14)
§ 152.097 DRAINAGE EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way
channel or stream, and adequate by the Plan Commission. The location, width,
alignment and improvement of the drainage way or easement shall be subject to
the approval of the Village Engineer; and parallel streets or parkways may be
required in connection therewith.
   (B)   Where necessary storm water drainage shall be maintained by landscaped
open channels of adequate size and grade to hydraulically accommodate maximum
potential volumes of flow. These design details are subject to review and
approval by the Village Engineer.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-15)
§ 152.098 CONSERVATION EASEMENTS.
   Conservation easements may be required to protect natural areas of excessive
slope or areas subject to flooding in order to prevent erosion or changes of
stream quality or flood characteristics.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-16)
§ 152.099 SUITABILITY OF BLOCKS.
   The widths, lengths and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the planned use
of the land; zoning requirements; need for convenient access, control and
safety of street traffic; and the limitations and opportunities of topography.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-18)
§ 152.100 COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USES.
   Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use shall
be designated as such, and the plans shall show adequate off-street areas to
provide for parking, loading docks and other such facilities.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-19)
LOTS; BUILDING SETBACK LINES
§ 152.115 LOT SIZE.
   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientations shall be appropriate for
the location of the subdivision and for the type of development use
contemplated.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-21)
§ 152.116 CONFORMITY WITH ZONING.
   (A)   Lot dimensions and areas shall as a minimum conform to the
requirements of the Village Zoning Code. However, residential lots not served
by public sanitary sewers and water supply shall be not less than 100 feet wide
at the building line and not less than 20,000 square feet in area.
   (B)   Where either community sanitary sewers and sewage treatment or water
supply is provided, a lot shall be not less than 80 feet wide and not less than
11,200 square feet in area.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-22)
§ 152.117 LOTS ABUTTING WATER.
   Lots abutting a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream shall have a
minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site and to
afford the minimum usable area required in this code or the Zoning Code for
front, side and rear yards.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-24)
§ 152.118 CORNER LOTS.
   All corner lots shall have a minimum width of 80 feet and be substantially
larger than a normal lot to allow minimum building setback lines on both
streets.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-25)
§ 152.119 ABUTTING A STREET.
   All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-26)
§ 152.120 DOUBLE FRONTAGE.
   (A)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from highways
or primary thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and orientation.
   (B)   A planting screen easement of at least ten feet, and across which
there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the rear
lot lines of lots abutting the highways and major thoroughfares.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-27)
§ 152.121 LOTS AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-28)
§ 152.122 SETBACK LINES AND ZONING.
   (A)   Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall
conform to the front yard provisions of the Zoning Code, except that in no case
shall the building setback line be less than 25 feet from the front property
line.
   (B)   The Plan Commission may require greater setbacks where the Plan
Commission deems it necessary.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-30)
PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC AREAS; DRAINAGE
§ 152.135 LAND MAY BE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever the reasonable requirement provided by the comprehensive plan
indicates the necessity for providing for a school site, park site or other
public lands within any proposed subdivision for which approval has been
requested, and no such provision has been made therefor, the governing
authorities may require that land be designated for the public purpose before
approving the plat.
   (B)   Whenever a final plat of subdivision, or part thereof, has been
approved by the governing authorities as complying with the comprehensive plan
and there is designated therein a school site, park site or other public land,
the governing authorities having jurisdiction of the use, be it a school board,
park board or other authority, shall acquire the land so designated by purchase
or commence proceedings to acquire the land by condemnation within one year
from the date of approval of the plat; and if it does not do so within the
period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners
thereof in any other manner consistent with the code, including the
comprehensive plan and Zoning Code of the village.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-31)
§ 152.136 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES.
   In subdividing any land within the village or within one and one-half miles
of the corporate limits, due regard shall be shown for all natural features,
such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots or similar conditions which,
if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the proposed development.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-32)
§ 152.137 DESIGNATION OF DRAINAGEWAYS.
   (A)   All major drainageways shall be designed as shown on the community
storm drainage plan.
   (B)   Where no drainage plan exists drainage ways shall be designed as
follows.
      (1)   Major waterways. Major waterways are defined as those with a
tributary area in excess of four square miles. The major waterways shall be
designed for an average flood recurrence interval of 100 years.
      (2)   Secondary waterways. Secondary waterways are defined as those with
a tributary area of between one and four square miles. The secondary waterways
shall be designed for an average flood recurrence interval of 25 years.
      (3)   Minor waterways. Minor waterways are defined as those with one
square mile or less of tributary area. The minor waterways shall be designed
for an average flood recurrence interval of ten years.
      (4)   Design flows.
         (a)   Design flows for secondary and minor drainage facilities shall
be computed by the subdivider's engineer by use of the rational formula:
            Q = CIA in the urban areas.
            Wherein: Q = cubic feet per second
            C = run-off coefficient
            I = intensity of rainfall, inches per hour
            A = tributary area
         (b)   Drainage structures and their easements shall be adequate to
handle the flow from this formula.
   (C)   Drainage designs shall be accomplished for the subdivider by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Illinois.
      (1)   The drainage plan and design shall bear the seal of professional
engineer.
      (2)   The drainage plan will be subject to review and the approval of the
Village Engineer.
   (D)   Flows for the design of secondary and minor drainage facilities within
urban and suburban areas shall be calculated in accordance with the State
Department of Transportation Storm Water Design Manual, latest revision.
   (E)   In the agricultural areas within the review area of the village but
outside the urban area, run-off calculations shall be made using the most
appropriate method according to the current state of art of hydrology and
current engineering practice, i.e., Cook's or Soil Conservation Service
methods.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-34)
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
§ 152.150 APPLICATION.
   A combination of storage and controlled release of storm water run-off shall
be required to be constructed and maintained in the following:
   (A)   All residential subdivision development within the corporate limits or
subject to the provisions of the subdivision ordinance of the village,
excepting minor subdivisions as defined therein;
   (B)   Commercial, business or office and research development; and
   (C)   Any planned unit development.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-36)
§ 152.151 DRAINAGE PLAN DRAWINGS.
   (A)   A drainage plan shall be filed with the preliminary plat for
residential subdivisions and planned unit developments and shall be filed and
approved prior to the issuance of a building permit for commercial, business,
office and research developments.
   (B)   The drainage plan shall include engineering drawings and supporting
calculations, which describe existing storm water drainage systems and
environmental features, as well as the drainage system and the environmental
improvements which are proposed before development of the property.
   (C)   The drainage plan shall contain the following:
      (1)   Topographic survey of the property at two-foot contours or spot
elevations that adequately define drainage;
      (2)   Banks and centerline of streams and channels;
      (3)   Shoreline of lakes, ponds and detention basins;
      (4)   Farm drain and tiles;
      (5)   Sub-watershed boundaries within the property;
      (6)   Property's location within larger watershed;
      (7)   Location, size and slope of storm water conduits and drainage of
water;
      (8)   Sanitary sewers;
      (9)   Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and
watersheds which might be affected by the development;
      (10)   Retention/detention facilities;
      (11)   Roads, streets, inlets and storm sewers;
      (12)   Site plan with lots, public improvements, drainage easements and
building outlines;
      (13)   Base flood elevation and regulatory floodway where identified for
the property;
      (14)   Drainage certificate signed by a professional engineer and owner;
and
      (15)   Preparation of storm water management plan. All computations,
plans and specifications related to the implementation of this plan shall be
prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered with the state.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-37)
§ 152.152 MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE RUN-OFF.
   Maximum allowable run-off shall be limited to:
   (A)   One cfs/acre (one cubic foot per second per acre) for development on
unimproved sites of two acres or less;
   (B)   Limited to the flow that would occur during a five-year storm under
existing conditions for any undeveloped sites larger than two acres;
   (C)   For developed sites undergoing redevelopment or expansion:
      (1)   If 30% or more of the impervious area is increased or modified,
detention must be provided for the entire site and outflow is not to exceed
what would occur for a five-year storm under existing conditions. For example,
if more than 30% of an area that will not absorb storm water such as a parking
lot or roof area is increased, then a water detention facility must be provided
for the entire site to control and detain the storm water outflowed so that it
will not exceed that of a five-year storm.
      (2)   If less than 30% of the site is affected, then detention shall be
provided for only the area that is developed or modified.
   (D)   Limited to the flows that will not cause damage or exceed the capacity
of any downstream drainage facilities within the village.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-38)
§ 152.153 COLLECTION OF FLOWS.
   All flows shall be collected on-site by a lateral storm sewer system
provided by the developer and shall be a minimum 12-inch diameter pipe where
access to a storm sewer is available.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-39)
§ 152.154 DESIGN FORMULA.
   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Trustees, the modified rational
method shall be used for the run-off analysis.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-40)
§ 152.155 MINIMUM DETENTION OUTLET SIZE.
   (A)   Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to control
discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of six inches.
   (B)   If the minimum size permits release rates greater than those
specified, alternative outlet designs shall be utilized which incorporate self-
cleaning flow restrictors.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-41)
§ 152.156 DETENTION STORAGE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The design maximum storage to be provided in a detention basin shall
be based on the run-off from a 100-year storm.
   (B)   Detention storage shall be computed using the modified rational method
as outlined in Chapter 12 of the State Division of Highway Standards Drainage
Manual.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-42)
§ 152.157 DETENTION POND DESIGN CRITERIA.
   A detention pond shall be defined as an area designated to store excess run-
off temporarily with no permanent pool and shall incorporate the following
design criteria:
   (A)   A minimum 2% bottom slope or implementation of a low flow system or
under-drain;
   (B)   A low flow by-pass system wherever feasible;
   (C)   Be located at least one foot from the property line;
   (D)   Have 3:1 or flatter side slopes;
   (E)   Provide a minimum of two feet of freeboard or 50% of the maximum pond
depth, whichever is less;
   (F)   Energy dissipation and/or erosion control for areas where velocities
meet or exceed six feet/sec;
   (G)   Emergency overflow designed to pass the peak inflow which would occur
in a 100-year storm;
   (H)   Landscaping and multiple use shall be considered in all pond designs;
   (I)   Subdivision detention ponds shall be incorporated into multiple
properties to encourage maintenance or shall incorporate recreational use and
be the responsibility of the home owner's association;
   (J)   Provisions shall be provided to allow ease of clearing outlet
structures;
   (K)   Flows from ponds shall be deposited directly into an approved storm
sewer system where available; and
   (L)   Facilities adjacent to a state highway may design for all flows
entering the highway system on IDOT standards for storm water run-off.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-43)
§ 152.158 RETENTION POND DESIGN CRITERIA.
   A RETENTION POND shall be defined as a permanent pool with sufficient
capacity to store excess run-off and shall incorporate the following design
criteria:
   (A)   Shall be designed so that a significant flush occurs in a five-year
storm;
   (B)   Approaching slopes are a maximum 5:1 or flatter;
   (C)   The pond shall have a shelf area along the sides, a minimum of three
feet in width and a depth of no more than one foot before the pond pool area;
   (D)   The pond area shall be a minimum of three feet in depth;
   (E)   A two-stage weir shall be incorporated, first stage to allow flushing
of the pond and second stage to limit the outflow for detention. Pond size
shall be designed so that a significant flush occurs in a five-year storm;
   (F)   The pond shall incorporate an emergency overflow able to pass the
inflow that would occur in a 100-year storm;
   (G)   The pond shall be designed so that as much flow as possible shall
enter the pond through grass swales or sheet flow across grass areas;
   (H)   Developer shall submit a maintenance plan for sediment removal and
water quality control; and
   (I)   A structure capable of de-watering the pond within 48 hours shall be
incorporated into the pond design.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-44)
§ 152.159 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Commercial development.
      (1)   Maintenance of all structures, conduits and pooling areas required
to convey flow or provide detention for the development shall be the
maintenance responsibility of the owner to its connection to a village-owned
system or its release onto right-of-way.
      (2)   A signed drainage covenant as provided by the village shall be
provided prior to site plan approval.
   (B)   Residential development.
      (1)   Pond area shall be a part of buildable lots and shall be maintained
by adjacent residents. All conduits and structures shall be placed in easements
and shall be the responsibility of the village.
      (2)   Pond areas not incorporated into buildable lots shall be designated
as a recreation area and shall be the responsibility of a home owner's
association. Proof of home owner's association requirements and
responsibilities shall be submitted with preliminary plat.
      (3)   Regional detention retention basins not incorporated into buildable
lots and owned by the village shall be designated a public recreation area and
shall be the responsibility of the village.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-45)
§ 152.160 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   DETENTION POND. See §
152.157 above.
   DRY BOTTOM RESERVOIR. An earthen detention basis constructed so that it
drains completely after the rainstorm and associated flows subside.
   EXCESS STORM WATER RUN-OFF. The portion of storm water run-off resulting
from the proposed land use and which exceeds the run-off from the existing land
use for a storm with a five-year average recurrence interval.
   FIVE-YEAR RAINFALL. A precipitation event have a 20% chance of occurring in
any one calendar year.
   FLOOD PLAIN. The land area susceptible to being inundated temporarily by
flood water from an adjacent watercourse.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse that must be reserved
for passage of the base flood.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA.  This would be an area that will not absorb water in a
developed site such as a parking lot, driveway, roof area, sidewalk and the
like.
   PARKING LOT DETENTION. Parking lots may be utilized for storm water
detention with the following restrictions:
      (1)   There should be no more than seven inches of water depth in remote
areas of the parking lot or four inches in heavy traffic areas under design
storm conditions; and
      (2)   The parking lot may not violate appropriate provisions of other
ordinances governing their design and operation.
   PROTECTED CHANNEL. A channel which receives storm water discharge and is
constructed of pavement, riprap or human-made materials to reduce the potential
for erosion.
   RESERVOIR. The place where water is collected and kept in quantity for use
or for later release for a beneficial purpose.
   RETENTION POND. See §
152.158 above.
   STORM WATER CHANNEL. A natural or human-made open watercourse with definite
bed and banks which periodically or continuously contains moving water, or
forms a connecting link between two bodies of water.
   STORM WATER RUN-OFF.  The fraction of the water resulting from precipitation
which flows from the served land during and immediately after the rainfall.
   STORM WATER RUN-OFF RELEASE RATE. The rate at which storm water run-off is
released from dominant to servient land or, in the case of detention, the
discharge rate from the detention facility.
(2001 Code, § 34-6-46)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS
§ 152.175 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Upon approval of the preliminary plan and the engineer's plans and
specifications, the subdivider shall construct and install the required
subdivision improvements prior to filing with the Plat Officer the final plat
for final approval.
   (B)   All subdivision improvements within the plat jurisdiction of the
village shall be designed, furnished and installed by the subdivider at his or
her own expense in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, and other
applicable village, county and state regulations. All improvements shall be
subject to inspection and approval of the Village Building Inspector or a
qualified engineer appointed by the village.
   (C)   In lieu of construction, the subdivider may post with the village a
cashier's check, negotiable securities, or a surety bond payable to the village
sufficient to cover the full cost of the improvements as estimated by a
registered professional engineer and approved by the Plat Officer, to assure
the satisfactory installation of the improvements. (See §§
152.200 through
152.204.)
   (D)   The developer is responsible for all required improvements until
released by inspection and approval one year after completion and construction.
A construction guarantee of 10% of the cost of the improvements shall be
retained by the Plat Officer during this time.
   (E)   All construction must be completed within two years. Construction of
all improvements required by this code must be completed within two years from
the date of the approval of the preliminary plan by the Village Board unless
good cause can be shown for granting an extension of time.
   (F)   Inspection at subdivider's expense:
      (1)   All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of
this code shall be inspected during the course of construction by the Village
Engineer or a duly designated deputy; and
      (2)   During the course of construction of the improvements, the
subdivider shall be required to notify the Village Engineer 48 hours before
each of the following operations in order that the Engineer or a duly
designated deputy may make required inspections:
         (a)   Before base material is deposited in place for inspection of all
street subgrades; monumentation and grading;
         (b)   Before paving is placed on the base material, for inspection of
the base construction;
         (c)   Before any backfilling operations whatsoever following the
installation of water, sanitary or storm sewers or any other underground public
improvements.
   (G)   All dedications must be accepted by the village.
      (1)   Final acceptance of the dedication of streets, utilities, open
space or other public area shall be the responsibility of the Village Board,
and shall only be done by resolution at the regular meeting of the Village
Board.
      (2)   However, that action should only take place after receiving the
report of the Village Engineer and Inspector.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-1)
§ 152.176 GRADING AND MONUMENTATION.
   (A)   Grading; generally.
      (1)   Any action causing the removal of major trees, filling of any area
with more than three feet of fill material, cutting the soil or cover material
from any area by more than two feet, the alteration of any natural watercourse
or major drainage way, shall be considered grading and shall only be allowed
when shown and approved in conformance with a preliminary grading plan.
      (2)   All grading should be kept to the minimum necessary to provide the
proper relationships between lots, blocks, streets, utilities and storm
drainage systems. All the grading shall be shown on the grading plan. Where it
is necessary to fill to a depth of five feet or more, the fill shall be laid in
layers of six inches or less, adequately watered and compacted, and then
subsequent layers of six inches added in a similar manner until the desired
grade is reached.
         (a)   Where areas other than roadways must be cut or filled, topsoil
should either be skimmed off before grading and uniformly replaced or new
topsoil of a quality acceptable to the Building Inspector must be added after
the grading at average, uniform depth of not less than four inches.
         (b)   Where areas are not to be graded and are in excess of 15% slope,
the Village Plan Commission may require riprapping, planting or other methods
of slope stabilization. In some cases the dedication of natural easement
covering the areas may be required.
   (B)   Block and lot grading.
      (1)   The finished grade of all subdivided blocks should be such that
water run-off will flow freely from the block to streets, storm inlets, natural
watercourses and drainage swales, and drain from the subdivision without
causing erosion, flood damage, ponding or similar problems. Where the natural
grade will not permit the flow, additional grading must be provided.
      (2)   All individual lots should be of an elevation and grade that storm
water and sanitary waste will freely leave the site without causing erosion or
flooding problems. All sites should therefore be at a reasonable level above
streets, drainage and sanitary waste collection.
   (C)   Trees and grading. As many trees as can be reasonably utilized in the
final development plan shall be retained and the grading adjusted where
practical to the existing grades at the trees.
   (D)   Street grading. All streets shall be uniformly graded in accordance
with the typical cross-section shown in the engineering specifications of the
preliminary plan. All trees and brush shall be removed and the roadways shall
be graded to the sub-soil level.
   (E)   Monumentation. Reference monuments shall be installed within all
subdivisions as follows.
      (1)   The perimeter of all subdivisions shall have permanent monuments of
concrete reinforced within one number four vertical rod, and not less than four
inches square or in diameter at the top and tapered to six inches at the bottom
and 36 inches long, set flush with the adjacent ground. Each permanent monument
shall have a suitable mark in the center of the top. Sufficient permanent
concrete monuments shall be erected to reestablish the property lines of the
subdivision.
      (2)   Monuments shall consist of five-eighths-inch iron pins not less
than 24 inches in length driven into the ground.
      (3)   All lot corners shall be marked by one-half-inch iron pins not less
than 24 inches in length driven into the ground similar to those monuments
described in the above paragraph.
   (F)   Grading and monument inspection. No sidewalk, utility or street
pavement shall be constructed within any subdivision or addition thereof until
the grading and monumentation of the subdivision has been inspected.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-2)
§ 152.177 STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Each street shall be graded, drained, constructed and surfaced in
conformance with the standards contained in
Table VII-I (§
152.082(A)(7)), modification may be required however, because of soil,
topographical and other natural conditions.
   (B)   All street improvements shall be appropriate to the type of
development anticipated and durable under use and maintenance contemplated for
the streets.
   (C)   All street bases and sub-bases shall be inspected before the paving
surface is applied.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-3)
§ 152.178 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be installed as required in
§§
152.075 through
152.160, and in areas around and leading to schools, parks and shopping areas.
   (B)   Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide in residential areas and
five feet four inches wide in business areas.
   (C)   All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete four inches thick with
thickness increased to five and one-half inches where sidewalks are crossed by
driveways and areas of unfavorable soil.
   (D)   A sand or gravel base at least two inches thick may be required.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-4)
§ 152.179 CURBS.
   (A)   Concrete curbing or combined curb and gutter shall be constructed on
each side of all street pavements except where waived by the Village Board.
   (B)   Curbing on local light traffic residential streets shall consist of
portland cement concrete and may be either plain concrete curb, eight inches in
thickness and 24 inches in depth, or combination curb and gutter consisting of
IDOT standard B6.12-B6.18 or B6.24.
   (C)   Curbing on business streets or major thoroughfares shall be not less
than five inches in height above gutter grade and shall be of a type and
section adopted as standard for the village, or the variation thereof as may be
approved by the Village Engineer.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-5)
§ 152.180 PARKWAY VEGETATION.
   All parkways within the dedicated street area shall be graded and seeded in
an approved manner, and care should be taken to prevent damage to water and gas
shut-off valves, and the owner shall be held responsible for any damage which
is incurred.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-6)
§ 152.181 PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   (A)   Whenever practical telephone and electric utilities shall be
underground. When utility lines for telephone and electric service must be
carried on overhead poles, the utilities shall be placed in rear lot line
easements or designated side lot line easements.
   (B)   Where telephone, electric and gas service lines are placed underground
entirely throughout a subdivision area, conduits or cables shall be placed
within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict
with other underground services.
   (C)   Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be
unsightly or hazardous to the public. All underground utility installations
which traverse privately-owned property shall be located in recorded easements.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-7)
§ 152.182 STORM DRAINAGE.
   The subdivider shall design and construct a storm drainage system adequate
to handle maximum potential flows of water drainage from the subdivision or
passing through the subdivision without causing hazard for life or property
within the subdivision or surrounding land areas. All storm systems shall be
designed and constructed according to the preliminary plat and shall consider
the appropriate streets, storm sewers, roadway ditches, grassed swales, natural
watercourses, catch basins and inlets, as may be required. All the facilities
should be complimentary in design and construction. In general all areas shall
be required to install storm sewers.
   (A)   Natural watercourse.
      (1)   Whenever practical, natural open drainage ways shall be utilized as
part of the subdivision storm drainage system.
      (2)   Whenever a natural stream or other human-made important surface
drainage course or agricultural drainage tiles are located within a
subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate an adequate easement along each side
of the stream or tile for purposes of widening, deepening, sloping, improving
or protecting the stream or tile for drainage or flood water retention.
      (3)   The filling, alteration, widening or any other restriction or
alteration of a natural stream and flood basin shall be permitted only as shown
and approved on the preliminary plat. In areas where stream slopes exceed 12%,
the slopes shall either be graded, stabilized by riprapping, or some sort of
planting or shall be dedicated as a natural easement.
   (B)   Drainage ditches and swales. Where roadway ditches or swales are
permitted the ditches or swales shall be contained within easements at least
ten feet wide and the drainage shall be improved as follows:
      (1)   With grades to 4%, ditches may have sod bottoms and banks;
      (2)   With grades from 4% to 8%, ditches or swales must have ditch
checks;
      (3)   With greater than 8% grades, ditches or swales must have riprap or
be paved;
      (4)   The filling, alteration, widening or any other restriction or
alteration of a roadway ditch or swale shall not be permitted without prior
written approval of the Village Board; and
      (5)   No shrubbery, fence or other such structure shall be planted or
constructed in or over any drainage ditch or swale in such a manner which would
impede the flow of water and storm run-off through these ditches and swales.
   (C)   Storm drainage structures.
      (1)   Culverts; when allowed, pipe culverts may be used. The minimum
length of culverts shall be at least equal to the distance from edge of
shoulder to edge of shoulder, plus six times the vertical distance from the
edge of should to the flow line of the culvert. No culvert shall have a
diameter of less than 12 inches. In no case shall driveway culverts be less
than 20 feet in length.
      (2)   Bridges. All bridges and culverts having a span of more than ten
feet shall be approved by the Bridge Engineer, Department of Public Works and
Buildings, Division of Highway of the state.
      (3)   Storm sewers. The sewer system shall be designed by the rational
method, with self-cleaning velocities as follows (see §
152.137 above):
         (a)   The part of the system which serves as main or terminal
collectors shall be of sufficient capacity to carry the maximum storm water
flows which may occur in a ten-year period.
         (b)   The part of the system which serves as lateral collectors, and
which can readily be augmented by future additions, shall be of sufficient
capacity to carry maximum storm water flows which may occur in a five-year
period.
         (c)   The engineer shall select coefficients of run-off based on the
types of development anticipated in all parts of the watershed affecting the
drainage structure. Information regarding future development of the watershed
shall be obtained from the Planning Director.
         (d)   The system shall include all necessary appurtenances such as
inlets, catch basins and manholes as may be required for proper operation and
maintenance. The sizing of the structures and spacing should provide that
encroachment into the street not exceed eight feet from the back curb, and that
the head on top of the grate be no higher than the top of the curb or six
inches, whichever is the least dimension.
         (e)   Where the main storm sewer serving a subdivision can be expected
to carry a substantial amount of storm water from adjoining lands higher in the
drainage area, and where the run-off from these lands can be expected to
increase in the future because of more intense development, the developer may
be permitted to substitute for the sewer an open ditch. The ditch shall comply
with grading, seeding and sodding specifications of this code, and the ditch
shall be located on a drainage easement of sufficient width to permit its
proper maintenance and to allow the eventual construction of an underground
storm sewer adequate to serve the entire drainage area above the subdivision.
         (f)   All storm sewers shall be at least 12 inches in diameter and
shall be of material and construction approved by the Village Engineer.
         (g)   All materials for the construction of bridges, culverts, storm
sewers, catch basins, manholes, inlets and other facilities shall be approved
by the Village Engineer.
      (4)   Oversized storm sewers. If greater than 24-inch diameter sewers are
required to handle the contemplated flows, the cost of the larger sewers shall
be shared between the developer and the village. The developer shall be
responsible for the cost of furnishing and installing a sewer of an appropriate
size for his or her development, and the village will be responsible for the
incremental increase in cost to install the larger sewer.
      (5)   Underdrain system for sump pump discharge. Whenever natural
topography does not allow the flow of ground water from individual sump pumps
to be directly discharged into a natural watercourse, the developer shall
provide an underdrain system at curb side to provide an outlet for the
discharges. The drain system shall consist of a six-inch rigid PVC pipe,
constructed in a trench immediately behind the curb. The pipe shall be laid to
a minimum depth of three feet six inches from top of pipe of top of curb. The
trench shall be backfilled with aggregate to the bottom of the curb. Pipe and
aggregate backfill shall be in accordance with the applicable provision of §
607 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, State of
Illinois. Each lot will be provided with a two- inch riser pipe for future
connection of a sump pump discharge line. Each riser's location shall be duly
noted on record drawings provided by the developer.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-8)
§ 152.183 DAMS AND IMPOUNDMENT STRUCTURES.
   Dams for water impoundments, pools, ponds, reservoirs and small lakes shall
be planned, designed and constructed under the supervision of a qualified
engineer and shall meet the approval of the Department of Conservation of the
state.
   (A)   Earth dams. Minimum requirements for earth dams shall be as follows.
      (1)   Foundations. A minimum thickness of at least 24 inches of an
impervious material is required for dams up to 12 feet. The entire area in
which the dam is to be founded shall be free from all top soil, roots,
vegetation, stones, rock or debris, and shall be plowed and roughed up to
provide an interlocking tight bond with the new fill.
      (2)   Cores. Cores should have a width of 30% to 50% of the water head
and shall be constructed of materials which will not lead to core failure and
leaks.
      (3)   Crest. The crest shall be at least ten feet wide to allow adequate
space for maintenance equipment and shall have sufficient height above the
water surface (freeboard) to prevent waves from going over it.
      (4)   Slopes. The upstream slope shall not be steeper than three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical and shall be sufficiently protected from ice
and wave action by an impervious earth blanket, riprap or concrete. The
downstream slope shall not be steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot
vertical and shall be protected against erosion by a growth of permanent sod.
      (5)   Drainage. Sufficient drainage and "reverse filtering" facilities to
ensure the permanent stability of the dam and its foundation shall be provided.
Proper precautions shall be taken to prevent any seepage along drain pipes
running through the dam.
      (6)   Spillways. Facilities for handling the maximum normal surplus
waters shall be provided, together with a sodded relief spillway constructed 18
inches above the normal water level. Proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent seepage along any of the spillways facilities constructed within the
dam.
      (7)   Materials. All materials, equipment and construction methods shall
conform to the requirements of the American Association of State Highway
Officials Specifications for Highway Bridges and the Standard Specifications.
      (8)   Test and analysis. Results of the following tests and analysis
shall accompany all plans for dams:
         (a)   Tests of the foundation material showing compressibility, shear
strength and permeability;
         (b)   A complete stability analysis of the proposed dam using any of
the available analysis techniques; and
         (c)   Permeability tests of the proposed core materials.
   (B)   Masonry dams. Minimum requirements for masonry dams shall include
provisions to insure proper foundation bearing and for the prevention of
slippage, excessive seepage, "piping" and scouring. The structure shall be
designed by a registered structural engineer. The design and construction
requirements shall conform to the American Association of State Highway
Officials Specifications for Highway Bridges and the Standard Specifications.
   (C)   Existing dams. An engineering report shall be submitted to the Plat
Officer on all existing dams within a proposed subdivision. Any dam found to be
structurally unsafe shall be reconstructed or reinforced in accordance with the
above standard.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-9)
§ 152.184 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS.
   Any and all public water systems installed within the legal jurisdiction of
the village shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, latest edition. The Standard
Specification shall be superseded by the specifications provided herein.
   (A)   Water mains.
      (1)   Scope.
         (a)   The work covered by this section consists of furnishing all
plant, labor, equipment, tools, services and materials, and performing all
operations required to execute the water main work complete, in strict
accordance with this specification and the applicable drawings and subject to
the terms and conditions of the contract.
         (b)   Construct all water main work of sizes and materials, and at
locations shown on the drawings; provide fittings and appurtenances, all as
indicated on the drawings, and as herein specified.
      (2)   Materials.
         (a)   Unless otherwise noted on the drawings all water main of ductile
iron pipe shall have a cement-mortar lining conforming to ANSI A21.4 (AWWAC
104).
            1.   Ductile iron pipe shall be designed in accordance with ANSI
A21.50 (AWWA C150 - Latest Revision) using 60,000 psi tensile strength, 42,000
psi yield strength and 10% elongation. All pipe shall have a minimum class pipe
as shown below, three and one-half (three feet to six feet cover, trench
condition 1, flat bottom, no blocks on tamped backfill, and at least 100 psi
water hammer allowance and two to one factor of safety. In no case shall the
wall thickness be less than the following:
 
Nominal Pipe Diameter (Inches) Pressure Class
4 - 12                         350
 
            2.   Ductile iron pipe for aerial installations shall have flanged
joints unless otherwise shown on the plans. Barrels of ductile iron pipe with
screwed flanges shall conform to ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C151). Flanges shall be
faced and drilled to ANSI Class 125 standard template for use with either ANSI
A21.10 (AWWA C110) or B16.1 flanged fittings. Gaskets for flanged pipe shall be
one-sixteenth inch thick, full faced, rubber or neoprene. Bolts for flanged
joints shall be of galvanized steel.
         (b)   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
            1.   Pipe shall conform to AWWA C900, Standard Dimension Ratio
(SDR) 18, Laying Condition Class C.
            2.   A #12 TW tracer wire shall be laid with all PVC pipe detail on
plans and as directed by the engineer. The main tracer shall be continuous
throughout. At each fire hydrant and house service, a #12 TW service wire shall
be connected to the main tracer and to the fire hydrant or house service.
            3.   The connection at the main tracer shall be with a 3M #562
(yellow) plastic self- stripping pigtail connector. At the hydrant shoe or
house service tapping saddle, the connection may be done with a brass pipe, or
grounding, clamp with brass screws, or similar device approved by the Engineer.
            4.   All connections shall be taped and sealed with electrical
mastic and Scotch #22 10 E-2 seal.
      (3)   Fittings. Fittings for ductile iron and PVC water main shall be of
class or pressure rating not less than that of the connecting pipe and shall
conform to the latest revision of the following specifications: ANSI A21.10
(AWWA C153) Gray Iron and Ductile Iron Fittings, three-inch through 48-inch.
ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111) Rubber Gasket Joints for Cast Iron and Ductile Iron
Pressure Pipe and Fittings. All fittings shall be cement mortar lined in
accordance with ANSI A21.4 (AWWA C104).
      (4)   Joints and couplings.
         (a)   Joints for ductile iron pipe shall be either the mechanical or
push-on type conforming to the following requirements:
            1.   Mechanical joints shall be of the stuffing box type with
gasket, cast iron gland and cast iron bolts and shall conform to ANSI A21.11
(AWWA C111); and
            2.   Push-on joints shall be of a type employing a single molded
rubber gasket to effect joint seal. Joint and gasket shall conform to ANSI
A21.11 (AWWA Oil).
         (b)   Couplings for PVC plastic pipe shall be of the elastomeric-
gasket type and shall conform to ASTM D3139.
      (5)   Inspection. Inspection of pipe and materials will normally be made
at point of destination, however, the engineer reserves the right to provide
factory inspection as deemed necessary.
   (B)   Gate valve.
      (1)   Notice. The general conditions, special conditions and all other
herein bound and documents accompanying documents are part of these
specifications and of the contract. Submission of proposal implies that the
bidder is fully conversant with all requirements of all above mentioned.
      (2)   Scope.
         (a)   The work covered by this section consists of furnishing all
plant, labor, equipment, tools, services and materials, and performing all
operations required to execute the gate valve work complete, in strict
accordance with this specification and the applicable drawings and subject to
the terms and conditions of this contract.
         (b)   The gate valve work specified herein applies to valves installed
underground on distribution and transmission mains. Valves to be installed in
treatment plant pumping station or similar facilities shall be as specified in
the pipe section of the specifications.
      (3)   Shop drawings. Before commencing work, submit complete shop
drawings and illustrations for work in this section for engineer's approval.
Refer to general conditions for detailed information regarding shop drawings
requirements.
      (4)   Gate valves.
         (a)   Valve castings shall be made from superior quality of iron,
remelted in a cupola or air furnace; tough and of even grain.
         (b)   Valves shall open in the same direction as those installed in
the owner's existing equipment. In the absence of existing facilities, new gate
valves shall open to the left (counterclockwise). Unless specifically noted on
drawings or specified otherwise, valves shall have hub ends, mechanical joint
ends or flanged ends. Hydrant auxiliary valves may be provided with one flange
end bolting to the hydrant only where so specifically noted on the drawing or
directed in writing by the engineer. Normally the valves shall be of the bell
or mechanical joint type installed in the connecting lead between the hydrant
and the main. All other valves installed in underground pipe lines shall have
hub ends or mechanical joint ends.
         (c)   All gate valves shall be fully mounted with bronze or other
suitable, non-corrodible metal, of the double disc type, with non-rising stems.
Fit valves three to 12 inches, nominal size, with two-inch square, cast iron
operating nut, mounted directly on the stem. Valves 16 to 48 inches, nominal
size, shall be fitted with bevel gears (without gear or grease cases), rollers
and tracks, and non-rising stem bypass valves, as per AWWA Specification C500,
unless otherwise shown on drawings.
         (d)   All valves shall conform to requirements of AWWA C500, latest
revision. Valves three to 12 inches, nominal size; suitable for pressures of at
least 200 psi. Valves 16 to 48 inches, nominal size; suitable for pressures of
at least 150 psi.
      (5)   Valve boxes. Provide all valves three to 12 inches inclusive,
nominal size and all bypass valves with screw top adjustable metal boxes,
approximately five inches in diameter, constricted so that removable cover will
not be thrown out by travel over same. Provide boxes with suitable hoods at
base of lower section to relieve any strain superimposed on valve bonnet.
      (6)   Valve vaults. Provide all valves 16 to 48 inches, nominal size,
with standard manhole enclosure as detailed on the drawings.
      (7)   Foundation.
         (a)   Set valves securely on concrete or stone foundation, laid on
solidly compacted ground. Foundation thickness shall be at least eight inches;
volume, one cubic foot minimum. Concrete, if used, shall be Class C, as
specified in "concrete" section of the specifications.
         (b)   Valves shall be set at an elevation conforming to the height of
connecting pipe so that there is no strain on joints.
      (8)   Tapping sleeves and crosses.
         (a)   Provide tapping sleeves and gate valves, also tapping crosses,
and gate valves where pressure connections to existing facilities are shown on
drawings. Tapping sleeves; similar and equal to Mueller H-610, H-611 or H-615,
or Clow F2552 or F-2562. Tapping crosses; similar and equal to Mueller H-710,
H-711 or H-715, or Clow F-2565 or F-2567. Gate valves for use with tapping
sleeves or crosses; similar and equal to Mueller H-662, H-667, or H-642, or
Clow F-2550 or F-2560.
         (b)   Install sleeves and valves in water mains as per manufacturer's
instructions, and without shutting off pressure in existing mains.
      (9)   Gate valve markers. Where so indicated on the drawings, gate valves
shall be witnessed by permanent reinforced concrete posts of size and shape as
detailed and at the locations shown. Set posts in or as near fence and valve
box tops as possible, with lettering on post facing valve box top. For other
conditions, set and witness post markers as directed by the Engineer.
   (C)   Fire hydrants.
      (1)   Notice. The general conditions, special conditions and all other
herein bound and accompanying documents are part of these specifications and of
the contract. Submission of proposal implies that the bidder is fully
conversant with all requirements of all above mentioned documents.
      (2)   Scope. The work covered by this section consists of furnishing all
plant, labor, equipment, tools, services and materials, and performing all
operations required to execute the fire hydrant work complete, in strict
accordance with this specification and the applicable drawings and subject to
the terms and conditions of the contract.
      (3)   Shop drawings. Before commencing work, submit complete shop
drawings and illustrations for work in this section for engineer's approval.
Refer to general conditions for detailed information regarding shop drawings
requirements.
      (4)   Hydrants.
         (a)   Fire hydrants shall be provided and installed of a size and in
the number indicated on the drawings, with valve openings and nozzles as
follows:
 
Hydrant Size Valve Opening  Lateral Water    Hose Nozzles (Two Pumper Nozzle
             (Approximate)  Main Connection  Required)         (One Required)
6-inch       6-inch         6-inch or 8-inch 2-1/2-inch        4-1/2-inch
5-inch       5-inch         6-inch           2-1/2-inch        4-1/2-inch
4-inch       4-inch         4-inch           2-1/2-inch        None
 
         (b)   Where hydrants are shown on the plans to be connected directly
to the hydrant lead, fit all hydrants with bell or mechanical joint ends,
compatible with the type of hydrant lead pipe. Where hydrants are shown on the
plans to be connected directly to auxiliary gate valves, fit hydrants with
flange ends for connection to the auxiliary gate valves. The auxiliary gas
valves shall be fitted with flange end for connection to the hydrant shoe and
bell or mechanical joint end to connect to the hydrant pipe lead. Auxiliary
gate valve and box shall conform to requirements specified as specified in
division (B) herein.
         (c)   Hydrants shall be of the compression or gate type, with
preference given to valve types seating with the pressure and shall have two
positively operated drain valves both being an integral part of the main valve.
The hydrant body shall be of the "breakable" type so designed that neither the
lower portion of the barrel nor the stem shall be damaged if the hydrant is
broken and so designed that repairs may be effected by easily replaceable
components.
         (d)   The hydrant body shall be of cast iron, all castings of superior
quality iron, remelted in a cupola or air furnace, tough and of even grain.
Unless otherwise noted on the drawings, all hydrants shall have bury of four
and one-half feet when measured from bottom of the connecting pipe to the
ground line beading on the hydrant barrel.
         (e)   Hose nipples, hydrant seat, drip valve and stuffing box shall be
of bronze or other suitable non-corroding metal.
         (f)   Hose threads on all hydrants shall be interchangeable with those
now in service in owner's system. Hose nozzles shall be protected with approved
weather caps.
         (g)   Hydrant valve shall be faced with suitable, yielding material,
such as rubber or leather, except that on those of the gate type, bronze ring
may be used.
         (h)   All hydrants; conform to AWWA Specification C502, latest
revision.
         (i)   Hydrants shall be provided with a one and one-fourth (one-inch
bronze pentagon operating nut and shall be open in same direction as owner's
existing equipment or if no hydrants exist shall open to the left (counter-
clockwise).
      (5)   Foundation. Each hydrant shall be supported on a foundation at
least 12 inches square and eight inches thick of stone or solid concrete, set
firmly on solid undisturbed earth. The trench around the hydrant shall be at
least three feet in diameter to permit proper installation of the foundation
and placement of the drainage media hereafter specified.
      (6)   Drainage. Provide adequate drainage for hydrants when closed, by
filling circular space around hydrant with clean, coarse, crushed stone or
gravel (free from foreign matter), graded from one-fourth inch to one and one-
half inches. Place crushed stone or gravel carefully, so as not to displace
hydrant, valve or connecting piping. The drainage fill material shall extend to
the limits shown on the drawings but in any event shall consist of a minimum of
two cubic yard of crushed stone or gravel. No connection shall be made from the
drainage pit to any sewer or underground drainage conduit.
      (7)   Installation. Before setting, clean hydrants completely free of
dirt and other foreign matter. Set hydrants solidly with sufficient concrete-
blocking behind barrel and behind the connection to the water main to prevent
movement of pipe in joints, or of hydrant.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-10)
§ 152.185 SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   Where the subdivision is located within the village limits and public
sanitary sewers are available, each lot within the subdivided area shall be
provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer, the sewer connection to
terminate not less than two feet beyond the curb or one foot outside the
sidewalk when the sidewalk adjoins the curb. All connections to the sanitary
sewer system and the subdivision sewer system shall comply with the ordinances
of the village and of the Sanitary District pertaining to sewers and all
construction of the system shall be subject to the direction and approval of
the Village Engineer or of the Superintendent of the Sanitary District.
   (B)   If, at any time of final platting, sanitary sewer facilities are not
available to the plat, but under contract to be built and will become available
within a period of two years from the date of plat recording, the subdivider
shall install or cause to be installed mains throughout the subdivision service
to each street lot line in accordance with this section and shall cap all
laterals as may be specified by the Village Engineer. The size, type and
installation of all sanitary sewers proposed to be constructed shall be in
accordance with plans and standard specifications approved by the Village
Engineer.
   (C)   The subdivider shall construct sanitary sewers in such a manner as to
make adequate sanitary sewerage service available to each lot within the
subdivision. If public sewer facilities are not available, the subdivider shall
make provision for adequate private sewage disposal systems if soil and water
conditions are favorable or if adequate methods are undertaken to overcome
limitations of the natural capabilities of the land for waste disposal systems.
The installations shall meet standards specified by the village and State and
County Boards of Health.
   (D)   Sanitary sewer pipe shall be scaled with resilient compression joints
and shall conform to ASTM Designation C425-66T Type I or II.
      (1)   The minimum diameter of all lateral sewers shall be eight inches
and all pipe under 24-inch internal diameter shall be bell and spigot, salt
glazed, vitrified clay pipe, conforming to ASTM Specification E-0200 for extra
strength pipe.
      (2)   Asbestos-cement sewer pipe and cast iron sewer pipe may be used as
an alternate sanitary sewer material.
      (3)   The alternate materials shall conform to specifications approved by
the Village Board and copies of the same shall be on file with the Village
Clerk.
      (4)   Four- or six-inch house service stubs shall be installed as
required to provide sewer service to every lot in the subdivision wherever
house sewers cannot subsequently be installed without tunneling under or
crossing the street pavement.
      (5)   The house services shall extend to the street or lot line and shall
have a depth of not less than seven feet at the terminus, wherever possible.
      (6)   Lateral sewers, wherever possible, shall have a minimum depth of
eight feet below the established street grade.
      (7)   All sewers should be backfilled with sand or other materials
specifically approved by the Village Engineer.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-11)
§ 152.186 STREET LAMPS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall install street lamps along all streets of a
design compatible with the neighborhood and type of development proposed.
   (B)   The lamps shall be placed at each street intersection and at such
interior block spacing as may be required by the Village Engineer.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-12)
§ 152.187 STREET SIGNS.
   The subdivider shall install at the intersection of all streets proposed to
be dedicated, a street sign of a design specified by the intersection of all
Superintendent of Public Works.
(2001 Code, § 34-7-13)
DEDICATIONS, EASEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND THE LIKE
§ 152.200 DEDICATIONS.
   (A)   Areas required to be dedicated.
      (1)   All new streets created by a subdivision shall be shown and
dedicated on the plat as public streets of the village.
      (2)   Where a subdivision abuts on an existing street and the provisions
of the village require an additional width of right-of-way, the subdivider
shall dedicate same.
      (3)   Pedestrian ways bisecting long blocks, or wherever else located,
shall be dedicated to the village.
   (B)   Identification of dedications. Areas to be dedicated shall be clearly
identified and named on the plat, and dedicated to the public.
(2001 Code, § 34-8-1)
§ 152.201 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Areas to be shown as easements.
      (1)   Public utilities, storm water facilities and installations shall be
located on suitable easements as specified in this code.
      (2)   Planting strips or other buffer zones located between reverse
frontage lots and a thoroughfare, or between incompatible uses, or whatever
required, shall be shown as easements.
   (B)   Identification of easements. Easements shall be clearly identified on
all plats; e.g., "Drainage Easement", "Utility Easement" and "Planting Strip
Easement".
(2001 Code, § 34-8-2)
§ 152.202 RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   Areas to be reserved.
      (1)   Whenever the area being subdivided embraces all or part of any
lands set aside on the official map for a street, school, conservation area,
other community facility or any other public use, all land so designated shall
be shown on the tentative plat as being dedicated or reserved for that proposed
use, and it shall be reserved by the subdivider for a period of one year from
the date of approval of the final plat, during which time it shall be made
available for sale to the public agency concerned.
      (2)   If the sale price cannot be agreed upon, the fair cash market value
of the property may be established by an appraiser acceptable to all parties.
The sale price shall be based on the fair cash market value of the date of the
filing of the first tentative plat.
   (B)   Reservations of preliminary plats.
      (1)   Areas reserved shall be clearly identified on the preliminary plat
as reserved in accordance with this code.
      (2)   The preliminary plat shall also contain the proposals of the
subdivider, as they might otherwise be platted, for the areas under
reservation, to be applied in the event the land is not acquired by the public
within the period of reservation.
      (3)   Upon completion of the one-year period of reservation, the
preliminary plat shall remain a valid preliminary plat for the formerly
reserved areas for a period of one year, subject to restrictions imposed by
this code.
   (C)   Reservations and final plats.
      (1)   Where practical, final plats shall not include areas reserved; the
final plats should affect only that portion of the subdivider's land which is
unrestricted by the reservations.
      (2)   Where final plats must include areas reserved, the areas shall be
clearly identified as reserved in accordance with this code and shall not
contain any proposals of the developer.
      (3)   Final plats may be submitted for reserved land unacquired by the
public at the close of one year. The plats will be considered additional units
of the subdivisions for which initial final plats were recorded.
   (D)   Reversion. If the appropriate public agency having jurisdiction has
not, within one year of the approval of the preliminary plat, acquired the site
reserved for a public use by the subdivider, he or she may use it in any way
for any purpose permitted by the applicable regulation then in effect.
(2001 Code, § 34-8-3)
§ 152.203 VACATIONS.
   (A)   Procedure. In all cases the vacation of any plat or part thereof or
any public right-of-way, easement, or part thereof shall follow the procedure
for the review of plats established in this code except that:
      (1)   Final action shall be taken by the village; and
      (2)   The Plat Officer shall recommend to the Village Board a sum,
consistent with Zoning Committee policy, to be paid by the owner of abutting
properties in consideration of any public property involved in the vacation.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   No vacation shall be approved which creates a condition which would
not be permitted under the standards of design set forth in this code, unless
the vacation would at the same time correct a more serious condition which
exists contrary to the standards of this code.
      (2)   No vacation shall be approved which will result in a conflict with
the official plan or official map unless passed by two-thirds vote of the
Village Board.
      (3)   No vacation shall be approved which will result in a violation of
the Village Zoning Code or other applicable village ordinance or regulations,
unless the violation will at the same time correct a more serious condition
which exists contrary to the ordinances or regulations.
   (C)   Petition form and content. The sketch and preliminary plat of vacation
shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications for plats and plans
where pertinent, except that the preliminary plat of vacation shall be
accompanied by a certified statement of the assessed valuation of all
properties surrounding any public right-of-way to be vacated. Final petitions
for vacation shall include the following items:
      (1)   Three copies of the original plat or the applicable part thereof
certified by the Recorder to be a true copy of same, on which is shown the
portion to be vacated outlined in a heavy line and hatched.
      (2)   The following petitions, deeds and certifications, all drafted from
models obtainable from the Plat Officer:
         (a)   Deed of vacation;
         (b)   Petition; three copies;
         (c)   County Clerk's certificate;
         (d)   Resolution; and
         (e)   Assessor's certificate.
      (3)   The petition as it is presented to the Village Board shall be
accompanied by a report from the Committee.
   (D)   Easements. The vacation of any plat or part thereof or right-of-way
easement or part thereof shall not be deemed to be a vacation of the rights of
any public utility where the public utility has installed its facilities
therein.
(2001 Code, § 34-8-4)
§ 152.204 BONDS AND FINANCIAL GUARANTEES.
   (A)   To ensure proper compliance with the provisions of this code, the
following bonds and financial guarantees shall be required therefor:
      (1)   A construction agreement;
      (2)   A performance guarantee;
      (3)   A maintenance guarantee; and
      (4)   Proof of adequate liability and title insurance.
   (B)   All bonds and insurance required under this section shall be secured
from companies authorized to do business in the state and shall be deposited
and remain at all times with the Clerk of the village.
      (1)   Construction agreement.
         (a)   To assure construction and installation of improvements required
by these regulations, the subdivider shall execute a construction agreement
with the Village Board in form and substance approved by the legal counsel.
This agreement shall provide that all the improvements shall be constructed and
installed at the subdivider's expense in compliance with the standards and
specifications for each of the various types of improvements; the improvements
shall be available to and for the benefit of the lands within the subdivision;
that the improvements will be completed and installed within 24 months of the
date of approval of the preliminary plat.
         (b)   The construction agreement shall further provide that, in the
case where approval of the final plat has been given before construction of
improvements and a performance guarantee has been provided and if the
improvements are not completed within the specified time, the village upon
proper notice may complete the improvements and recover full costs and expenses
thereof from the subdivider and may appropriate the portion of money or bonds
posted for the faithful performance of the works.
      (2)   Commencement of improvements. No construction of any improvements
or clearing, grubbing, and grading shall be commenced prior to the approval of
the construction agreement by the Village Board.
      (3)   Performance guarantee.
         (a)   Type of guarantee. The subdivider may execute and file financial
guarantees with the Village Board in lieu of actual installation or completion
of the required improvements when requesting conditional approval of the final
plat. The guarantees may be in the form of a performance of surety bond, a
certified check or any other type of guarantee approved by the Village Board.
         (b)   Term of guarantee. Guarantees shall be for a period of not
longer than two years unless the Village Board extends the time period by
resolution.
         (c)   Amount of guarantee. The financial guarantee shall be in an
amount equal to the Village Engineer's estimate of:
            1.   The cost of construction of all improvements; plus
            2.   The engineers' fees for office checking and field inspection.
         (d)   Completion; reduction. When any portion of an improvement has,
upon inspection, been found satisfactorily completed, a reduction in the bonds
or partial withdrawal of funds equal to the estimated costs of the completed
improvements may be authorized by the Village Board.
      (4)   Maintenance guarantees.
         (a)   The maintenance bond shall be of an amount as determined by the
Village Engineer and shall be arranged for a period of one year from date of
acceptance of improvements by the Village Engineer.
         (b)   The maintenance bond shall be determined by taking into
consideration topography, soil conditions and prevailing costs of labor and
materials. No maintenance bond should be less than $1,000.
         (c)   The subdivider shall be responsible for routine maintenance of
all improvements and shall repair all failures due to faulty construction as
soon as they became apparent.
         (d)   He or she shall also make repairs due to erosion or abuse by
utility companies installing utilities and shall repair all failures for all
other reasons during the maintenance bond period. He or she shall also restore
the roads and streets at the end of the maintenance period.
      (5)   Liability insurance. The subdivider shall furnish the insurance as
is deemed necessary by the Village Board which shall indemnify and save
harmless the village from any and all liability arising by reason of the
conditions of the streets of the subdivision which may arise or grow out of the
construction of installation of the facilities. The insurance shall be of the
duration as determined by the Village Board, but shall in no case be allowed to
expire earlier than the effective period of any maintenance bond. A copy of the
insurance policy shall remain at all times with the Village Clerk.
      (6)   Title insurance. Evidence must be shown that title insurance in an
amount of not less than $1,000 will be issued insuring the title of the lands
to be dedicated, as shown on the final plat.
(2001 Code, § 34-8-5)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 152.215 FEES.
   (A)   The following regulations and charges shall be hereby established to
govern the administration of this code.
   (B)   There is hereby established a fee for the approval of preliminary and
final plats, as follows:
      (1)   Preliminary plat: $50 for each preliminary plat plus $5 for each
lot within the proposed subdivision, with a minimum total charge of $15; and
      (2)   Final plat: the final plat fee shall be $50 if no variation from
the preliminary plat, otherwise $50, plus $5 per lot whenever Plan Commission
review is required.
   (C)   An additional fee charge to the subdivider shall be made for cost of
engineering inspections by the Village Engineer.
   (D)   The fee shall be established by the village based on current rates and
standard engineering practice.
   (E)   All the fees shall be payable to the village, by certified check or
money order.
(2001 Code, § 34-9-1)
§ 152.216 VARIATION AND RELIEF.
   (A)   The Village Board may on recommendation of the Plan Commission grant
special exceptions or variances under these regulations.
   (B)   The corporate authority may grant variances to these regulations where
unusual or exceptional factors or conditions require the modification provided
that the Plan Commission, after a hearing, shall:
      (1)   Find that unusual topographical or exceptional physical conditions
exist;
      (2)   Find that strict compliance with these regulations would create an
extraordinary hardship in the face of the exceptional conditions;
      (3)   Permit any modification to depart from these regulations only to
the extent necessary to remove the extraordinary hardship;
      (4)   Find that the modifications would improve the village over what
would be allowed under the terms of this code;
      (5)   Find that any modification granted will not be detrimental to the
public interest not in conflict with the intent and purpose of these
regulations; and
      (6)   Require such other conditions to be met by the proposed plat as the
Planning Commission may find necessary to accomplish the purpose of this code
when modified.
(2001 Code, § 34-9-3)
§ 152.217 SPECIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The standards and requirements of this code may be modified on a broad
scale by the Village Board in the case of a plan or program for a special
subdivision or neighborhood unit.
   (B)   The modification shall not be approved until after written
recommendation of the Plan Commission, which recommendation may be given when
in the judgment of the Plan Commission, the specific plan or program presented
provides adequate public space and improvements for the circulation,
recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and
populated, and which also provides the covenants or other legal provisions as
will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. The village further
reserves the right to require the subdivider to meet any additional
specifications and/or restrictions it may deem necessary to accomplish the
purpose of this code when modified.
(2001 Code, § 34-9-4)
§ 152.218 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this Subdivision Code shall be approved by the Village Board
as provided by statute; providing, however, that no amendment shall be adopted
without first referring the proposed amendment to the Plan Commission and
receiving a report therefrom except, however, if no report is received within
90 days, it shall be deemed to be approved by the Plan Commission.
(2001 Code, § 34-9-5)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever willfully violates any rule or provision of these regulations
or fails to comply with any order pursuant thereto shall forfeit and pay not
less than $750. Each and every day a violation exists shall constitute a new
and separate violation under this code.
   (B)   Any person, whether he or she be the owner or agent of the owner who
transfers any sublot, parcel or trace of land before a plat has been approved
by the village and recorded in the office of the County Recorder, shall forfeit
and pay the sum of not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each sublot,
parcel, or tract of land so sold. The description of the sublot, parcel or
tract by metes and bounds in the deed or transfer shall not serve to exempt the
seller from the forfeiture provided in this section.
   (C)   Any person who disposes of or offers for sale or lease for a time
exceeding five years, any sublot or any part of a sublot, in a subdivision
before provisions of these regulations are complied with, shall forfeit and pay
$750 for each sublot or part of a sublot so sold, offered for sale, or leased,
to be recovered with costs in a civil action, in the name of the Village
Treasurer for the use of the village.
(2001 Code, § 34-9-2)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING CODE
Section
   
153.01   Zoning Code adopted by reference
§ 153.01 ZONING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the Zoning Code of the village,
including Appendix Chapters, if any, be and is hereby adopted as the Zoning
Code of the village, for the purpose of securing adequate light, pure air, and
safety from fire and other dangers, that the taxable value of land and
buildings throughout the village may be conserved, that congestion in the
public streets may be lessened or avoided, that the hazards to persons and
damage to property resulting from the accumulation or run-off of storm or flood
waters may be lessened or avoided, and may otherwise be promoted, and to insure
and facilitate the preservation of sites, areas, and structures of historical,
architectural and aesthetic importance; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Zoning Code on file in the
office of the village hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out herein.
(Ord. 13-03-18 Ord. - 4, passed 3-18-2013)
CHAPTER 154: WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY TELECOMMUNICATIONS OVERLAY
DISTRICT
Section
   
154.01   Ordinance adopted by reference
§ 154.01 ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Ordinance 10-04-19-07, passed April 19, 2010, providing specific areas
throughout the Village of Argenta, Illinois for the installation, construction,
attachment and alteration of facilities to accommodate wireless communication
facilities; providing the criteria for evaluating such proposed activities;
providing a procedure for the suitability certification; and accomplishing
related purposes, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code
the same as if set forth in full herein. Copies of the ordinance are available
for public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 10-04-19-07, passed 4-19-2010)
CHAPTER 155: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Base flood elevation
   
155.04   Duties of the Mayor
   
155.05   Development permit
   
155.06   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
155.07   Protecting buildings
   
155.08   Subdivision requirements
   
155.09   Public health and other standards
   
155.10   Carrying capacity and notification
   
155.11   Variances
   
155.12   Disclaimer of liability
   
155.13   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
155.14   Severability
   
155.15   Effective date
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
village by the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12,
11-30-2, 11-30-8 and 11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available, and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
155.03 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180
days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
      (1)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      (2)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      (3)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days per year;
      (4)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
      (5)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
      (6)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving,
or other alterations of the ground surface;
      (7)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings
and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). These two terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village of Argenta, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Argenta, or that may be annexed
into the Village of Argenta, that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The floodplains of the Village of Argenta are generally identified as such on
panel number(s) 0205 and 0210 of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Macon County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated June
16, 2011. Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as identified
by the community. The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Macon County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Argenta or
that may be annexed into the Village of Argenta are generally identified as
such on the Flood Insurance Rate map prepared for Macon County by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated June 16, 2011.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Friends Creek shall be as
delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Macon County prepared
by FEMA and dated June 16, 2011. The floodways for each of the remaining
floodplains of the Village of Argenta shall be according to the best data
available from the federal, state, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3) Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
      (4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   IDNR /OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM. Illinois Department of Natural Resource
Office of Water Resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary
area of 640 acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of any stream
serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or more in a rural area. Construction
on these streams requires a permit from the Department. (Ill Admin. Code tit.
17, pt. 3700.30). The Department may grant approval for specific types of
activities by issuance of a statewide permit which meets the standards defined
in §
155.06 of this chapter.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
155.07 of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a rninimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE (see "BUILDING").
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes "Repetitive
Loss Buildings" (see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance in which
the cumulative percentage of improvements:
         (a)   Equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started, or
         (b)   Increases the floor area by more than 20%.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
      (3)   The term does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.03 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and
IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Friends Creek shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance
Study of Macon County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated June 16, 2011.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county
wide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Macon County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A Zone" on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Macon
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by
the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Macon County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the Village of Argenta, or that may be annexed into the Village of Argenta,
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood insurance
Study of Macon County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated June 16, 2011.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.04 DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be responsible for the general administration of this
ordinance and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the Village of Argenta meet the requirements of this
ordinance. Specifically, the Mayor shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with §
155.05;
   (B)   Insure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
155.06;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
155.07 are met and maintain a record of the "as-built" elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§
155.08;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of §
155.09;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
155.11 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in §
155.99 as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain,
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.05 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Mayor. The Mayor shall not issue a development
permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
155.07 of this chapter, and
      (5)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Mayor
shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any
development located on land that can be shown by survey elevation to be below
the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by
survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has
not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is
not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this
ordinance. In addition, any development located on land shown to be below the
base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not
identified as floodplain on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   The Mayor shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
      (2)   The Mayor shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Mayor
shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits
have been obtained.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.06 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below of this section, no
development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and
anticipated development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities
or threat to public health and safety. The following specific development
activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources Statewide Permit Number 2;
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 3;
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 4;
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5;
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground utility
lines, light poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding 70 square feet and raising
buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any other
activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6;
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7;
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8;
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9;
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10;
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11;
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 12;
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 13;
      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) above of this
section may be permitted only if:
      (1)   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.07 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of
§
155.06 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet.
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If substantially improved, the
existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of
this section.
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within 24 months of the date the damage occurred.
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year.
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
155.02.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with §
155.07(B), and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 III. Adm. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of §
155.07(D) unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck.
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet.
      (6)   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect.
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model, and
      (10)   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by used of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot.
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every one square foot of floor area.
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $15,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 576 square feet (24' x 24').
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.08 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The Village of Argenta shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of §§
155.06 and
155.07 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
      (3)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (B)   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.09 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
155.06 and
155.07 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
155.07 of this chapter.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.10 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (B)   In addition, the Village of Argenta shall notify adjacent communities
in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.11 VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals
for a variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of
Trustees of the village. The Board of Trustees may attach such conditions to
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this
chapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      (6)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      (7)   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   The President of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant
in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protections
standards of §
155.07 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risk to life and property, and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic structures. Variances to the building protection requirements
of §
155.07 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"Historic Structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of §§
155.06 and
155.07 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Agriculture. Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter. In order to
minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public
health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance
issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-
floodproofed.
      (1)   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      (2)   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
      (3)   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with §
155.07 of this chapter.
      (4)   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with §
155.07 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      (5)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with §
155.07 of this chapter.
      (6)   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to
the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters in accordance with §
155.07(B) of this chapter.
      (7)   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of §
155.06 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      (8)   Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the Village of Argenta or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.13 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Argenta to fulfill the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program including: June 16, 2011. However, this chapter does
not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility
in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.14 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and
the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of
the remainder.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication as required by law.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Mayor may determine that
a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The Mayor shall
notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
      (1)   The village shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense.
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      (4)   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   (B)   The Mayor shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered
a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a
standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (1)   The Mayor is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate
the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to
resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (2)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the duly appointed Board of Appeals. Written
notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
         (a)   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation, and
         (b)   The time and place of the hearing.
      (3)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the duly
appointed Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be
suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 11-06-06-07, passed 6-6-2011)
CHAPTER 156: RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
Wind Energy Systems
   
156.01   Purpose
   
156.02   Wind energy system definitions
   
156.03   Applicability
   
156.04   Temporary wind turbines
   
156.05   Wind energy systems permitted by right
   
156.06   Wind turbines permitted by a special use permit
   
156.07   Evaluation of wind energy system special use permit
   
156.08   Wind energy system special use expiration
   
156.09   Design standards
   
156.10   Code compliance
   
156.11   Maintenance
   
156.12   Violation
   
156.13   Abandonment and removal
   
156.14   Pre-existing wind energy systems
Solar Energy Systems
   
156.30   Purpose
   
156.31   Definitions
   
156.32   Applicability
   
156.33   Permits required
   
156.34   Solar energy systems permitted by right and special use
Battery Energy Storage Systems
   
156.50   Purpose
   
156.51   Definition
   
156.52   BESS prohibited
   
156.53   Violation
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 156.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to further the goals and objectives of the
Village of Argenta in promoting the use of wind as an alternative energy
source. This section regulates the siting, installation, and operation of wind
energy systems to allow the effective and efficient use of wind resources while
protecting the health, safety, and welfare of nearby residents and the general
public.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.02 WIND ENERGY SYSTEM DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter:
   AMBIENT SOUND. The all-encompassing sound at a given location, usually a
composite of sounds from many sources near and far. For the purpose of this
section, the AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL shall mean the quiescent background level,
that is, the quietest of ten-second average sound levels measured when there
are no nearby or distinctly audible sound sources. Daytime ambient measurements
should be made during mid-morning, weekday hours while nighttime measurements
should be made after midnight.
   ANEMOMETER TOWER. A temporary wind speed indicator constructed for the
purpose of analyzing the potential for utilizing a wind energy system at a
given site. This includes the tower, base plate, anchors, cables and hardware,
wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment, data logger, instrument wiring,
and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wing
characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information
or to characterize the wind resource at a given location.
   ARGENTA ZONING JURISDICTION. The unincorporated territory lying within one
and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the Village of Argenta, excluding
the areas located within the zoning jurisdiction of another municipality.
   HORIZONTAL-AXIS WIND TURBINE. A tower-mounted turbine in which the rotor is
mounted horizontally.
   ROTOR. The rotating part of a wind turbine, including the blades and blade
assembly or the rotating portion of the generator.
   ROTOR DIAMETER. The diameter of the circle swept by the rotor. For
measurement purposes, this means the distance from the outer-most tip of the
blade to the center of the turbine rotor multiplied by two.
   SHADOW FLICKER. A repetitive oscillation of light and shadow cast when light
passes through and is interrupted by moving wind turbine blades.
   SOUND LEVEL. The A-weighted sound pressure level in decibels (dB) (or the C-
weighted level if specified) as measured using a sound level meter that meets
the requirements of a Type 2 or better precision instrument according to the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) SI.4. The "average" sound level is
time-averaged over a suitable period using an integrating sound level meter
that meets the requirements of ANSI S12.43.
   SYSTEM HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the finished grade at the
foot of the system to the outer-most tip of the rotor when the tip is at its
highest point.
   TOWER-MOUNTED WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine mounted on a structure that is
designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of elevating and supporting
a wind generator, including freestanding lattice towers, monopole towers or
guyed towers.
   VERTICAL-AXIS WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine in which the rotor is mounted
vertically.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (or SYSTEM). A wind turbine and all directly supporting
components, including any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor,
tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, and batteries.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-MOUNTED. A relatively small wind turbine and
components mounted on a building and which generates power for on-site use.
   WIND-ENERGY SYSTEM, ON-SITE. A wind energy system that is incidental and
subordinate to and which generates power for the principal use of the zoning
lot on which it is situated. A wind energy system is considered on-site even if
excess electricity is used by the utility company in exchange for a reduction
in the cost of electrical power supplied by that company.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, PRE-EXISTING. Any wind energy system which is
operational on the effective date of this section.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SERVICE AREA. A wind energy system intended to provide
power to a small grouping of uses within a single zoning district.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, UTILITY.
      (1)   A wind energy system that exceeds the maximum system height, or
maximum rotor diameter standards provided by this section for an on-site tower-
mounted wind energy system; or
      (2)   Groupings of wind energy systems, often maintained by one entity,
which generate power on-site to be transferred to a transmission system for
distribution to customers.
   WIND TURBINE. A rotary mechanical device that extracts energy from the wind
for either direct mechanical use or conversion to electrical energy.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.03 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to wind energy systems
erected and operated within the corporate limits of the Village of Argenta and
within the unincorporated territory lying within one and one-half miles of
those corporate limits (Argenta Zoning Jurisdiction) per statutory authority
granted in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-26.
   (B)   All zoning districts and zoning regulations cited are as enacted by
the Village of Argenta or Macon County, whichever is applicable to the subject
property.
   (C)   All wind energy systems shall be erected, constructed, installed and
modified in conformance with the provisions of this section, and all other
applicable regulations, as evidenced by the issuance of a building permit, and
any other necessary zoning or development approvals.
   (D)   Pre-existing wind energy systems shall be exempt from the provisions
of this section with the exception of maintenance, removal of abandoned systems
and those which specifically apply to pre-existing systems. Pre-existing wind
energy systems shall be permitted to continue per the provisions of this
section below.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.04 TEMPORARY WIND TURBINES.
   An anemometer tower is permitted in all zoning districts as a temporary use
for no more than 18 months. An extension of this time period, not to exceed an
additional 18 months, may be granted at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator upon submittal and review of sufficient evidence to support the
requested extension.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.05 WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS PERMITTED BY RIGHT.
   (A)   Building-mounted wind energy systems. Within all zoning districts, a
building mounted wind energy system is permitted as an accessory use to any
permitted principal use other than common-lot-line dwellings. A building-
mounted wind energy system shall only be permitted within a condominium
development if authorized by the condominium association board, and if
provisions are made for the maintenance of said system in the condominium
development bylaws or other applicable legal document, subject to the review
and approval of the Village of Argenta. All building-mounted wind energy
systems shall be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Design standards as set forth in §
156.09.
      (2)   Maximum height. Ten feet as measured from the highest point of the
roof for all uses in residential zoning districts; and 15 feet as measured from
the highest point of the roof for all uses in non-residential zoning districts.
      (3)   Maximum rotor diameter. Ten feet.
      (4)   Minimum setback. Shall be equal to the required minimum yard
(front, rear, side) for the zoning district in which it is located. The setback
shall be measured horizontally from the furthest outward extension of all
moving parts to the nearest property line.
      (5)   Minimum separation. If more than one building-mounted wind energy
system is installed, a minimum distance equal to the height of the highest
system must be maintained between the bases of each system.
      (6)   Maximum quantity. The maximum number of systems per property shall
be based on setback and separation requirements as set forth in this section.
      (7)   Building support. The building upon which the system is to be
mounted shall be able to safely support operation of the wind energy system.
Certification by a structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois shall
be required as part of the building permit process by the Village of Argenta.
   (B)   On-site tower-mounted wind energy system. An on-site tower-mounted
wind energy system is a permitted accessory use within all zoning districts. An
on-site tower-mounted wind energy system shall only be permitted on the commons
area within a condominium development if authorized by the condominium
association board, and if provisions are made for the maintenance of said
system in the condominium development bylaws or other applicable legal
document, subject to the review and approval of the Village of Argenta. All on-
site tower-mounted wind energy systems shall be subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   Design standards as set forth in §
156.09.
      (2)   Maximum system height.
         (a)   Residential zoning districts. 120 feet.
         (b)   Non-residential zoning districts. 175 feet, except that the
maximum system height shall be limited to 120 feet if located within 500 feet
of an existing residence or the boundary of a residentially zoned property.
      (3)   Maximum rotor diameter.
         (a)   Residential zoning districts. 30 feet.
         (b)   Non-residential zoning districts. 70 feet, except that maximum
rotor diameter shall be limited to 30 feet if located within 500 feet of an
existing residence or the boundary of a residentially zoned property.
      (4)   Lot size. No minimum lot size.
      (5)   Location. Entirely behind the principal building in residential and
commercial zoning districts. Wind energy systems shall not be constructed on
any public easement.
      (6)   Minimum setback. A distance equal to the system height from all
property lines, public street right-of-way lines and overhead utility lines.
The setback shall be measured from the center of the tower's base. No guy wire
anchors may extend closer than ten feet to the property line, or the distance
of the required setback in the respective zoning district, whichever results in
a greater setback.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.06 WIND TURBINES PERMITTED BY A SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Service area tower-mounted wind energy systems. A service area tower-
mounted wind energy system may be erected in all zoning districts with the
issuance of a special use permit. A special use permit for a proposed service
area tower-mounted wind energy system shall be evaluated in consideration of
the factors set forth in §
156.07 and along with compliance to the design standards set forth in §
156.09. A special use permit application shall be submitted in accordance with
this subchapter. If the owner of a system is not the owner of land on which the
system is located, the village may require that a bond be posted, at time of
approval of a special use permit, for the removal of the system. All service
area tower-mounted wind energy conversion systems permitted as a special use
shall be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Design standards as set forth in §
156.09.
      (2)   Maximum system height. 175 feet.
      (3)   Maximum rotor diameter. 70 feet.
      (4)   Minimum setback. A distance equal to the system height from
property lines of those properties which are not a part of the service area,
public street right-of-way lines and overhead utility lines. The setback shall
be measured from the center of the tower's base.
      (5)   Maximum quantity. As determined by the special use permit.
   (B)   Utility tower-mounted wind energy system. A utility tower-mounted wind
energy system may be erected in all agricultural and industrial zoning
districts as established by either the Village of Argenta or by Macon County
with the issuance of a special use permit. A special use permit for a proposed
utility tower-mounted wind energy system shall be evaluated in consideration of
the factors set forth in §
156.07 and along with compliance to the design standards of §
156.09. A special use permit application shall be submitted in accordance with
this subchapter. If the owner of a system is not the owner of land on which the
system is located, the village may require that a bond be posted, at time of
approval of a special use permit, for the removal of the system. All utility
tower-mounted wind energy conversion systems permitted as a special use shall
be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Design standards as set forth in §
156.09.
      (2)   Maximum system height. 400 feet.
      (3)   Maximum rotor diameter. 300 feet.
      (4)   Lot size. The minimum lot size shall be equal to the minimum lot
size for the zoning district in which the system is located.
      (5)   Minimum setback. A distance equal to the total height of the system
from all property lines, public street right-of-way lines and overhead utility
lines. In addition said system shall be located a minimum of 1,200 feet from an
existing residence or the boundary of a residentially zoned property. The
setback shall be measured from the center of the tower's base.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.07 EVALUATION OF WIND ENERGY SYSTEM SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   In evaluating a special use for a utility or residential service area tower-
mounted wind energy system, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the
following factors in addition to the requirements identified above:
   (A)   Number of systems and their location;
   (B)   The number of systems relative to the size of the parcel on which the
systems are proposed to be located;
   (C)   The height of the system relative to the size of the parcel on which
the system is proposed to be located;
   (D)   The need for the proposed height of the system in order to allow the
system to operate efficiently;
   (E)   The need for the rotor diameter and/or number of systems in order to
serve the site effectively;
   (F)   The uniformity of design, including tower type, color, number of
blades, and direction of blade rotation for multiple system proposals;
   (G)   The building density of the general area in which the system is
proposed to be located;
   (H)   The nature of existing and planned future land use on adjacent and
nearby properties;
   (I)   Proximity to an existing residence or residential zoning district;
   (J)   Land use compatibility and impact on orderly development;
   (K)   Location of other wind energy systems in the surrounding area;
   (L)   Proximity to transmission lines to link the systems to the electric
power grid;
   (M)   Surrounding topography;
   (N)   Proximity to environmentally sensitive areas and the environmental
impact of the system;
   (O)   Whether the design of the proposed system reflects compliance with the
design standards of §
156.09;
   (P)   Whether a substantial adverse effect on public safety will result from
the height or rotor diameter of the system or some other aspect of the system's
design or proposed construction; and
   (Q)   Any other factors relevant to the proposed system.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.08 WIND ENERGY SYSTEM SPECIAL USE EXPIRATION.
   A special use permit issued pursuant to this section expires if:
   (A)   A building permit for the wind energy system has not been requested by
means of a complete application within two years of approval of the special use
permit.
   (B)   The wind energy system is abandoned and removed per the provisions of
this section below.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.09 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   In addition to all other applicable requirements of this section, wind
energy systems shall be constructed in conformance with the following design
standards:
   (A)   Visual appearance.
      (1)   Tower type. Monopole type tower is required in all zoning
districts.
      (2)   Color. Non-reflective, non-obtrusive color such as off white, light
gray, or other neutral color, or the color supplied by the manufacturer. The
required coloration and finish shall be maintained throughout the life of the
system.
      (3)   Lighting. No artificial lighting is allowed unless required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable authority. If
lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause
the least disturbance to surrounding land uses.
      (4)   Signs. All signs, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on a
wind energy system with the exception of one warning sign no more than four
square feet in area.
      (5)   Electrical system. All on-site electrical transmission lines
connecting a wind energy system to a building or public utility electricity
distribution system shall be located underground. As-built plans shall be
submitted showing the location of underground conduit and cable located within
the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Safety.
      (1)   Tower access. Towers shall be designed to prevent climbing within
the first 12 feet from the ground. Access to the tower shall be limited by
locating all climbing apparatus to no lower than 12 feet from the ground and by
providing any other applicable anti-climbing measures.
      (2)   Equipment access. All ground-mounted electrical and control
equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
      (3)   Ground clearance. The minimum distance between the ground and any
part of the rotor blade system of a tower-mounted horizontal-axis wind energy
system shall be 20 feet. For a tower-mounted vertical-axis wind energy system,
no moving portions of the turbine shall be located any closer than ten feet
above the adjacent finished grade.
      (4)   Overspeed controls. All on-site tower-mounted wind energy systems
shall be equipped with automatic and manual braking systems. Utility tower-
mounted wind energy systems shall be equipped with a redundant braking system,
including both aerodynamic over-speed controls and mechanical brakes.
      (5)   Force wind standard. At a minimum, a wind energy system shall be
engineered to withstand a wind velocity 110 miles per hour.
   (C)   Electromagnetic interference. All wind energy systems shall be
designed and sited such that no disruptive electromagnetic interference is
caused to communication systems, contrary to Federal Communication Commission
requirements for electromagnetic interference and/or other state or local laws.
All turbines shall utilize nonmetallic rotor blades unless the applicant can
supply documentation from an independent testing laboratory certifying that any
proposed metallic blade rotor will not cause electromagnetic interference.
   (D)   Vibration. All wind energy systems shall not produce vibrations which
are humanly perceptible beyond the property on which a wind energy system is
situated.
   (E)   Sound level limitations.
      (1)   The sound level limits identified below shall apply. Established
Sound Level Measurement Procedures shall be used that account for ambient sound
contributions.
 
Receiving Property Hours of Operation     Sound Level Limits
Residential        10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 45 dB(A)
Residential        7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 55 dB(A)
Non-Residential    24 hours               60 dB(A)
Industrial         24 hours               65 dB(A)
 
      (2)   No system shall operate with an average sound level more than 5 dB
(A) above the non-operational ambient level, as measured at the property line.
      (3)   To limit the level of low frequency sound, the average C-weighted
sound level during system operation shall not exceed the A-weighted ambient
sound level by more than 20 dB.
      (4)   Applications for wind energy systems requiring a special use permit
shall include an environmental sound impact study that gives:
         (a)   Certified manufacturer's specification of the sound emissions
from similar turbines that specifically state that the overall sound level as
well as the 1/3-octave band levels measured in accordance with IEC 61400-11.
         (b)   The expected maximum one minute averaged A- and C-weighted sound
level at the property line with all turbines operating.
         (c)   The daytime and nighttime quiescent ambient sound levels at the
property line as measured by an environmental acoustics expert (board certified
by the Institute of Noise Control Engineering).
   (F)   Shadow flicker.
      (1)   Applications for wind energy systems requiring a special use permit
shall include a shadow flicker study. Using available software, the applicant
shall show calculated locations of shadow flicker caused by a wind energy
system and the expected duration in total number of hours per year of the
flicker cast upon adjacent dwellings and residential zoning districts.
      (2)   Wind energy systems requiring a special use permit shall be sited
in a manner that does not result in significant shadow flicker impacts on
adjacent properties. Significant shadow flicker is defined as more than 30
hours per year on any residential structure. The applicant has the burden of
providing evidence that the shadow flicker will not have significant adverse
impact. Potential shadow flicker shall be addressed either through siting or
other approved mitigation measures.
   (G)   Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) compliance. All wind energy
systems shall comply with all applicable regulations of the FAA, including
required FAA permits for installation closer than two miles to an airport. The
applicant shall be responsible for determining the applicable FAA regulations
and securing the necessary approvals.
   (H)   Industry standards. All wind energy systems shall conform to
applicable industry standards, including those of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI). Owners shall submit certificates of design
compliance that equipment manufacturers have obtained from Underwriters
Laboratories (UL), National Renewable Energy Laboratories (NREL), Det Norske
Veritas (DNV), Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie (GL), or an equivalent third
party.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.10 CODE COMPLIANCE.
   All wind energy systems shall meet the requirements of all other applicable
codes and ordinances of the Village of Argenta.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.11 MAINTENANCE.
   All wind energy systems shall be maintained in good condition and in safe
working order throughout the life of the system. If the system is not
maintained in operational condition and/or poses a potential safety hazard, the
owner shall immediately correct the situation at their expense. Any wind energy
system found to be unsafe by the Zoning Administrator or appointed designee,
must stop operation immediately upon notification, if the owner fails to
correct the unsafe condition, the Zoning Administrator may remove or cause to
be removed, altered or repaired an unsafe wind energy system immediately and
without notice, if, in his/her opinion, the condition of the system is such as
to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public. If a wind energy
system remains inoperable for a period of 180 days, it shall be deemed
abandoned and the procedures under § 156.13 applied.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.12 VIOLATION.
   Should a wind energy system or any part thereof violate the requirements of
this subchapter, the owner shall cease operations immediately. Upon receipt of
a complaint or the notice of a complaint from the owner, the Zoning
Administrator shall make a determination as to whether there is a violation
requiring the immediate cessation of operation. The system may resume operation
once the violation(s) have been remedied.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.13 ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL.
   A wind energy system shall be deemed abandoned it not functioning for a
continuous period of 180 days, and there is no demonstrated plan to restore the
equipment to operating condition. The village will issue a Notice of
Abandonment for the removal of an abandoned wind energy system as follows:
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue a Notice of
Abandonment to the owner of a wind energy system that is deemed to be
abandoned, and in cases where immediate safety is not of concern, the owner
shall have 30 days from Notice receipt date to respond.
   (B)   Following the 30-day response period, and if the Zoning Administrator
determines that the system remains abandoned, the owner of the system shall
remove the abandoned system at their expense within 180 days of the original
Notice of Abandonment. A demolition permit shall be obtained for the removal of
the abandoned system.
   (C)   Failure to remove the abandoned system within said 180 days
constitutes a violation of this section. Following said 180 days, the village,
or a contractor hired by the village, shall have the authority to enter the
subject property and cause removal of the system at the owner's expense. In the
case of such removal the village may file a lien for reimbursement, of any and
all expenses incurred by the village without limitation, including attorney
fees and accrued interest. For those cases in which the owner of a wind energy
system is not the owner of land on which the system is located, the village may
execute the bond posted at the time of approval of the system.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.14 PRE-EXISTING WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Pre-existing wind energy systems shall be allowed to continue. Routine
maintenance shall be permitted on such pre-existing systems.
   (B)   A building permit and any other necessary zoning and development
approvals shall be obtained to alter, enlarge, extend, replace or relocate a
pre-existing wind energy system.
   (C)   If a pre-existing wind energy system is nonconforming with this
section, it shall not be altered, enlarged, extended or relocated such that the
nonconformity of the system is increased.
   (D)   Pre-existing wind energy systems that are substantially damaged or
destroyed must be rebuilt to conform to this section.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 156.30 PURPOSE.
   The Village of Argenta finds that it is in the public interest to encourage
the use and development of solar energy systems as a clean, renewable energy
source and to help promote local, clean jobs. The purpose of this section is to
facilitate the effective and efficient use of solar energy systems while
protecting the public health, safety, and welfare of residents and the general
public.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.31 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter:
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A collection of photovoltaic (PV) panels or other
devices that convert sunlight into electricity.
   SOLAR ARRAY. An accessory use solar energy system (see definition of
Accessory Use in Article 11, Division 1, Sec. 2.0(2)).
   SOLAR FARM. A principal use solar energy system.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.32 APPLICABILITY.
    This section applies to new solar energy systems. Pre-existing solar energy
systems are not required to meet the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.33 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Solar energy systems require all applicable permits.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 156.34 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS PERMITTED BY RIGHT AND BY SPECIAL USE.
   (A)   Use determination. The Zoning Administrator shall determine if a
system is a solar farm or a solar array based on its intended purpose and on
the criteria for accessory uses outlined in this chapter.
   (B)   Building-mounted solar energy systems. Building-mounted solar energy
systems are permitted by right within all zoning districts and are exempt from
further regulation of this section.
   (C)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
      (1)   Solar farms.
         (a)   Solar farms are permitted in the A-1 - Agriculture District and
I - Industrial District.
         (b)   Site plans for solar farms shall include the following: the
number and location of inverters, solar panels, access drives, grid
interconnection, and any other information required by the Zoning
Administrator. Inverters shall be located at least 150' from property lines.
         (c)   Solar farms located within 500 feet of a residential use must
provide a landscape buffer such that shrubs and trees shall be provided with
one tree and three shrubs for every 40 linear feet or fraction thereof along
the lot lines. Alternative planting plans that create a sufficient barrier may
be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
         (d)   Solar farms must comply with applicable state and local
regulations, including the Village of Argenta Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Solar arrays.
         (a)   Solar arrays are permitted in all zoning districts.
         (b)   Solar arrays must:
            1.   Meet all criteria for accessory structures outlined in this
chapter; and
            2.   Comply with all other sections of this chapter governing
accessory structures.
         (c)   Solar arrays are excluded from gross floor area calculations.
         (d)   The area beneath a solar array is considered open space if the
following criteria apply:
            1.   It comprises no more than 50% of the lot area when combined
with areas covered by paving for sidewalks, leisure, and recreational areas
such as patios, tennis courts, and swimming pools;
            2.   It does not comprise more than 25% of the total open space;
and
            3.   There is a minimum clearance of seven feet six inches between
the ground level and the underside of the solar panel assembly.
         (e)   Solar arrays located in a residential district must be located
behind the front face of the principal structure.
(Ord. 23-11-20 Ord03, passed 11-20-2023)
BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS
§ 156.50 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to further the goals and objectives of the
Village of Argenta in prohibiting the construction, installation, and operation
of battery energy storage systems within the corporate limits of the village in
order to protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of village
residents and the general public. Specifically, the Village Board of Trustees
has determined that the proximity of the village's residential zoning districts
to any potential site for the construction, installation, and operation of
battery energy storage systems does not allow for safe operation within the
village. Further, the Village Board of Trustees has determined that risk of
fire, casualty, property damage, and personal injury to village residents from
the construction, installation, and operation of battery energy storage systems
outweighs any potential public benefit.
(Ord. 25-04-21 Ord02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 156.51 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM ("BESS"). An energy storage system that can
store and deploy generated energy, typically a group of batteries that charge
(i.e., collect energy) and store electrical energy from the grid or energy
generation facility and then discharge that energy at a later time to provide
electricity or other grid services when needed. BESS generally consists of
batteries, battery storage containers, racking systems, on-site switchyards,
inverters, associated interconnection transmission lines, and supervisory
control and data acquisition systems.
(Ord. 25-04-21 Ord02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 156.52 BESS PROHIBITED.
   No BESS or any part thereof shall be constructed, installed or operated
within the corporate limits of the Village of Argenta or within the
unincorporated territory lying within one and one-half miles of those corporate
limits (Argenta zoning jurisdiction) per statutory authority granted in ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-26.
(Ord. 25-04-21 Ord02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 156.53 VIOLATION.
   Should a BESS or any part thereof be constructed, installed or operated in
violation of this subchapter, the owner of the property shall cease operations
immediately and be subject to a fine not to exceed $750 per occurrence. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate occurrence.
(Ord. 25-04-21 Ord02, passed 4-21-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
II.   LEASES
      
III.   VARIANCES
TABLE I: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord. No.    Date      Description
                      Rezoning property 112 and 113 East Elm Street from
09-11-09-12 12-9-2009 Central Business District to a mixed use of Central
                      Business and Residential
                      Rezoning several properties from Business District to
10-01-04-01 1-4-2010  Residential except for the following: 145 E. Walnut, 130
                      E. Water, and 138 E. Water, which will retain a Business
                      District classification
 
TABLE II: LEASES
 
Ord. No.    Date      Description
                      Authorizing a real estate ground lease with United States
10-08-02-5  8-2-2010  Cellular Operating Company of Chicago, for a term of 30
                      years
                      Approving a lease through January 2, 2017 with Argenta
11-11-07-14 11-7-2011 Sanitary District for office space located at Village
                      Hall
 
TABLE III: VARIANCES
 
Ord. No.   Date     Description
                    Approving petition for variance for Terry Camfield, for
13-01-07-1 1-7-2013 property known as 208 Rt. 48. The variance is to convert a
                    portion of a building that is zoned for commercial use to
                    apartments for residential use.
                    Approving petition for variance for James Hanna for
13-01-07-2 1-7-2013 property commonly known as 340 S. North Street. The
                    variance is to construct an accessory building that is 30'
                    by 40'.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 2001 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                         Code Section
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01               10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02               10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03               10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04               10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09               10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11               10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29               10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2                  10.04
Ch. 5, Act 120, § 1                 32.005
Ch. 5, Act 120, § 2.02              32.010
Ch. 5, Act 120, § 2.06              32.005
Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.       31.45
Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq.   10.02
Ch. 5, Act 270, § 1                 32.031
Ch. 10                               32.025
Ch. 30, Act 235, § 6                32.112
Ch. 35, Act 105                      110.01
Ch. 35, Act 115                      110.01
Ch. 35, Act 120                      110.01
Ch. 35, Act 635                      35.35
Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 7-132 et seq.    35.19
Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 21-101 et seq.   35.18
Ch. 50, Act 105, § 2                32.027,
                                     32.055
                                     32.001,
Ch. 65                               51.126,
                                     152.002
Ch. 65, Act 5                        10.02,
                                     90.10
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2              10.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1              10.99,
                                     155.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1            10.99
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-4              32.076
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-5              32.076
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-3-2              130.01,
                                     130.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 2-2-12             32.025,
                                     32.032
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-5           32.030
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-10          32.026
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-15          32.025
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-30          32.028,
                                     32.031
                                     32.028,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-35          32.084,
                                     32.102
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-40          32.087
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-45          32.089
                                     32.001,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50          32.004,
                                     32.029,
                                     32.052
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-5           32.050
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-10          32.053
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-15          32.027
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-20          32.028,
                                     32.081
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-25          32.028
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-25-5           32.001
                                     32.055,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5           32.102,
                                     32.125,
                                     32.170
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10          32.089
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-5           32.059
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-10          32.056
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-20          32.053
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-30          32.054
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-35          32.051
                                     32.103,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-40          32.104,
                                     32.108
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-45          32.104,
                                     32.109
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-50          32.112
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-55          32.105
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-65          32.111
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-85          32.107
                                     32.025,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90          32.076,
                                     32.077
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-95          32.089
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-110         32.076,
                                     32.082
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-115         32.088
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-15          32.009
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-20          32.007,
                                     32.008
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-25          32.001,
                                     32.003
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-45          32.011
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-50          32.012
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-40-55          32.013
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-45-5           32.063
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-5 et seq.   32.033
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-15(D)(8)    32.036
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 4-1                32.027
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-3-1              35.15
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-8-8              35.17
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-9-1              32.032
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-9-2              32.032
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2             35.38
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-22            112.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-1             130.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-3             35.16
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5             130.16
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-2             130.04,
                                     133.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-3             130.10
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-5-4             130.11
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-8-4             130.14
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-4 et seq.    30.23
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-4 – 11-1230.15
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12           155.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-26           156.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-6            92.20,
                                     92.22
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7            92.20,
                                     92.22
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-13           92.39,
                                     92.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2            155.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8            155.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-1            92.62
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2            155.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-5            110.39
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-60-2            92.05
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-80-1 – 11-8093.095
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-2            93.150
                                     93.023,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-3            93.025,
                                     93.026
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-7            93.112
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-11           93.111
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-13           93.110
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-15           132.14
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-17           93.020
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 32-5.1             130.03
Ch. 210, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.     151.02,
                                     151.25
Ch. 210, Act 115, § 2.1             151.01
Ch. 210, Act 115, § 2.2             151.01
Ch. 210, Act 115, § 2.3             151.01
Ch. 210, Act 115, § 2.4             151.01
Ch. 210, Act 115, § 2.5             151.01
Ch. 210, Act 115, § 2.7             151.01
Ch. 210, Act 115, § 2.10            151.01
Ch. 210, Act 115, § 9.9             151.07
Ch. 210, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.     151.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 2-202             35.38
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-221             35.35
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222             35.35
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1           35.35
Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3               51.091
Ch. 230, Act 15                      111.05
Ch. 230, Act 20                      111.05
Ch. 235                              111.01
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 3.01 et seq.    111.01
                                     111.07,
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-1               111.11,
                                     111.25,
                                     111.39
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-2               32.061
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-4               111.45,
                                     111.53
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-5               111.11
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-1               111.11
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-5               111.47
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-12              111.27
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-15              111.47
                                     111.38,
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16              111.47,
                                     111.49,
                                     111.50
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-17              111.47
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-20              111.44
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-22              111.47
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-24              111.11
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-1               111.11
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-5               111.53
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-7               111.53
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9               111.53
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-13              111.53
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-14              111.26
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 10-2 – 10-7   111.53
Ch. 410, Act 82, §§ 1 et seq.      135.01
Ch. 410, Act 650, §§ 1 et seq.     111.34
Ch. 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.     112.02,
                                     135.01
Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.       35.01
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 4(e)              51.091
Ch. 425, Act 60, § 1-60-4           151.07
Ch. 430, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.     151.03
Ch. 510, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.   90.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1                 70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-3-2             70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.   70.01,
                                     73.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188             10.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-815             71.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11                70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1-1            70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203            70.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-207            70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208            70.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.1          70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.2          70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-209.1          70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302            70.22,
                                     70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-303            70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-304            70.24
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310(f)         70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313            70.35,
                                     70.36
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401 – 11-416 70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-500 – 11-5070.35,
                                     73.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-505            70.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-602            70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-603            70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604            70.35,
                                     70.36
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(b)         70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-608            70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904(a)         70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006           110.39
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1301.1 et seq71.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2         71.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3         71.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302           71.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416(a)        70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1419           70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1422           70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101 et seq.    70.55
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-602            70.56
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-605            70.55
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-605.1          70.55
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-605.2          70.55
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-709            73.06
Ch. 625, Act 40, §§ 1-1 et seq.    72.01
Ch. 705, Act 405                     130.19
Ch. 720, Act 5                       130.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 2-1 – 2-11    130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 2-13 – 2-16   130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-19              130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-20              130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7-10            92.39
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 28-1 – 28-3   111.05
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9              131.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 47-5              92.05
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 47-10             92.05,
                                     92.41
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 47-15             92.05
Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq.     130.17
Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq.   130.17
Ch. 720, Act 600, §§ 1 et seq.     130.17
Ch. 720, Act 605, § 1               93.095
Ch. 720, Act 680, §§ 1 et seq.     130.06
Ch. 740, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.     130.19
Ch. 740, Act 115, § 3               130.19
Ch. 775, Act 5, § 3-101 et seq.     91.04
Ch. 805, Act 5                       111.01
                                     
 
REFERENCES TO 2001 CODE
2001 Code Section 2009 Code Section
2001 Code Section 2009 Code Section
Schedule A        Ch. 74, Sch. I
Schedule (A)      Ch. 75, Sch. III
Schedule B        Ch. 74, Sch. II
Schedule C        Ch. 74, Sch. III
Schedule D        Ch. 74, Sch. IV
Schedule E        Ch. 75, Sch. I
Schedule F        Ch. 75, Sch. II
Schedule H        Ch. 75, Sch. III
1-2-1             32.001
1-2-2             32.002
1-2-3             32.003
1-2-4             32.004
1-2-5             32.005
1-2-6             32.006
1-2-7             32.007
1-2-8             32.008
1-2-11            32.009
1-2-12            32.010
1-2-14            32.011
1-2-15            32.012
1-2-16            32.013
1-2-18            32.025
1-2-19            32.026
1-2-20            32.027
1-2-21            32.028
1-2-22            32.029
1-2-23            32.030
1-2-24            32.031
1-2-25            32.032
1-2-26            32.033
1-2-27            32.034
1-2-28            32.035
1-2-29            32.036
1-2-30            32.037
1-2-31            32.038
1-2-32            32.039
1-2-33            32.040
1-2-40            32.050
1-2-41            32.051
1-2-42            32.052
1-2-43            32.053
1-2-45            32.054
1-2-46            32.055
1-2-47            32.056
1-2-48            32.057
1-2-49            32.058
1-2-50            32.059
1-2-51            32.060
1-2-52            32.061
1-2-53            32.062
1-2-54            32.063
1-2-57            32.075
1-2-58            32.076
1-2-59            32.077
1-2-60            32.078
1-2-61            32.079
1-2-62            32.080
1-2-63            32.081
1-2-64            32.082
1-2-65            32.083
1-2-66            32.084
1-2-67            32.085
1-2-68            32.086
1-2-69            32.087
1-2-70            32.088
1-2-71            32.089
1-2-72            32.100
1-2-73            32.101
1-2-74            32.102
1-2-75            32.103
1-2-76            32.104
1-2-77            32.105
1-2-78            32.106
1-2-79            32.107
1-2-80            32.108
1-2-81            32.109
1-2-82            32.110
1-2-83            32.111
1-2-84            32.112
1-2-88            32.125
1-2-89            32.126
1-2-94            32.140
1-2-95            32.141
1-2-98            32.155
1-2-99            32.156
1-2-100           32.170
1-2-101           32.171
1-2-102           32.172
1-2-103           32.173
1-2-104           32.174
1-3-1             32.041
1-4-1             30.01
1-4-2             30.02
1-6-1             31.01
1-6-2             31.02
1-6-3             31.03
1-6-4             31.04
1-6-5             31.05
1-6-6             31.06
1-6-7             31.07
1-6-8             31.08
1-6-9             31.09
1-6-10            31.10
1-6-11            31.11
1-6-12            31.12
1-6-13            31.13
1-6-14            31.14
1-6-15            31.15
1-6-16            31.16
3-1-1             90.01
3-1-2             90.02
3-1-3             90.03
3-1-4             90.04
3-1-5             90.05
3-1-6             90.06
3-1-7             90.07
3-1-8             90.08
3-1-9             90.09
3-1-10            90.10
3-2-1             90.25
3-2-2             90.26
3-2-3             90.27
3-2-4             90.28
3-2-5             90.29
3-2-6             90.30
3-2-7             90.31
3-2-8             90.32
3-2-9             90.33
3-2-10            90.34
3-2-11            90.35
3-2-12            90.36
3-2-13            90.37
3-2-14            90.38
3-2-15            90.39
3-2-16            90.40
3-3-1             90.55
3-3-2             90.56
3-3-3             90.57
3-3-4             90.58
3-3-5             90.59
3-3-6             90.60
3-3-7             90.61
4-1-1             30.15
4-1-2             30.16
4-1-3             30.17
4-1-4             30.18
4-1-5             30.19
4-1-6             30.20
4-1-7             30.21
4-1-8             30.22
4-1-9             30.23
7-1-1             110.01
7-1-2             110.02
7-1-3             110.03
7-1-4             110.04
7-1-5             110.05
7-1-6             110.06
7-1-7             110.07
7-1-8             110.08
7-1-9             110.09
7-1-10            110.10
7-1-11            110.11
7-1-12            110.12
7-1-13            110.13
7-1-14            110.14
7-1-15            110.15
7-1-16            110.16
7-2-1             110.30
7-2-2             110.31
7-2-3             110.32
7-2-4             110.33
7-2-5             110.34
7-2-7             110.36
7-2-8             110.37
7-2-10            110.38
7-2-11            110.39
7-3-1             110.50
7-3-2             110.51
7-3-3             110.52
7-3-4             110.53
7-3-5             110.35
7-3-6             110.54
7-3-7             110.55
7-3-8             110.56
7-3-9             110.57
7-3-10            110.58
7-3-11            110.59
7-3-12            110.60
13-1-1            91.01
13-1-2            91.02
13-1-3            91.03
13-1-4            91.04
13-1-5            91.05
13-1-6            91.06
13-1-7            91.07
13-1-8            91.08
13-1-9            91.09
13-1-10           91.10
13-1-11           91.11
13-1-12           91.12
13-1-14           91.13
13-1-16           91.30
13-1-17           91.31
13-1-18           91.32
13-1-19           91.33
13-1-20           91.34
13-1-21           91.35
13-1-22           91.36
13-1-23           91.37
13-1-24           91.38
13-1-25           91.39
15-1-1            31.45
15-1-2            31.46
15-1-3            31.47
15-1-4            31.48
15-1-5            31.49
15-1-6            31.50
15-1-7            31.51
15-1-8            31.52
15-1-9            31.53
15-1-10           31.54
15-1-11           31.55
15-1-12           31.56
15-1-13           31.57
15-1-14           31.58
15-1-15           31.59
16-1-1            50.01
16-1-2            50.02
16-1-3            50.03
16-1-4            50.04
16-1-5            50.05
16-1-6            50.06
16-1-8            50.07
16-1-9            50.08
16-1-10           50.09
16-1-11           50.10
16-1-12           50.11
21-1-1            111.01
21-2-1            111.02
21-2-2            111.03
21-2-3            111.04
21-2-4            111.05
21-2-5            111.06
21-2-6            111.07
21-2-7            111.08
21-2-8            111.09
21-2-9            111.10
21-2-10           111.11
21-3-1            111.25
21-3-2            111.26
21-3-3            111.27
21-3-4            111.28
21-3-5            111.29
21-3-6            111.30
21-3-7            111.31
21-3-8            111.32
21-3-9            111.33
21-3-10           111.34
21-3-11           111.35
21-3-12           111.36
21-3-13           111.37
21-3-14           111.38
21-3-15           111.39
21-3-16           111.40
21-3-17           111.41
21-3-18           111.42
21-3-19           111.43
21-3-20           111.44
21-3-21           111.45
21-3-22           111.46
21-3-23           111.47
21-3-24           111.48
21-3-25           111.49
21-3-26           111.50
21-3-27           111.51
21-3-28           111.52
21-4-1            111.53
21-4-2            111.53
21-4-3            111.53
21-4-4            111.53
21-4-5            111.53
21-4-6            111.53
21-4-7            111.53
21-4-8            111.53
21-4-9            111.53
21-4-10           111.99
21-4-11           111.53
21-4-12           111.53
21-4-13           111.53
23-1-1            151.01
23-1-2            151.02
23-1-3            151.03
23-1-4            151.04
23-1-5            151.05
23-1-6            151.06
23-1-7            151.07
23-1-8            151.08
23-1-9            151.09
23-1-10           151.10
23-2-1            151.25
23-2-2            151.26
23-2-3            151.27
23-2-4            151.28
23-2-5            151.29
23-2-6            151.30
23-2-7            151.31
23-2-10           151.32
23-2-11           151.33
23-2-12           151.34
23-2-13           151.35
23-2-17           151.36
23-2-18           151.37
23-2-21           151.38
24-1-1            70.01
24-2-1            70.02
24-2-2            70.03
24-2-3            70.04
24-2-4            70.05,
                  70.06
24-3-1            70.20
24-3-2            70.21
24-3-3            70.22
24-3-4            70.23
24-3-5            70.24
24-3-6            70.25
24-4-1            70.35
24-4-2            70.36
24-4-3            70.37
24-4-4            70.38
24-4-5            70.39
24-4-6            70.40
24-4-7            70.41
24-5-1            70.55
24-5-2            70.56
24-6-1            71.01
24-6-2            71.02
24-6-3            71.03
24-6-4            71.04
24-6-5            71.05
24-6-6            71.06
24-6-7            71.07
24-6-8            71.08,
                  71.99
24-7-1            95.01
24-7-2            95.02
24-7-3            95.03
24-7-4            95.04
24-7-5            95.05
24-7-6            95.06
24-8-1            72.01
24-8-2            72.02
25-1-1            92.01
25-1-2            92.02
25-1-3            92.03
25-1-4            92.04
25-1-5            92.05
25-2-1            92.15
25-2-2            92.16
25-2-3            92.17
25-2-4            92.18
25-2-5            92.19
25-2-6            92.20
25-2-7            92.21
25-2-8            92.22
25-3-1            92.35
25-3-2            92.36
25-3-3            92.37
25-3-4            92.38
25-3-5            92.39
25-3-6            92.40
25-3-7            92.41
25-4-1            92.55
25-4-2            92.56
25-4-3            92.57
25-4-4            92.58
25-4-5            92.59
25-4-6            92.60
25-4-7            92.61
25-4-8            92.62
27-1-1            130.01
27-1-2            130.02
27-2-1            130.03
27-2-2            130.03
27-2-3            130.04
27-2-4            130.04
27-2-5            130.05
27-2-6            130.06
27-2-7            130.06
27-2-8            130.07
27-2-9            130.08
27-2-10           130.09
27-2-11           130.10
27-2-12           130.11
27-2-13           130.12
27-2-14           130.13
27-2-15           130.14
27-2-16           130.15
27-2-17           130.16
27-3-1            131.01
27-3-2            131.02
27-3-3            131.03
27-4-1            132.01
27-4-2            132.02
27-4-3            132.03
27-4-4            132.04
27-4-5            132.05
27-4-6            132.06
27-4-7            132.07
27-4-8            132.08
27-4-9            132.09
27-4-10           132.10
27-4-11           132.11
27-4-12           132.12
27-4-13           132.13
27-4-14           132.14
27-5-1            133.01
27-5-2            133.02
27-6-1            134.01
27-6-2            134.02
27-6-3            134.03
30-2-1            34.01
30-2-2            34.02
30-2-3            34.03
30-2-4            34.04
30-2-5            34.05
30-2-6            34.06
30-2-7            34.07
30-2-8            34.08
30-2-9            34.09
30-2-10           34.10
30-2-11           34.11
30-2-12           34.12
30-2-13           34.13
30-2-14           34.14
30-2-21           34.30
30-2-22           34.31
30-2-23           34.99
30-3-1            94.01
30-3-2            94.02
30-3-3            94.03
30-3-4            94.04
30-3-5            94.05
30-3-6            94.06
30-3-7            94.07
30-3-8            94.99
33-1-1            93.001
33-1-2            93.002
33-2-1            93.015
33-2-2            93.016
33-2-3            93.017
33-2-4            93.018
33-2-5            93.019
33-2-6            93.020
33-2-7            93.021
33-2-8            93.022
33-2-9            93.023
33-2-10           93.024
33-2-11           93.025
33-2-12           93.026
33-2-13           93.027
33-2-14           93.028
33-2-15           93.029
33-2-16           93.030
33-2-17           93.031
33-2-18           93.032
33-3-1            93.045
33-3-2            93.046
33-3-3            93.047
33-3-4            93.048
33-3-5            93.049
33-3-6            93.050
33-3-7            93.051
33-3-8            93.052
33-4-1            93.065
33-4-2            93.066
33-4-3            93.067
33-4-4            93.068
33-4-5            93.069
33-4-6            93.070
33-4-7            93.071
33-4-8            93.072
33-4-9            93.073
33-4-10           93.074
33-4-11           93.075
33-4-12           93.076
33-4-13           93.077
33-4-14           93.078
33-4-15           93.079
33-4-16           93.080
33-4-17           93.081
33-4-18           93.082
33-4-19           93.083
33-4-20           93.084
33-4-21           93.085
33-4-22           93.086
33-4-23           93.087
33-4-24           93.088
33-4-25           93.089
33-4-26           93.090
33-4-27           93.091
33-4-28           93.092
33-4-29           93.093
33-4-30           93.094
33-4-31           93.095
33-5-1            93.110
33-5-2            93.111
33-5-3            93.112
33-6-1            93.125
33-6-2            93.126
33-6-3            93.127
33-6-4            93.128
33-6-5            93.129
33-6-6            93.130
33-6-7            93.131
33-6-8            93.132
33-7-1            93.145
33-7-2            93.146
33-7-3            93.147
33-7-4            93.148
33-7-5            93.149
33-7-6            93.150
34-1-1            152.001
34-1-2            152.002
34-1-3            152.003
34-1-4            152.004
34-1-5            152.005
34-1-6            152.006
34-1-7            152.007
34-1-8            152.008
34-2-1            152.009
34-3-1            152.020
34-3-2            152.021
34-3-3            152.022
34-3-4            152.023
34-3-5            152.024
34-3-6            152.025
34-3-7            152.026
34-3-8            152.027
34-4-1            152.040
34-4-2            152.041
34-4-3            152.042
34-5-1            152.055
34-5-2            152.056
34-5-3            152.057
34-5-4            152.058
34-5-5            152.059
34-5-6            152.060
34-5-7            152.061
34-6-1            152.075
34-6-2            152.076
34-6-3            152.077
34-6-5            152.078
34-6-6            152.079
34-6-7            152.080
34-6-8            152.081
34-6-9            152.082
34-6-10           152.083
34-6-11           152.084
34-6-13           152.095
34-6-14           152.096
34-6-15           152.097
34-6-16           152.098
34-6-18           152.099
34-6-19           152.100
34-6-21           152.115
34-6-22           152.116
34-6-24           152.117
34-6-25           152.118
34-6-26           152.119
34-6-27           152.120
34-6-28           152.121
34-6-30           152.122
34-6-31           152.135
34-6-32           152.136
34-6-34           152.137
34-6-36           152.150
34-6-37           152.151
34-6-38           152.152
34-6-39           152.153
34-6-40           152.154
34-6-41           152.155
34-6-42           152.156
34-6-43           152.157
34-6-44           152.158
34-6-45           152.159
34-6-46           152.160
34-7-1            152.175
34-7-2            152.176
34-7-3            152.177
34-7-4            152.178
34-7-5            152.179
34-7-6            152.180
34-7-7            152.181
34-7-8            152.182
34-7-9            152.183
34-7-10           152.184
34-7-11           152.185
34-7-12           152.186
34-7-13           152.187
34-8-1            152.200
34-8-2            152.201
34-8-3            152.202
34-8-4            152.203
34-8-5            152.204
34-9-1            152.215
34-9-2            152.999
34-9-3            152.216
34-9-4            152.217
34-9-5            152.218
36-1-1            35.15
36-1-2            35.16
36-1-3            35.17
36-1-4            35.18
36-1-5            35.19
36-1-6            35.20
36-1-7            35.21
36-2-1            35.35
36-2-3            35.36
36-2-4            35.37
36-2-5            35.38
36-2-6            35.39,
                  35.40
36-2-7            35.99
36-2-8            35.41
36-3-1            35.55
36-3-2            35.56
36-3-3            35.57
36-3-4            35.58
36-3-5            35.59
36-3-6            35.60
36-3-7            35.61
36-3-8            35.62
36-3-9            35.63
36-3-10           35.64
36-3-11           35.65
36-3-12           35.66
36-3-13           35.67
36-3-14           35.68
36-3-15           35.69
36-3-16           35.70
36-3-17           35.71
36-3-18           35.72
38-1-1            51.001
38-1-2            51.002
38-1-3            51.003
38-1-4            51.003
38-2-1            51.015
38-2-2            51.016
38-2-3            51.017
38-2-4            51.018
38-2-5            51.019
38-2-6            51.020
38-2-7            51.021
38-3-1            51.035
38-3-2            51.036
38-3-3            51.037
38-3-4            51.038
38-3-5            51.039
38-3-6            51.040
38-3-7            51.041
38-3-8            51.042
38-3-9            51.043
38-3-10           51.044
38-3-11           51.045
38-3-12           51.046
38-3-13           51.047
38-3-14           51.048
38-3-15           51.049
38-3-16           51.050
38-3-17           51.051
38-3-18           51.052
38-3-19           51.053
38-3-20           51.054
38-3-21           51.065
38-3-22           51.066
38-3-23           51.067
38-3-24           51.068
38-3-25           51.069
38-3-26           51.070
38-3-31           51.085
38-3-32           51.086
38-3-33           51.087
38-3-34           51.088
38-3-35           51.089
38-3-36           51.090
38-3-37           51.091
38-3-38           51.092
38-3-39           51.093
38-3-40           51.094
38-3-41           51.095
38-3-42           51.096
38-3-43           51.097
38-3-53           51.110
38-3-54           51.111
38-3-55           51.112
38-3-57           51.114
38-4-1            51.125
38-4-2            51.126
38-4-3            51.127
38-4-4            51.128
38-5-56           51.113
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
125      9-15-1975   70.07
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.          Date Passed Code Section
-                 - -         Ch. 74, Sch. IV
98-08             9-8-1998    111.07
1-18-99           1-18-1999   35.41
99-10-18B         10-18-1999  31.16
02-03-19          3-19-2002   33.01 -
                              33.06
03-09-02          9-2-2003    35.01
                              51.041,
03-11-17          11-17-2003  51.130,
                              51.131
04-08-06          5-17-2004   31.30 -
                              31.33
05-22-02          2-22-2005   51.004
                              96.01 -
05-06-06          6-6-2005    96.13,
                              96.99
05-11-07          11-7-2005   70.21;
                              Ch. 74, Sch. V
05-11-1           11-21-2005  70.37,
                              70.99
05-11-2           11-21-2005  130.16,
                              130.99
05-11-5           11-21-2005  130.06,
                              130.99
05-12-19-02       12-19-2005  111.50
05-12-19-03       12-19-2005  130.17,
                              130.99
05-12-19-04       12-19-2005  71.04
06-22-06-01       12-19-2005  70.99
-                 4-17-2006   32.002
06-01             5-15-2006   111.07
06-02             7-17-2006   33.07
-                 3-19-2007   90.99
07-02             7-16-2007   51.129
2008-02           5-19-2008   34.15
2008-11           12- -2008   31.50
09-02-16-01       - -2009     150.01
09-01-05-01       1-5-2009    150.05,
                              150.06
                              73.01 -
09-04-06-02       4-6-2009    73.09,
                              73.99
09-05-18-03       5-18-2009   150.03
09-05-18-04       5-18-2009   150.02
09-06-15-16       6-15-2009   150.04
09-07-20-09       7-20-2009   73.02
09-09-08-10       9-8-2009    111.07
09-11-09-12       12-9-2009   T.S.O. I
10-01-04-01       1-4-2010    T.S.O. I
10-04-19-07       4-19-2010   154.01
10-06-07-02       6-7-2010    Adopting Ordinance
10-06-07-03       6-7-2010    31.90
10-08-02-5        8-2-2010    T.S.O. II
11-01-03-01       1-3-2011    32.032
11-02-22-02       2-22-2011   150.04
11-03-08-03       3-8-2011    Ch. 74 Sch.I
11-04-04-04       4-4-2011    111.47
11-05-16-06       6-6-2011    32.009
11-06-06-07       6-6-2011    Ch. 155
11-06-06-08       6-6-2011    31.90
11-08-01-09       8-1-2011    Adopting Ordinance
                              52.01 -
11-09-19-11       9-19-2011   52.05,
                              52.20 -
                              52.23
11-10-03-12       10-3-2011   32.053
11-11-07-14       11-7-2011   T.S.O. II
12-06-04-01       6-4-2012    110.39
12-06-18-3        6-18-2012   31.90
12-09-04-5        9-4-2012    Adopting Ordinance
12-11-19-7        11-19-2012  51.020
12-11-19-8        11-19-2012  32.041
12-11-19-9        11-19-2012  32.028
12-12-07-10       12-7-2012   111.25
13-01-07-1        1-7-2013    T.S.O. III
13-01-07-2        1-7-2013    T.S.O. III
13-03-18 Ord. - 4 3-18-2013   153.01
13-06-17-07       6-17-2013   31.90
13-07-01-08       7-1-2013    90.75 -
                              90.87
13-07-01-09       7-1-2013    111.07
14-06-02-2        6-2-2014    92.01
14-07-21-3        7-21-2014   92.17
14-08-04-04       8-4-2014    31.90
14-11-03-6        11-3-2014   93.145
14-11-03-7        11-3-2014   93.148
14-11-03-8        11-3-2014   95.03
                              73.01 -
14-12-01-9        12-1-2014   73.09,
                              73.99
15-03-02-01       3-2-2015    95.05
15-03-16-03       3-16-2015   90.77
15-05-18-05       5-18-2015   70.42,
                              70.99
15-06-01-06       6-1-2015    51.089
15-06-01-07       6-1-2015    31.90
15-07-20 Ord 08   7-20-2015   Adopting Ordinance
15-08-03 Ord09    8-3-2015    111.07
                              51.015,
15-08-17 Ord10    8-17-2015   51.020,
                              52.22
15-09-21 Ord11    9-21-2015   51.015
15-10-05 Ord12    10-19-2015  95.01 -
                              95.04
16-02-01 Ord01    2-1-2016    134.03
16-06-20 Ord03    6-20-2016   31.90
16-06-20 Ord04    6-20-2016   Adopting Ordinance
17-11-06 Ord03    11-6-2017   Adopting Ordinance
18-09-17 Ord05    9-17-2018   32.002,
                              32.041
18-11-19 Ord6     11-19-18    Adopting Ordinance
19-02-18 Ord01    2-18-19     51.129
19-06-17 Ord04    6-17-2019   51.021
19-07-15 Ord05    7-15-2019   130.06
19-09-16 Ord06    9-16-2019   112.01
19-10-21 Ord07    10-21-2019  Adopting Ordinance
20-01-20 Ord01    1-20-2020   112.02
20-01-20 Ord02    1-20-2020   135.01
2022-06-20 Ord02  6-20-2022   51.129
23-01-17 Ord01    1-17-2023   51.129
                              156.01 -
23-11-20 Ord03    11-20-2023  156.14,
                              156.30 -
                              156.34
24-07-15 Ord03    7-15-2024   111.07
24-10-21 Ord04    10-21-2024  150.01 -
                              150.06
24-10-21 Ord04    10-21-22024 150.01 -
                              150.06
24-11-18 Ord06    11-18-2024  32.041
25-04-21 Ord02    4-21-2025   156.50 -
                              156.53
25-06-16 Ord03    6-16-2025   130.16
25-10-20 Ord06    10-20-2025  130.19
25-10-20 Ord07    10-20-2025  130.18
                             
 
