VILLAGE CODE
of
BARRINGTON HILLS, ILLINOIS
1977
Code current through:
Ord. 25-08, passed 4-28-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Barrington Hills, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 25-08, passed April 28, 2025, and
resolution 98-5, passed February 23, 1998. Ordinances of the Village adopted
after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that
they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village office in
order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been
amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
Ordinance 25 - 10
 
 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING ZONING REGULATIONS ON SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS TO BE PROVIDED
IN TITLE 5 OF THE VILLAGE CODE
WHEREAS, the Village of Barrington Hills (hereinafter the “Village”) is an
Illinois home rule municipality pursuant to Article VII, Section 6, of the
Illinois Constitution and is empowered by the
Illinois Constitution to enact all constitutional ordinances, resolutions and motions and to exercise any
power and perform any function pertaining to the Village’s local government and affairs, subject to any
express limitation provided by the Illinois General Assembly in the manner
provided in Article VII, Section 6 of the Illinois Constitution; and
 
WHEREAS, in furtherance of this authorization, the Village has adopted a zoning
code, set forth in Title 5 Zoning Regulations of the Village’s Municipal Code
to, among other purposes, effectuate the Village’s planning program and to
regulate individual property use by establishing use districts, building site
requirements, setback, density, parking and height regulations, and by
specifying external impact standards for noise, smoke, odor, glare and
vibration; and
WHEREAS, currently, the Village’s zoning code does not provide for regulations
specifically applicable to solar energy systems and their installation and use
on property within the Village; and
 
WHEREAS, given the recent rise of interest in the potential use of solar energy
systems in the community, the Village’s Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) crafted
regulations specifically applicable to solar energy systems and their
installation and use on property within the Village, which regulations the ZBA
submitted for Public Hearing; and
 
WHEREAS, Notice of Public Hearing with respect to the proposed solar energy
systems was published in the Daily Herald Newspaper in the Village of
Barrington Hills, as required by the Village Code and statutes of the State of
Illinois; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to said Notice, the ZBA conducted a Public Hearing on the proposed solar
energy systems regulations at a meeting held on July 21, 2025, and upon conclusion of the Public Hearing,
the Zoning Board of Appeals voted 4-
1 on a motion to recommend adoption of the proposed solar energy
systems regulations, with minor modifications, attached hereto and incorporated herein as exhibit A; and
 
WHEREAS, the Zoning Board of Appeals has forwarded its findings and
recommendation in regard to the proposed solar energy systems regulations to
the Village Board, in the Findings and Recommendation, attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference as Exhibit B; and
 
WHEREAS, the President and Village Board of Trustees have considered the matter
and have determined that the solar energy systems regulations, as recommend for
approval by the ZBA attached hereto as Exhibit A, are in the public interest;
promote and protect the public health, safety, morals,
convenience and general welfare of the public; and that the recommended regulations be approved.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED 
by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village
of Barrington Hills, a home rule community located in Cook, Lake, Kane and McHenry Counties, Illinois,
duly assembled at a regular meeting, as follows:
 
SECTION ONE :
  That the forgoing recitals are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth herein.
 
Ordinance 25 -10
 
 
SECTION TWO :  That Title 5, Chapter 2, section 5-2-
1 of the Village Code shall be amended to add the definitions set forth in
Exhibit A and that Title 5, Chapter 3 of the Village Code shall be amended to
add section 5-3-14, as set forth in Exhibit A.
 
SECTION THREE:  That all other ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof,
in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, are, to the extent of such
conflict, expressly repealed.
SECTION FOUR : That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form as provided by
law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Barrington Hills, Illinois, this 29th day of September, 2025.
Ayes:   4 (Clarke, Hoffmann, Ekstrom, Riff)
Nays:   0
Absent:   2 (Vacancy, Strauss)
 
 
APPROVED:   ATTEST:
 
 
 
Village President   Village Clerk
 
EXHIBIT A
 
5-2-1 Definitions (Additions to existing code)
 
ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is to
harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of energy or
transferring heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical,
electrical, or chemical means.
BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM:
 A solar energy system that is an integral
part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or
substituting for an architectural or structural component of a building.
Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or
hot water solar energy systems that are contained within roofing materials,
windows, skylights, and awnings.
GROUND MOUNT: A solar energy system on a rack or pole that rests on or is
attached to the
ground not to exceed the permitted floor area ratio for accessory buildings as provided in section
5-5-10-3 of the Village Code.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: A solar energy system that converts solar energy directly
into electricity.
ROOF MOUNT: A solar energy system mounted on a rack fastened onto a roof.
 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A system that uses the power of the sun to capture,
distribute, and/or store energy for on-site consumption of utility power within
a principal or accessory structure.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PRIVATE: A collection of one 
(1) or more solar collectors designed for use by the occupant(s) of the zoning
lot on which said system is located; excess power
generation is limited to net metering or similar technology with regulations set by the local power
utility, community, county and state. Private solar energy system equipment
shall conform to applicable industry standards, and applicants for building
permits for private solar energy systems shall submit certificates from
equipment manufacturers that the equipment is manufactured in compliance with
industry standards.
 
SOLAR FARM: A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity,
whether by photovoltaic, concentrating solar thermal devices, or other
conversation technology, for the primary purpose of wholesale sales of
generated electricity.
5-3-14 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REGULATIONS
 
A.   Purposes: The purpose of this section is to preserve the health, safety,
and welfare of the Village by promoting the safe, effective, and efficient use
of solar energy systems. For such purposes, this section:
1.   Establishes zoning regulations relative to the installation and operation
of solar energy systems permitted to be installed within the Village.
2.   Accommodates sustainable energy production from a renewable energy source.
 
3.   Preserves the character and aesthetics of the Village’s zoning districts
to maintain property values and promote the public health, safety, and welfare
of Village residents and businesses.
B.   Permitted Accessory Use: Solar energy systems, private, non-ground mount,
as defined herein, are permitted accessory uses in all zoning districts where
structures of any sort are allowed, subject to the requirements set forth in
this section.
C.   General Requirements: The requirements set forth in this section shall
govern the Solar Energy Systems that may be installed within the Village. The
provisions of this section are intended to establish zoning regulations for
Solar Energy Systems that may be installed in the Village.
1.   Use:
 A Solar Energy System shall be an accessory to the principal permitted use of zoning
lot.
2.   Approval:
 Any approval granted for a Solar Energy System shall not, under the provisions
of this section, be construed to prevent ordinary or permitted building,
landscaping, or other accessory improvements on any adjacent properties.
 
D.   Permitting and Installation:
 
1.   A building permit is required to be obtained from the Village prior to
the commencement of any construction activity relative to the installation of
any Solar Energy System.
2.   The owner of a Solar Energy System shall ensure that it is installed and
maintained in good condition and in compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Village code and the laws, statutes, codes, and regulations enforced by
any State or Federal agency of competent jurisdiction.
3.   All wiring associated with a Solar Energy System shall be underground or
contained within a raceway that complements the building materials of the
principal structure.
4.   Interconnection: Energy produced by a Solar Energy System shall be
utilized on-site, subject to legal provisions that allow the sale of excess
energy back to the electric grid.
5.   Illumination of a Solar Energy System shall be prohibited, except to
accommodate co- installation of parking lot lighting luminaries, where
applicable.
6.   Signage: Other than safety signage, no commercial signage or attention-
getting device is permitted on any Solar Energy System.
7.   Special Accessory Use: Solar energy systems, private, ground-mounted, as
defined herein are special accessory uses in all zoning districts where
structures of any sort are allowed, subject to the requirements set forth in
this section and subject to the special use standards and approval procedures
set forth in section 5-10-7 of the Village Code, including but not limited to
the imposition of conditions of use. Such conditions on use may include a
further reduction in the floor area ratio for a ground-mounted solar energy
system less than the permitted floor area ratio for accessory buildings as
provided in section 5-5-10-3 of the Village Code.
8.   Solar Farms: Not allowed in any zoning district of the Village.
 
9.   Height:
 
a.   Roof-Mounted Solar Energy System:
 
(i)   When installed on a flat roof, a Roof-Mounted Solar Energy System shall
not exceed a maximum height of six feet 
(6’) as measured from the roof surface of the
building on which the system will be mounted to the highest point of the system as
installed.
(ii)   When installed on a pitched roof, a Roof-Mounted Solar Energy System
shall be mounted parallel to the pitch of the roof and not extend more than one
(1) foot off the roof surface.
10.   Setback:
 
a.   Roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not extend beyond the exterior
perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted.
b.   All Solar Energy Systems authorized in this section shall conform to all applicable
setback requirements in the Village Code.
11.   Maximum Sizing: A Solar Energy System shall be designed not to exceed 10
kilowatt hours (kw). At the discretion of the Building Official, said System
may exceed 10kw if it is shown that the electrical demand for the subject
property requires the additional capacity.
12.   Glare: Installation of a Solar Energy System shall be designed to
mitigate glare onto adjacent properties. At the discretion of the Building
Official, a solar system glare study may be required and the use of anti-
reflective coatings, re-orientation of panels, and other measures may be
required to ensure compliance.
E.   Energy System Removal:
 
All energy systems are required to be properly removed after they have reached the end
of their useful life, when damaged beyond repair, or similar conditions. Full
removal is required, including structures, equipment, foundation etc.
2.   A separate permit from the Building Department is required for removal.
 
F.   Violations:
Any violation of this section, or any provision thereof, shall be subject to the
General Penalty provisions of Title1, Chapter 4, Section 1-4-1 of the Village
Code.
 
EXHIBIT B
 
July 25, 2025
 
 
To:   President and Board of Trustees Village of Barrington Hills
 
RE:   ZBA Application for Text Amendment Solar Energy System Regulations
 
This is to advise you that a public hearing of the Zoning Board of Appeals
(“ZBA”) was held on July 21, 2025, where a quorum was present, for purpose of
the ZBA’s consideration of its own Application for proposed solar energy
systems regulations for inclusion in the Village’s Zoning Code.
Notice of the hearing was published in a timely manner in the Daily Herald as
well as posted in the Village Hall as part of the agenda for the July 21, 2025
meeting.
 
Information relative to the Application and the specific text amendments was
presented
by Doug Pollock, Temporary Director of Administration, with legal comment provided by
Village Attorney Sean Conway.
 
FACTS
Administrator Pollock testified to the notice provided for hearing. Attorney Sean Conway
provided the ZBA procedural history on the proposed solar energy systems
regulations and provided the ZBA and general public an overview of the proposed
regulations. Specifically, Attorney Conway explained that the current proposed
regulations sought to allow ground mounted solar energy systems only by special
use, as opposed to by right, in contrast to the prior proposed regulations,
which were not accepted by the Village Board.
 
After a call for testimony from members of the Public, none was had.
 
FINDINGS
After having examined the facts as presented, and taking into consideration the testimony
set forth during the public hearing, the ZBA discussed the proposed solar energy systems
regulations, and with minor modifications the ZBA determined that the proposed
solar
energy systems regulations were in the public interest and not solely in the interest of the
Applicant.
 
RECOMMENDATION
 
The ZBA voted 4-1 
(2 members absent) to recommend that the Village Board approve the proposed
solar energy regulations for inclusion in the Village Zoning Code, as shown in
Exhibit A of the Ordinance.
 
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Daniel Wolfgram
 
Chairman
Zoning Board of Appeals Village of Barrington Hills
 
 
 
 
Ordinance 25-11
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE VILLAGE’S TREE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS IN TITLE 4,
CHAPTER 6 OF THE VILLAGE CODE
WHEREAS, the Village of Barrington Hills (hereinafter the “Village”) is an
Illinois home rule municipality pursuant to Article VII, Section 6, of the
Illinois Constitution and is empowered by the Illinois Constitution to enact
all constitutional ordinances, resolutions and motions and to exercise any
power and perform any function pertaining to the Village’s local government and
affairs, subject to any express limitation provided by the Illinois General
Assembly in the manner provided in Article VII, Section 6 of the Illinois
Constitution; and
WHEREAS, in furtherance of this authorization, the Village has adopted tree
preservation regulations, provided in Title 4, Chapter 6 of the Village Code,
designed to promote the preservation of heritage trees in the Village that are
located in a woodland, which regulations were initially adopted in 2019; and
WHEREAS, the Village’s Plan Commission has studied the Village’s current
regulations in consultation with the Village’s Arborist and upon its study, the
Plan Commission has recommended certain updates to the Village’s tree
preservation regulations, as shown in Exhibit A, attached hereto and
incorporated herein; and
   WHEREAS, the President and Village Board of Trustees have considered the
Plan Commission’s recommended updates to the Village’s tree preservation
regulations, as shown in Exhibit A and finds that the recommended updates
attached hereto as Exhibit A, are in the public interest; promote and protect
the public health, safety, morals, convenience and general welfare of the
public; and that the recommended updates be approved.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Barrington Hills, a home rule community located in Cook, Lake, Kane
and McHenry Counties, Illinois, duly assembled at a regular meeting, as
follows:
   SECTION ONE :    That the forgoing recitals are hereby incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
SECTION TWO :   That Title 4, Chapter 6 of the Village Code shall be amended to
delete the language as stricken and add the language as underlined, as
reflected in Exhibit A, attached hereto.
SECTION THREE:   That all other ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof,
in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, are, to the extent of such
conflict, expressly repealed.
SECTION FOUR :   That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form as provided by
law.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Barrington Hills, Illinois, this 29th day of September, 2025.
Ayes:   4 (Clarke, Hoffmann, Ekstrom, Riff)
Nays:   0
Absent:   2 (Vacancy, Strauss)
APPROVED:               ATTEST:
                                                      
___________________         _____________________
   Village President             Village Clerk
   
CHAPTER 6 TREE PRESERVATION
SECTION:
4-6-1: Intent And Purpose
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Administration
4-6-4: General Requirements
4-6-5: Construction Standards
4-6-6: Replacement
4-6-7: Appeals
4-6-8: Tables
4-6-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The intent of this chapter is to ensure the presence, conservation and
perpetuation of heritage trees within the Village, and to educate residents
about their existence and the importance of protecting them. Heritage trees are
a unique natural resource found throughout the Village of Barrington Hills that
have a positive impact on animal habitat, air and soil quality, as well as
watershed and invasive species management. By preventing situations that may
substantially alter the natural environment, the Village aims to protect the
health, safety and welfare of residents, while also ensuring that they may
continue to enjoy all the benefits of living in the unique environment of
Barrington Hills. This may be accomplished by regulating how heritage trees may
be removed, replaced and maintained as a result of building construction and/or
landscape activity.
By adoption of this amendment to the text of this chapter 6, the village
intends to make the application of the amendments set forth applicable to all
open permits as of the date of adoption.
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of the regulations contained in this chapter, the definitions
contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the
context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future, and words used in the singular shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and not
discretionary; the word "may" is permissive; the masculine gender includes the
feminine and neuter. Whenever a word or term defined herein appears in the text
of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof and any word appearing in parenthesis directly thereafter shall be
construed in the same manner.
BUILDING OFFICER: The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer as defined in
section 1-6-9 of this Code.
CERTIFIED ARBORIST: A person, who based on training and experience, diagnoses
the condition of shade or ornamental trees, evergreens and shrubs and
recommends or supervises the treatment of any such trees, or in any manner
treats any such trees, by feeding or fertilizing, or by pruning, trimming,
bracing, treating cavities or other methods, has passed the ISA certified
arborist exam and maintains his or her certification in good standing with the
International Society of Arboriculture (ISA).
CERTIFIED FORESTER: A person who practices the art and science of forest
stewardship and natural resource management, and who has met the requirements
to be a certified forester and maintains his or her certification in good
standing with the Society of American Foresters.
CONDITION RATING: The condition of a heritage tree based on a 6-point scale set
forth in subsection 4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter with 1 being the best and
6 being the worst, for purposes of determining the health of a heritage tree
and whether the tree is subject to regulations contained in this chapter.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured in
inches at a point of four and one-half feet (41/2') above grade.
GOOD CONDITION: A tree having a condition rating of 1, 2, or 3 as set forth in
subsection 4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter. Only trees of those ratings in a
woodland will be considered heritage trees.
GROWING SEASON: The optimum planting time for the care and nurture of woody
plant stock during any one calendar year is when there is less than about five
percent (5%) chance for a frost until there is about ninety five percent (95%)
chance for frost.
HERITAGE TREES: Trees of a size, genus and species indigenous to this region,
as set forth in subsection 4-6-8(A), table A of this chapter, are determined to
be of significant historical and ecological value to the Village of Barrington
Hills to be protected trees. Any such trees listed as being in Fair (3), Good
(2), or Excellent (1) condition as set forth in subsection 4-6-8(B), table B of
this chapter shall be considered Heritage Trees.
INVASIVE SPECIES: An invasive species is a non-native species that establishes
itself in a new environment, where it can cause harm to the local ecosystem,
economy, or human health.
MINIMUM ROOT ZONE: The area beneath a tree having as its center point the
center of the trunk of the tree and a radius equal to one foot (1') for every
inch of dbh.
SITE: A lot, or contiguous lots, under the control of a common owner, for which
a tree removal permit was sought and obtained.
SITE PLAN: A general illustration of the proposed work, its location, the use
of the building or structure, and all portions of the site, including but not
limited to details of grading, and structural, mechanical, sanitary and
electrical work.
SURROUNDING AREA: Shall not include any area which is not on the same site as
that for which the tree removal permit was sought and obtained.
TREE: Any self-supporting, woody plant together with its root system, growing
upon the earth usually with one trunk, or a multi-stemmed trunk system,
supporting definitely formed crown.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN (TPP): A plan directly overlaid on the site plan
indicating the location, species, condition rating and dbh of all heritage
trees, and includes a maintenance plan for three (3) growing seasons for all
heritage trees, consistent with the sound forestry practices, as found in
subsections 4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT (TRP): The permit required by this chapter in order to
remove any heritage tree within a protected woodland.
VILLAGE: The Village of Barrington Hills, in the Counties of Cook, Kane, Lake
and McHenry, in the State of Illinois.
WOODLAND: Eight (8) or more heritage trees on a site within circular area
having a radius not to exceed 117.8 feet and shall include all such trees
within the woodland regardless of the number of such trees. A site may
encompass one or more woodlands.
WOODLAND MANAGEMENT PLAN: A plan prepared by a Certified Arborist or Certified
Forester detailing comprehensive management activities for the purpose,
specifically, of enhancing existing woodlands consistent with sound forestry
practices, pursuant to Section 4-6-6 of this chapter. Such plan can include the
rehabilitation of the existing woodlands, but must, at a minimum, include the
planting of a certain number of new trees some new stock consistent with the
village’s desire to provide for heritage trees within the village.
4-6-3: ADMINISTRATION:
(A)      Tree Removal Permit Required: A tree removal permit ("TRP") shall be
required for the destruction or removal of any heritage tree in any woodland.
No person shall, directly or indirectly remove, damage or destroy a woodland
without having secured a TRP.
(B)      Exemption:
1.      This chapter shall not apply to the removal of woodlands pursuant to a
forestry management plan or nursery stock plan that is approved and
administered by a governmental agency with jurisdiction over such matters.
2.      This chapter shall not apply to the removal of woodlands on property
owned by a common owner, either singularly, collectively or institutionally,
which exceeds one hundred (100) acres of contiguous land in the Village so long
as the property is subject to a tree preservation plan acceptable to the
Village. Such a plan, which shall have been prepared by or endorsed by a
certified arborist or certified forester, may be accepted by the Village's Plan
Commission and shall, at a minimum, include the forestry management practices
found in subsections 4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter to
preserve and protect heritage trees.
(C)      Application And Fee: A TRP application on the prescribed form shall be
submitted to the Village Building Officer with the permit fee established by
the Village.
(D)      Application Procedure:
1.    Construction Permit: The applicant shall submit a tree preservation plan
("TPP") to the Village Building Officer with their application for a TRP in
conjunction with construction when a building permit is required by the
provisions of this title.
a.      The TPP shall consist of reproducible site plans, drawn to scale, of a
tree survey of all heritage trees in a woodland overlaid directly upon the site
plan including the location, species, dbh, and condition as rated in accordance
with the standards in subsection 4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter. It shall be
submitted in a legible format digitally.
The survey shall distinguish among the heritage trees to be preserved,
transplanted, or destroyed. Groups of trees which are less than three feet (3')
apart may be designed by clumps, provided that all heritage trees and all other
trees with a dbh of twelve inches (12") or greater shall be individually
depicted on the TPP.
1.   Trees shall be tagged in the field with a numbered metal tag and the
corresponding tag number shall be shown on the tree preservation plans.
2.   Tree preservation plan shall show the critical root zones (CRZ) of all
Heritage Trees drawn 1’ radius for every 1” of tree trunk diameter (ex. For a
20” DBH tree, the CRZ should be shown 20’ in all directions). For Heritage
Trees to be considered preserved, critical root zone impact must be less than
20%.
3.   Critical root zones shall be shown in relation to all proposed impacts,
including, but not limited to proposed grading changes, existing and proposed
utilities, septic systems, water and sewer, stabilized construction entrances,
concrete washouts, soil stockpiles, material storage areas, demolition
activities, access routes, etc.
4.   The Tree Inventory shall incorporate an action plan in addition to
indicating trees to be removed or preserved, showing actions to be taken for
trees to be preserved which will be impacted by construction including, but not
limited to, root pruning, crown pruning, mulching, Cambistat treatment, root
zone protection, etc. Any necessary root pruning shall take place to the depth
of adjacent excavation, and no deeper.
5.   The tree preservation plan shall include appropriate tree protection
fencing for any trees to be preserved, and where appropriate, the silt fencing
should be sandwiched together with the tree protection fencing to protect the
roots from siltation and construction damage. Once installed, tree protection
fencing is to remain in place, and upright for the duration of all
construction-related activities.
6.   Where possible tree protection fencing should be contiguous to create an
“envelope” to minimize the possibility of root zone impact or intrusion into
preservation areas. No materials are to be stored in the tree preservation
area, no construction access should take place in the tree preservation area
unless prior approval is granted by the Village, no parking shall take place in
tree preservation areas.
7.   Any silt fencing that crosses root zones of trees to be preserved should
be shown on the plan as the “Type B” silt fencing installation method. The Type
B silt fencing detail should be added to the Tree Preservation Plan face. 
b.      The Building Officer in consultation with the Village Arborist may
permit the TPP to exclude areas of the site from the tree survey if it is
determined that the proposed construction or other activity will not impact
those areas.
c.      The TPP shall include a maintenance plan for all heritage trees,
consistent with the forestry practices found in subsections 4-6-8 of this
chapter, to ensure the protection of the trees for a period of at least three
(3) growing seasons from the issuance of an occupancy permit, if one is
required.
2.      Non-Construction Permit: When no building permit is required, the
applicant shall submit the following documents in a digital format with an
application for a TRP:
a.      Site plan that depicts the area of the tree removal, the heritage trees
to be removed, and all other heritage trees whose minimum root zone is within
the tree removal area. All heritage trees shall be identified by location,
species, dbh, and condition as rated in accordance with the standards in
subsection 4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter.
b.      Reasons for removing the heritage trees, including reports or studies,
if any, indicating that the trees should be removed.
3.      Application Review: Upon receipt of a completed application including
the TPP and the required fee, the Building Officer shall review the
application, which, if deemed necessary, may include a site inspection by the
Village Arborist.
(E)   Escrow:
1.    If tree replacement is required by this chapter, then as a condition of
the TRP, the applicant shall place into escrow with the Village an amount of
money in cash equal to the tree replacement value, as determined by the Village
Arborist. In the event the tree replacement value is greater than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) a bond in a form acceptable to the Village, may
be utilized in lieu of a cash escrow. The money shall be returned, or the bond
released: (a) once the new tree(s) are planted, pursuant to section 4-6-6(A) or
(b) upon approval of a Woodland Management Plan, pursuant to section 4-6-6(C).
Failure to plant the tree(s) in compliance with the TRP within one growing
season may result in forfeiture of the escrow or bond, which shall then be used
by the Village as a contribution pursuant to section 4-6-6(B). For purposes of
tree replacement, the Village Arborist shall maintain a current schedule of
cost including planting expenses for replacement of trees.
2.      If it is determined that practices which violate any portion of the
village code have resulted in tree damage, then the village may require an
escrow payment or tender of a bond (if the amount at issue exceeds one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00)) in a form acceptable to the Village be made to
the village, equal to the replacement value of the damaged tree(s) as
determined by the Village Arborist. The cash escrow or bond shall be held by
the village for the purpose of assuring that all remedial actions required by
the village to restore the health of the tree(s) are taken, and/or for the
purpose of assuring the appropriate tree replacement should any damaged trees
die or show noticeable signs of decline as determined by the Village Arborist.
4-6-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
(A)      The Building Officer shall grant a TRP only if:
1.      All reasonable efforts have been undertaken in the architectural layout
and design of the proposed construction or other activity to preserve
woodlands; or
2.      The removal of the heritage trees is consistent with sound forestry
practice found in subsection 4-6-8(C), table C of this chapter or will result
in the enhancement of the woodland; and
3.      The transplanting of the woodlands is not feasible.
(B)    As a condition to granting a TRP, the applicant shall be required to
replace the heritage trees that will be destroyed in accordance with section 4-
6-6 of this chapter with those tree species identified in subsection 4-6-8(A),
table A of this chapter. Replacement trees shall be acquired and planted in
conformance with subsections 4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this
chapter.
(C)      TRP shall expire and become null and void if work authorized by the
TRP is not commenced within one growing season from the date of issuance of the
TRP or if such work, when commenced, is suspended or abandoned at any time for
a period of ninety (90) days.
(D)      Except as set forth herein no certificate of compliance as required by
section 5-10-3 of this Code shall be issued for an associated building permit
until any required planting of heritage trees, as required by the TRP, has been
completed as certified by the Village Arborist. A certificate of compliance for
the TRP will be issued after three (3) growing seasons, and after the final
tree inspection approval has been given by the Building Officer in consultation
with the Village Arborist.
1.   Exception: Upon good cause shown as to why the required replacement of
heritage trees has not been completed, the Building Officer may issue a
temporary certificate of compliance for an associated building permit(s) for a
period of six (6) months at no cost until the plantings have been completed and
inspected by the Village Arborist.
2.   In addition to the loss of the cash escrow required by subsection 4-6-3(E)
of this chapter, the failure to complete the plantings within the six (6) month
extension period shall result in a violation of this chapter, and shall be
subject to the general penalty procedures provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code.
3.   In the event the completion of the required TRP is prevented by seasonal
weather conditions, or availability of plant stock, the Building Officer in
consultation with the Village Arborist may extend the date of completion by six
(6) months into the next growing season.
(E)      The TRP shall be in a written form and shall be prominently posted on
the site so as to provide notice to the owner, owner's agent, and to all
persons working or seeking to work on the site. The TRP shall state the
conditions under which forestry activities are occurring on the site and any
other information that may assist in the identification of the TRP.
4-6-5: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
(A)      During construction, the TPP shall be followed to prevent the
destruction or damaging of heritage trees including unless otherwise authorized
by the TPP, a fence erected and maintained so that no excess soil, additional
fill, equipment, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed within the
minimum root zone of any heritage tree, unless the addition of excess soil or
fill is required in order to comply with the Lake County Watershed Development
Ordinance found in section 4-2-10 of this title.
(B)      Until the issuance of the certificate of compliance, the area of the
site included within a TPP shall not have other plantings or landscape
additions that prevent the planting of the required replacement heritage trees
as determined by the Building Officer.
(C)      Heritage trees in a TPP that are removed or receive major damage as
determined by the Building Officer in consultation with the Village Arborist
shall be required to be replaced by heritage trees of equal dbh in the
aggregate, in accordance with section 4-6-6 of this chapter, with those tree
species identified in subsection 4-6-8(A), Table A of this chapter. Replacement
trees shall be acquired and planted in conformance with subsections 4-6-8(C),
table C and (D), table D of this chapter.
4-6-6: REPLACEMENT:
(A)      Replacement In Kind:
1.   In the event that a person shall remove or damage a heritage tree(s) in a
woodland without having secured a TRP, this shall constitute a violation of
this chapter and each day may constitute a separate offense. In addition to the
general penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code, an after-the-fact TRP
shall be obtained.
2.   The replacement tree or trees required by this section shall be a species
listed in subsection 4-6-8(A), table A of this chapter and the replacement
trees shall equal the same number of the damaged or removed heritage trees.
Replacement trees shall be a minimum size of three inches (3”) caliper and
acquired and planted in conformance with subsections 4-6-8(C), table C and (D),
table D of this chapter.
3.   All plantings and installations shall conform to the current ANSI Z60.1
American Standard for Nursery Stock and ANSI A300 Standards and best management
practices. All tree work is to be performed in accordance with current ANSI
A300 and Z133 standards and current best management practices.
4.   Replacement trees shall not be planted within the critical root zones of
existing Heritage Trees.
5.   Any trees that arrive to the site with wire baskets shall have the baskets
cut down at the time of planting so the baskets do not cover more than the
bottom third (1/3) of the root ball to encourage the roots to freely grow into
the surrounding soil. Replacement trees shall come from nursery stock grown in
Northern Illinois or Southeast Wisconsin.
6.   Replacement trees required by this section shall be maintained alive and
healthy on the site for three (3) growing seasons. Methods should be used as
found in subsection 4-6-8(D), table D of this chapter to provide for protection
of the replacement trees from deer. Any replacement tree(s) which die or become
severely damaged before the end of the third growing season of planting upon
written notice from the Building Officer shall be replaced by the applicant in
conformance with subsections 4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter
at the next growing season.
(B)      Contribution In-Lieu Of Replacement: In order to fulfill some or all
of the replacement heritage trees required by the TRP, after providing a plan
for the preservation and enhancement of a woodland on the site, a fee in lieu
of the equal value of the remaining replacement tree(s) may be paid to a
governmental or non-profit natural resources management entity for a program
involving the restoration, establishment, enhancement, or preservation of
heritage trees in the Village.
(C)      Woodland Management Plan: In order to fulfill the replacement of some
or all heritage trees required by the TRP on sites with existing woodlands, or
where the replacement of any or all of the required trees would not be possible
due to spatial constraints, unadvisable due to good forestry practices, or
property aesthetics, the applicant may receive replacement credit for any or
all of the heritage trees (said amount to be determined by the village
arborist) by agreeing to adopt and implement a woodland management plan with
the purpose of enhancing existing woodlands and the ecology of the Village
which may exist in any location on the property by engaging in activities such
as (but not limited to) invasive species removal, thinning, burning,
conservation mowing, reforestation, afforestation, or planting and managing for
various types of desired habitats. The woodland management plan is intended
solely to be enhancement to the required TRP and is not intended to provide any
other incentive.
1.   Woodland Management Plan must be prepared by a qualified Certified
Arborist or Certified Forester and submitted to the village arborist for review
and comment. Upon completion of review and comment by the village arborist, the
Woodland Management Plan will be submitted to the village plan commission for
approval, which will not be unreasonably withheld. For purposes of public input
on the proposed Woodland Management Plan, the applicant is required to send a
copy of the plan, and a notice to property owners within 250-feet of the
affected property no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date the plan
commission is expected to discuss the Woodland Management Plan at a public
meeting. The applicant shall provide the plan commission a copy of the
properties to which such written notice was given, showing the date and method
of service of such notice.
2.   Woodland Management Plan must be submitted in written form with
corresponding work zones depicted on a copy of the Plat of Survey. The plan
must include an estimated cost of the implementation over the 3-year period for
purposes of provision of a surety bond to the village, in the amount of 110% of
the cost of performance. The bond will be maintained for the 3-year period. The
surety bond is used as a guarantee, which shall be issued by a surety company
having an AM Best rating of at least A- and approved by the village.
3.   Approved Woodland Management Plans are subject to periodic inspection and
annual reporting requirements to ensure the management plan is being
implemented and the stated goals, objectives and methods set forth in the plan
are being met.
4.   In the event a Woodland Management Plan is approved, the Woodland
Management Plan shall be recorded against the property to which it is
applicable to ensure compliance, as a covenant running with the land for the
length of the period set forth in the Woodland Management Plan.
5.    Credit for tree replacement may be given for an approved Woodland
Management Plan based on the following:
a.   Credit towards tree replacement may be given for a Woodland Management
plan at a rate of one replacement tree per 5,000 square feet of woodlands
impacted by the management plan.
b.   Credit towards tree replacement may be given for the removal of buckthorn
at the rate of one replacement tree per 5,000 square feet of buckthorn removed.
To receive credit for buckthorn removal, the following criteria must be met:
i.   Buckthorn removed must be a minimum of 36” in height
ii.   Means of removal must be specified (i.e. hand pulling, cutting, any stump
grinding must not damage critical root zones of existing trees), and all
removed plants must be properly disposed of.
iii.   Stumps must be treated at the time of cutting with a Garlon formulation
appropriate to existing site conditions, including a tracer dye, by an
applicator with a current and valid Illinois Applicator License
iv.   Must include (1) follow-up treatment of re-sprouts
v.   All buckthorn within the designated removal area must be removed and
treated to receive replacement credit
4-6-7: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by a plan review, action taken, or order issued, by the
Building Officer and/or Village Arborist may appeal to the Village Plan
Commission. Such appeal shall be taken within forty-five (45) days of the
action complained about, by filing with the Village Clerk, a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof and an appeal fee as stated in the Fee and
Penalties Schedule on file with the Village. An appeal shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from until a final
administrative decision has been rendered. The Plan Commission shall select a
reasonable time and place for the appeal and give due notice thereof to the
parties.
On hearing, the Plan Commission shall consider the written submissions or other
documentation upon which the Building Officer and/or Village Arborist rendered
a decision or took action upon and any oral arguments submitted by the Parties.
The Plan Commission may, but is not required to, hear further testimonial
evidence provided under oath.
The Plan Commission shall render a written decision on the appeal without
unreasonable delay. The Plan Commission may affirm or may, upon the concurring
vote of five (5) members, reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination, as in its opinion ought to be done, and
to that end shall have all of the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
was taken.
Any person aggrieved by a final administrative decision of the Plan Commission
may file an action for administrative review under Administrative Review Law
(735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) as expressly adopted herein. Payment of a filing fee
as stated in the Fees and Penalties Schedule ($700.00) for purposes of
the appeal shall be made to the Village at the time of the filing of
the appeal. In the event the appeal is successful all but $100 of the filing
fee will be returned.
4-6-8: TABLES:
(A)   Table A: Heritage Trees
   
Species                                   Diameter At
Common Name           Scientific Name     Breast Height (dbh)

Basswood/linden       Tilia americana     10 inches or greater
Black walnut          Juglans nigra       8 inches or greater
Hackberry             Celtis occidentalis 8 inches or greater
Hickory (all species) Carya spp.          8 inches or greater
Ironwood              Ostrya virginiana   6 inches or greater
Oak (all species)     Quercus spp.        10 inches or greater
Sugar maple           Acer saccharum      10 inches or greater
Wild black cherry     Prunus serotina     8 inches or greater
   NOTE: Sawtooth Oak (Quercus acutissima) is a non-native species of oak that
can hybridize with and out-compete native oak species and is not eligible for
replacement tree planting credit.
 
(B)   Table A-1: Replacement Trees
Replacement trees shall be a minimum 3-inch caliper and shall be selected from
the above list of tree species. Replacement trees may also include the
following eligible replacement species at the discretion of the Village
Arborist and based upon specific site conditions:
 
Additional upland species to consider: Additional low land species to consider:
Blue Beech                             American Sycamore
Butternut                              Red Maple
Catalpa                                River Birch
Ohio Buckeye
Pawpaw
(C)   Table B: Condition Rating
 
Rating Description    General Criteria
                      The tree is typical of the species, has less than 10
1      Excellent      percent deadwood in the crown that is attributable to
                      normal causes, has no other observed problems, and
                      requires no remedial action.
                      The tree is typical of the species and/or has less than
2      Good           20 percent deadwood in the crown, only 1 or 2 minor
                      problems that are easily corrected with normal care.
                      The tree is typical of the species and/or has less than
                      30 percent deadwood in the crown, 1 or 2 minor problems
                      that are not imminently lethal to the tree and no
3      Fair (Average) significant decay or structural problems, but the tree
                      must have remedial care above normal care in order to
                      minimize the impact of future stress and to ensure
                      continued health.
                      The tree is not typical of the species and/or has
                      significant problems such as 30 to 50 percent deadwood in
                      the crown, serious decay or structural defect, insects,
4      Fair to poor   disease or other problems that can be imminently lethal
                      to the tree or create a hazardous tree if not corrected
                      in a short period of time or if the tree is subjected to
                      additional stress.
                      The tree is not typical of the species and/or has over 50
                      percent deadwood in the crown, major decay or structural
5      Poor           problems, is hazardous or is severely involved with
                      insects, disease, or other problems that even if
                      aggressively corrected would not result in the long-term
                      survival of the tree.
6      Dead           Less than 10 percent of the tree shows signs of life.
(D)    Table C: Standards; This table lists the standards and organizations
that are referenced in various sections of this chapter. The standards are
listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard title
and the effective date. The section or sections of this chapter that references
the standard shall be specified as found in table C of this subsection.
ANSI ASC A300 (tree care)
ANSI Z133 (safety, arboricultural operations)
ANSI Z60.1 (nursery stock)
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) www.ansi.org
American Standard for Nursery Stock www.americanhort.org
IDNR, Division of Forest Research, "Urban and Community Forestry Program Tree
Planting Standards" 1999 Springfield, Illinois
Illinois Landscape Contractors Association www.ilca.net
International Society of Arboriculture www.isa-arbor.com
NRCS, "Illinois Urban Manual Tree and Shrub Planting" August, 1994
NRCS, "Tree Protection" April, 2000
Society of American Foresters www.safnet.org
University of Illinois Extension, Plant Clinic web.extension.illinois.edu/
plantclinic
4-6-9: PRUNING
(A)   Notwithstanding tree emergencies that present an immediate hazard, the
pruning of oaks and elms shall not take place from April 1 through November 1.
(B)    All tree work is to be performed in accordance with current ANSI A300
and Z133 standards and current best management practices.
(C)    Utility companies must provide written notice to the Village of their
intent to prune and proposed pruning locations 21 days prior to commencement of
work.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ord 25-14
ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY AND FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS
PUBLISHED BY THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY AND AMENDING THE VILLAGE’S
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS IN TITLE 4, CHAPTER 5 OF THE VILLAGE CODE
WHEREAS, the Village of Barrington Hills (hereinafter the “Village”) is an
Illinois home rule municipality pursuant to Article VII, Section 6, of the
Illinois Constitution and is empowered by the
Illinois Constitution to enact all constitutional ordinances, resolutions and motions and to exercise any
power and perform any function pertaining to the Village’s local government and affairs, subject to any
express limitation provided by the Illinois General Assembly in the manner
provided in Article VII, Section 6 of the Illinois Constitution; and
WHEREAS, The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has completed the final
flood hazard determination for Cook County, Illinois and Incorporated Areas and
finalized the Village’s Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report and Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM), which will be published as soon as possible and become
effective on January 23, 2026; and
WHEREAS, the Village currently participates in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) and desires to continue participation in the program; and
WHEREAS,  the President and Village Board of Trustees have previously amended
the Village’s Flood Damage Prevention Regulations, provided in Title 4, Chapter
5 of the Village Code (Ord. 18-09 on 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019) that meets or
exceeds the minimum requirements specified in 44 CFR Part 60.3(d) of the NFIP
regulations; and
WHEREAS, the Village has submitted a draft copy of the amended Title 4, Chapter
5 - Flood Damage Prevention regulations, attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein, to the Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR);
upon review in early November 2025, IDNR confirmed the updated regulations to
be NFIP compliant; and
WHEREAS,  the President and Village Board of Trustees have considered the
recommended updates, as shown on Exhibit A, and find it to be in the best
interest of the Village to approve the amendments to Title 4, Chapter 5 - Flood
Damage Prevention regulations; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board 
of Trustees of the Village
of Barrington Hills, a home rule community located in Cook, Lake, Kane and McHenry Counties, Illinois,
duly assembled at a regular meeting, as follows:
SECTION ONE :
 That the forgoing recitals are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth herein.
SECTION TWO : That Title 4, Chapter 5 of the Village Code shall be amended to
delete any
language as stricken and add the language as underlined, as reflected in Exhibit A, attached hereto.
SECTION THREE:  That all other ordinances and resolutions, or parts
thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, are, to the extent
of such conflict, expressly repealed.
SECTION FOUR :
 That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED 
by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Barrington Hills,
Illinois, this 17th day of November, 2025.
Ayes:   5 (McClary, Clarke, Hoffmann, Ekstrom, Riff)
Nays:   0
Absent:   1 (Strauss)
APPROVED:
 
 
 
____________________
Village President
 
 
____________________
Village President
ATTEST:
 
 
 
____________________
Village Clerk
 
 
 
____________________
Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A:
CHAPTER 5
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: How To Use This Chapter
4-5-4: Duties Of The Village Engineer
4-5-5: Base Flood Elevation
4-5-6: Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas
4-5-7: Occupation And Use Of Designated Floodways
4-5-8: Occupation And Use Of SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not Identified
4-5-9: Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
4-5-10: Other Development Requirements
4-5-11: Variances
4-5-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-5-13: Penalty
4-5-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-5-15: Severability
4-5-16: Effective Date
 
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Village's home rule authority and the
police powers granted to it by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-
12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is to
maintain this Village's eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to
minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss
of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is adopted in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   (A)   To meet the requirements of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act 1 ;
   (B)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   (C)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (D)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   (E)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
   (F)   To make Federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the Village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program;
   (G)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59 - 79, as amended;
   (H)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources; and
   (I)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
Notes
 
1 1. 615 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
 
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A nonhabitable structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: The Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act 1 .
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in subsection 4-5-7(B) of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in section 4-5-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA
will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood
insurance rate map, once the as built plans are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on
the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year
frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to
the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%)
increase in velocities.
   (A)   The floodways are designated for on the Countywide flood insurance
rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in effect from
time to time as listed in appendix A on file in the Village, as maintained by
the Village Clerk. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more
restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
   (B)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook, Kane, Lake, and
McHenry Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Village that may be annexed into the Village are designated for the Fox River,
Flint Creek, and Spring Creek on the Countywide flood insurance rate map
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in effect from time to
time as listed in appendix A on file in the Village, as maintained by the
Village Clerk.
   (C)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated
floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located
on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation
is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   (A)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or
any addition to a building.
   (B)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, it
must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   (C)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects.
   (D)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
   (E)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
   (F)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts;
channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials;
deposit of solid or liquid waste.
   (G)   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
   (H)   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter
including State, Federal or local units of government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59 -
79, as amended.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year
frequency floods plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
   (A)   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village
that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.
The SFHAs of the Village are generally identified as such on the panel number
(s) indicated in appendix A on file in the Village for the Countywide flood
insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in
effect from time to time as listed in appendix A on file in the Village, as
maintained by the Village Clerk.
   (B)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook, Kane, Lake, and
McHenry Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Village or that may be annexed into the Village are generally identified as
such on the panel number(s) indicated in appendix A on file in the Village for
the Countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, in effect from time to time as listed in appendix A on file
in the Village, as maintained by the Village Clerk.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY: See definition of designated floodway.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the Historic District or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered Historic District;
   (C)   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; or
   (D)   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific
structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective
FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement)
of a building. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety
and welfare. Examples of mitigation include: excavation of compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's
susceptibility to flooding.
NAVD 88: North American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and
proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude
the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a
flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   (D)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Offered for preapproved projects which are considered minor
projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR part 3708 rules for Northeastern
Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and conditions
for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois,
under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act 2 .
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act 3 .
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damaged
occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term
does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of
sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See definition of floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Offered for preapproved projects that are considered minor
projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR part 3700 rules. A complete
listing of the Statewide permits and permit requirements can be obtained from
the IDNR/OWR website.
STRUCTURE: See definition of building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive
loss buildings. See definition of repetitive loss.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the building which
the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started.
   (A)   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
   (B)   The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or
local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
Notes
 
1 1. 615 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
2 1. 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
3 2. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
 
4-5-3: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
   (A)   The Village Engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the
duties listed in section 4-5-4 of this chapter.
   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the Village Engineer should first use the
criteria listed in section 4-5-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to
determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain.
   (C)   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, the Village Engineer must determine whether the development site is
within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain
for which no floodway has been identified.
      1.   If the site is within a flood fringe, the Village Engineer shall
require that the minimum requirements of section 4-5-6 of this chapter be met.
      2.   If the site is within a floodway, the Village Engineer shall require
that the minimum requirements of section 4-5-7 of this chapter be met.
      3.   If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the Village Engineer shall
require that the minimum requirements of section 4-5-8 of this chapter be met.
   (D)   In addition, the general requirements of section 4-5-9 of this chapter
shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section 4-5-6, 4-
5-7, or 4-5-8 of this chapter.
   (E)   The Village Engineer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall
meet the requirements of section 4-5-10 of this chapter.
   (F)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Village Engineer
shall review the requirements of section 4-5-11 of this chapter to make sure
they are met. In addition, the Village Engineer shall complete all notification
requirements.
   (G)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the Village Engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in
section 4-5-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-4: DUTIES OF THE VILLAGE ENGINEER:
   (A)   Determining The Floodplain Designation:
      1.   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
      2.   If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been
conducted and which drains more than one square mile.
      3.   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA
(with a drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the development
would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which
would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain
and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections of this chapter.
   (B)   Professional Engineer Review:
      1.   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer
under the employ or contract of the Village for review to ensure that the
development meets section 4-5-7 or 4-5-8 of this chapter.
      2.   In the case of an appropriate use, the professional engineer shall
state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 4-5-
7 of this chapter.
   (C)   Dam Safety Requirements:
      1.   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage
potential in the event of failure.
      2.   The construction or major modification of all Class I (high hazard)
and Class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
      3.   Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and
the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off channel detention basins that
have an embankment are nonjurisdictional Class III dams. It is not required
that IDNR/OWR "sign off" on all nonjurisdictional Class III dams.
      4.   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a
hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is
required.
      5.   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
      6.   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures.
   (D)   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure any and all required Federal, State
and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
   (E)   Plan Review And Permit Issuance:
Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of
the Village meet the requirements of this chapter; and
2.   Review all plans and permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building
site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall:
a.   be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
b.   be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
c.   be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
d.   be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are located so as to
prevent water from entering.
Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and other regulations of this community when the development meets the
conditions of this chapter.
   (F)   Inspection Review:
      1.   Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      2.   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and
document the results of the inspection.
   (G)   Administering and Documenting Determinations: Establish procedures for
administering and documenting determinations, as outlined below, of substantial
improvement and substantial damage:
1.   Determine the market value or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal
of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the
building before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case of
repair, the market value of the building shall be the market value before the
damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
2.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged
building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements
and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building. Substantial
damage determinations take into account all damage sustained to the structure
regardless if the structure is repair or not.
3.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial
improvement or substantial damage.
4.   Notify property owner of all determinations and responsibilities for
permitting and mitigation of the structure.
5.   Make damage determinations of all damaged buildings in the SFHA after a
flood to determine substantially damaged structures which must comply with
subsection 4-5-9(C) of this chapter.
   (H)   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain permit files
including:
      1.   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject
to section 4-5-9 of this chapter; and/or
      2.   The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to
section 4-5-9 of this chapter.
   (I)   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies
of Federal or State permit documents, variance documentation, conditional
letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as
built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
   (J)   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections 4-5-7 and 4-5-
8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the
Village. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the
Village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      1.   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      2.   Dams and all other State, Federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the Village and County, except for those
projects meeting the requirements of subsection 4-5-7(B)1 of this chapter;
      3.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection 4-5-7(B)3e of this chapter;
      4.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 4-5-7
(B)3d of this chapter;
      5.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in subsection 4-5-7(B)3 of this chapter;
      6.   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
      7.   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
   (K)   Cooperation With Other Agencies:
      1.   Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter;
      2.   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain
may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain
map;
      3.   Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program;
and
      4.   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   (L)   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord. 18-
09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for
the Village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from Federal, State or other
sources. When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall submit
a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any
development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
the Fox River, Flint Creek, and Spring Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in each countywide Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and
including the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) of Cook, Kane, Lake, and McHenry
Counties prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), in effect
from time to time as listed in Appendix A on file in the Village, as maintained
by the Village Clerk, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook, Kane, Lake, and McHenry Counties that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed
into the Village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in each
countywide Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) of Cook, Kane, Lake, and McHency Counties prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), in effect from time to time as listed in
Appendix A on file in the Village, as maintained by the Village Clerk, and such
amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time.
   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the Countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook, Kane, Lake, and
McHenry Counties.
   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the Countywide flood insurance
rate map of Cook, Lake, Kane, and McHenry Counties shall be according to the
best existing data available from Federal, State or other sources. Should no
other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to
determine base flood elevations.
      1.   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be
determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model
such as HIP.
      2.   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from
a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological
Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
      3.   For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the
historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed
engineering study.
For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1 square mile)
which has been identified by the Village Engineer pursuant to subsection 4-5-4
(A)3 of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the
applicant utilizing a method as approved in this subsection (D). (Ord. 18-09,
8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
5.   Establishing a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation
(BFE) is required in a Zone A for all new subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser.
 
4-5-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe
shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section 4-5-9 of this chapter.
   (A)   Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the Village.
      2.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Village.
         a.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.
         b.   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section 4-5-
9 of this chapter.
      3.   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Village shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation.
         a.   Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher
than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which
has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
         b.   The Village shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
      4.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall
be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
      5.   The applicant shall submit copies of all other Federal, State, and
local permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of
activity to the Village. The Village shall not issue a permit unless all other
Federal, State, and local permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
      1.   Fill: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient
data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of
removing the site from the floodplain.
      2.   Compensatory Storage:
         a.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         b.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
         c.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         d.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
         e.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.
   (C)   Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE):
A person who has obtained an LOMR based on fill that removes a site in the
flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site
above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the Village to construct the lowest
floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The Village
Engineer shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant has complied with
all the criteria set forth in the following subsections:
      1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided per subsection (B) of this
section.
      2.   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, accessways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
      3.   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the
FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet (10') beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the Village may waive the ten foot (10') minimum setback if an Illinois
registered professional engineer certifies that an alternative method to
protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met. The
certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design
analysis, which shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for review. The
Village may require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that
the proposed shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe.
In no case shall the setback distance be less than four feet (4').
      4.   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above the BFE.
However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained,
the Village may waive the twenty foot (20') minimum setback distance if an
Illinois registered professional engineer certifies that an alternative method
to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures have been
met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter
setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding, shall
be submitted to the Village for review. In no case shall the setback distance
be less than four feet (4').
      5.   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet (5') thick under
the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of an LOMR-
F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification
and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according
to ASTM standard D-2487, classification of soils for engineering purposes.
      6.   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the
soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the
same direction.
      7.   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by an Illinois registered professional engineer, as warranted by the
site conditions.
      8.   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five (5) below the BFE.
      9.   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and
minimum of one-fourth (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4)
times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away
from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the
floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      10.   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      11.   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
      12.   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, the Village may allow the
construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates
that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set
forth in FEMA technical bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding.
In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is reasonably safe from
flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the
proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall be
completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA technical bulletin 10-
01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an Illinois registered
professional engineer.
      13.   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously existing natural
grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation,
if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to
drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-
2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification
or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway
for the Fox River, Flint Creek, and Spring Creek shall be as delineated on the
Countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook, Lake, Kane, and McHenry Counties.
Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in
this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to
accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the
requirements of section 4-5-9 of this chapter.
   (A)   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by State law shall commence any development in a floodway without
first obtaining a development permit from the Village and IDNR/OWR.
      1.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Village. The application shall include the following
information:
         a.   Name and address of applicant;
         b.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         c.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
         d.   Description of proposed activity;
         e.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
         f.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         g.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
         h.   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
         i.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
         j.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
         k.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign
the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust
by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
         l.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
            (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow,
and a graphic or numerical scale;
            (3)   Cross section views of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            (4)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance;
            (5)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
         m.   Any and all other Federal, State, and local permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development.
         n.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of this section.
         o.   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
         p.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 4-5-9 of this
chapter.
         q.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
            (1)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed
work;
            (2)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative
locations or methods (see 802.3.9) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed
work;
            (3)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in subsection (B)3i of this section would have
on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
            (4)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected.
      2.   The Village Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other Federal, State, and local permits and approvals
that may be required for this type of activity.
         a.   The Village shall not issue the development permit unless all
required Federal and State permits have been obtained.
         b.   The Village Engineer shall review and approve applications
reviewed under this section.
   (B)   Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses:
      1.   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and
which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or
impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or
channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Illinois
Administrative Code part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses
are as follows:
         a.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
         b.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities,
and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
         c.   Storm and sanitary sewer relief curtails;
         d.   Underground and overhead utilities;
         e.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage;
         f.   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory
structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
         g.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
         h.   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
            (1)   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event
will not exceed 1.0 foot; or
            (2)   The applicant of a short term recreational use facility
parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events
and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all
overbank flooding events;
         i.   Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
         j.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure;
         k.   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building,
provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage
occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection
elevation;
         l.   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before
the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will
be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
      2.   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use.
      3.   Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate
use will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the
following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with
supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer
and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of section 4-
5-9 of this chapter:
         a.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood
Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
            (1)   Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where
"n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross
section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te
Chow, "Open Channel Hydraulics" (McGraw-Hill, New York 1959).)
            (2)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing
and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a Federal,
State, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover.
            (3)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer
can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
               A.    When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
               B.    When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length.
               C.    When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet
(10') of stream length shall be used.
               D.    Transition sections shall be provided between cross
sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
               E.    All cross sections used in the calculations shall be
located perpendicular to flood flows.
         b.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream
Flooding:
            (1)   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
            (2)   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to
at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
            (3)   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head
loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
            (4)   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
            (5)   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the
location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall
demonstrate through a determination of flood discharges and water surface
elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
            (6)   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a
result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to
reduce flooding at existing structure.
         c.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream
Erosion Or Flood Heights:
            (1)   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
            (2)   In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures
built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood
flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
         d.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches:
            (1)   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or
within recorded flood easements.
            (2)   If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood
stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a dam or waiver.
               A.    The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section 4-5-5 of this
chapter. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted FEMA
approved hydraulic models.
               B.    Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per
subsection (B)3b of this section.
               C.    Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection (B)3c
of this section.
               D.    If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is
used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be
received.
               E.    The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the
bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this
subsection (B).
               F.    All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall
be designed per subsection (B)3h of this section.
         e.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And
Approach Roads:
            (1)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
            (2)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
            (3)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing
is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Illinois Administrative Code part 3708 (floodway
construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and
concurrence before a permit is issued.
         f.   On Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water:
            (1)   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot
when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel
banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as
within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within
recorded flood easements.
            (2)   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must
be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
            (3)   All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section
300.16 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois Administrative
Code part 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the proposed activity
involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
               A.    The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest
by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater
detention;
               B.    The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;
               C.    The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation
basin;
               D.    A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
               E.    The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
this section.
         g.   Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures:
            (1)   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of
the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building.
            (2)   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be
required for floodproofing activities.
         h.   Excavation In The Floodway:
            (1)   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and
culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing
bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other
appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.
            (2)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used
unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the
same efficiency:
               A.    When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
and
               B.    When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length; and
               C.    When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet
(10') of stream length shall be used; and
               D.    Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
         i.   Activity Involving A Channel Modification: If the proposed
activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
            (1)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from
the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment
of a stream side buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable
if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and
fish and wildlife habitat;
            (2)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
            (3)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
               A.    The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
               B.    Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at
both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they
will prevent erosion.
               C.    One sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
               D.    Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to
that which is essential for construction of the channel.
               E.    Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete,
gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
               F.    All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall
be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
               G.    If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and
flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate.
               H.    A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end
of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
               I.    New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and
all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
               J.    There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
               K.    Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
            (4)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
         j.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
         k.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in
the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
            (1)   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days
prior to the initiation of improvements.
            (2)   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be
applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization
shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any
portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may
not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60)
days.
            (3)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
            (4)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25')
in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along
existing channels (see 802.3.16). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be
minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to
minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be
restabilized immediately.
            (5)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the
"Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
         l.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
         m.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
            (1)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in section 4-5-5 of this chapter, must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or
conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and
concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
            (2)   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet:
               A.    The requirements of this section for the 100-year
frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
               B.    Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
               C.    If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments,
or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled
to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
         n.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision:
The Floodplain Administrator shall require a CLOMR prior to issuance of a
development permit for:
A.   Proposed floodway encroachments that will cause an increase in the
designated floodway location or the base flood elevation (BFE).
B.   Proposed developments which will increase the designated floodway location
or the base flood elevation (BFE) by more than 0.1 feet in riverine area where
FEMA has provided a BFE but no floodway.
Once a CLOMR has been issued by FEMA, the development permit may be issued for
site grading and structures necessary in the area of the map change to achieve
the final LOMR.  Upon completion, the applicant shall submit as-built
certifications, as required by FEMA, to achieve a final LOMR prior to the
release of final development permits. 
(2)   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the designated
floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant
shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents
necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision and
receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued.
            (3)   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging,
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
            (4)   In the case of nongovernment projects, the Municipality in
incorporated areas and the County in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given.
            (5)   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
            (6)   After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
         o.   Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
         p.   Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of Channel: For all
activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25')
of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
            (1)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within
at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
            (2)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during
the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
         q.   After Conditional Approval And Issuance Of Permit: After receipt
of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance of a
permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to
change the floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or
other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area
until the designated floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision
is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and
concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as built" plans.
   (C)   Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State
Review: For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated State permitting authority in the floodway.
      1.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge
pursuant to subsection (B)3d of this section.
      2.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection (B)3e of this section.
      3.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage
pursuant to subsection (B)3 of this section.
      4.   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams and all other
Federal, State, or local units of government projects, including projects of
the Municipality or County.
      5.   An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
      6.   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.
      7.   Projects in public bodies of water.
   (D)   Other Permit:
      1.   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development
permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
5 et seq.
      2.   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project
meets the requirements of regional permit 3.
      3.   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
this responsibility to the Village.
   (E)   Permits For Dams:
      1.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam as defined in section 300.16 per 17 Illinois Administrative Code part 3702
(rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the
start of construction of a dam.
      2.   If the Village finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit,
the Village shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office.
      3.   If the Village finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the Village shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/
OWR Bartlett Office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
   (F)   Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's
Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
      1.   Regional permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground and
overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios,
athletic fields, playground equipment and streambank protection activities.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA or floodplains (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A Zones), where no
floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile,
no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the
proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of
the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
   (A)   Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by
State law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without
first obtaining a development permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Village.
         a.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of
section 4-5-9 of this chapter.
         b.   The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
            (1)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose,
and intended use;
            (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
            (3)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
            (4)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:
               A.    A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of
the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
               B.    A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical
or numerical scale;
               C.    Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the
flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
               D.    A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
               E.    Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection
(B) of this section.
               F.    Any and all other Federal, State, and local permits or
approvals that may be required for this type of development.
      3.   Based on the best available existing data according to Federal,
State or other sources, the Village Engineer shall compare the elevation of the
site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         a.   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 4-5-
5(D) of this chapter.
         b.   Any development located on land that can be shown to have been
higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
         c.   The Village Engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.
         d.   The Village Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other Federal, State, and local permits, approvals or
waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The Village Engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required
Federal, State, and local permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Preventing Increased Damages:
      1.   Floodway Not Determined: No development in the SFHA where a floodway
has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and
welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the
floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter.
      2.   Riverine SFHAs: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not
been determined, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Engineering Requirements: The developer shall have a registered
professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans,
calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of
subsection 4-5-7(B)3a(1) of this chapter for the entire floodplain as
calculated under the provisions of subsection 4-5-5(D) of this chapter.
            (1)   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering
study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to
IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
            (2)   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of
section 4-5-8 of this chapter for the designated floodway.
         b.   IDNR/OWR Permit: A development permit shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made
that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required.
         c.   Permits For Dams:
            (1)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal
of a dam shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of
a dam.
            (2)   If the Village finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR
permit, the Village shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office.
            (3)   If the Village finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam,
the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
(IEMA).
      3.   Activities Permitted: The following activities may be permitted
without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of base
flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the
other requirements of this chapter.
         a.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 2;
         b.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 3;
         c.   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
permit 4;
         d.   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit
5;
         e.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade)
are covered by this permit;
         f.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 7;
         g.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 8;
         h.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 9;
         i.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 10;
         j.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide permit 11;
         k.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 12;
         l.   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 13;
         m.   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 14; and
         n.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
      4.   Flood Carrying Capacity: The flood carrying capacity of any altered
or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
      5.   Compensatory Storage:
         a.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         b.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
         c.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         d.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 18-09, 8-
27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections 4-5-6, 4-5-7 and 4-5-8 of
this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA
or floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following
requirements shall be met.
   (A)   Public Health Standards:
      1.   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or
floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of subsection
(C) of this section.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
      5.   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so
as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
   (B)   Carrying Capacity And Notification:
      1.   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
      2.   In addition, the Village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse.
   (C)   Protecting Buildings:
      1.   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an
SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:
         a.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet;
         b.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) and/or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%).
Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section;
         c.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section;
         d.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do
not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage);
         e.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year; and
         f.   Repetitive loss to an existing building.
      2.   A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
         a.   Lowest Floor: The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at
or above the flood protection elevation; and
         b.   Fill Requirements:
            (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond
the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection
elevation;
            (2)   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures;
            (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure;
            (4)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporate debris or refuse materials; and
            (5)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      3.   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
         a.   The building shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles,
walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and not
subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on each wall, shall be no
more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and consists of a minimum of two
(2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation;
         b.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris;
         c.   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; and
            (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
         d.   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used
for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; and
         e.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by registered professional engineer or
architect.
         f.   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois Administrative Code part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes
shall meet the following elevation requirements:
            (1)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved: a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation.
            (2)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty six inches (36") in
height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of
equivalent strength, whichever is less.
         g.   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to
meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection (C)3f of this
section unless:
            (1)   They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; and
            (2)   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only
for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
      4.   Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed
(in lieu of elevation) provided that:
         a.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood
protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood.
         b.   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.
         c.   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose
of this subsection).
      5.   A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade;
         c.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade;
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point;
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event;
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
      6.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
      7.   Toolsheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory structures on
an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor
below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
         a.   The building is not used for human habitation;
         b.   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in
a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the appropriate use
criteria of section 4-5-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements
of sections 4-5-6 and 4-5-7 of this chapter must be met;
         c.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation;
         d.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation;
         e.   The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size;
         f.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses
and cannot be modified later into another use;
         g.   The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of
subsection (C)3a of this section;
         h.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
         i.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
      8.   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also
meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section 4-5-
7 of this chapter. Nonconforming structures located in a designated floodway
may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in
accordance with subsection 4-5-7(B) of this chapter. A nonconforming structure
damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be
restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value
before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter. (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The Village Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the
extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management,
use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the
proposed developments are consistent with sections 4-5-6, 4-5-7, 4-5-8 and 4-5-
9 of this chapter and the need to be reasonably safe from flooding and minimize
flood damage. Plats for new subdivisions shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat accounts for changes in the
drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act 1 .
   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions and additions to subdivisions shall
include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway
delineations. Where this information is not available from an existing adopted
study, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 4-5-5(D) of this
chapter and the floodway delineation.
   (C)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   (D)   The Village Board of Trustees shall not approve any plat of
subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat
is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 18-09, 8-
27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
Notes
 
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
 
4-5-11: VARIANCES:
   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
designated floodway.
      1.   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for a variance.
      2.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant's request for
a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The
Village may attach such conditions to granting of a variance, as it deems
necessary to further the flood protection intent of this chapter.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The provisions of subsections 4-5-6(B) and 4-5-8(B) of this chapter
shall still be met;
      7.   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      8.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;
      9.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses; and
      10.   All other required State and Federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   (C)   The Village shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from
the requirements of section 4-5-9 of this chapter that would lessen the degree
of protection to a building will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (D)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic
structure as may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of subsection (B) of this section, subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the historic structure; and
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the historic
structure being removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-
2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes.
   (C)   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside
of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
   (D)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the Village or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully hereunder. (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-13: PENALTY:
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct any
violation of any provision of this chapter:
      1.   The Village may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense but
shall otherwise be subject to the Village’s General Penalty as set forth in
section 1-4-1 of the Village Code.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The Village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (B)   The Village shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      1.   The Village Engineer is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if
necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop
work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      2.   Any person aggrieved by any action taken or determination made
pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the Barrington Hills Plan Commission in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 4-3-4(D) of this title upon
payment of a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Within thirty (30)
days following the Plan Commission hearing, the Plan Commission shall transmit
its findings and recommendations in writing to the Village President and the
Board of Trustees for final disposition.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations, including but not limited to
prosecution in the Village’s system of Administrative Adjudication. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
 
4-5-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the Village
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 18-09,
8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
4-5-16: SEVERABILITY
The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of
the remainder.
 
4-5-16: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication as required by law.
APPENDIX A:
Summary of Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) Panel Numbers
 
 
CID    Name                         County      Panels       Date
                                                17031C0013K
                                                17031C0014K
                                                17031C0018K
                                                17031C0019K
170058 Barrington Hills, village of Cook**      17031C0151K  01/23/2026
                                                17031C0152K
                                                17031C0153K
                                                17031C0154K
                                                17031C0156K
                                                17031C0157K
                                                17089C0070H
                                    Kane**      17089C0090H  08/03/2009
                                                17089C0180H
                                                17097C0215K
                                                17097C0216K
                                    Lake***     17097C0217K  09/18/2013
                                                17097C0218K*
                                                17097C0219K
                                                17111C0342J
                                    McHenry**** 17111C0353J  11/16/2006
                                                17111C0354J
                                                17111C0365J
*Panel Not Printed
** The BFE for the floodplains shall be as delineated on the base flood
profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study (FIS) of Cook County and Kane
County prepared by the FEMA and both dated January 23, 2026.
*** The BFE for the floodplains shall be as delineated on the base flood
profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study (FIS) of Lake County prepared
by the FEMA and dated October 05, 2023.
**** The BFE for the floodplains shall be as delineated on the base flood
profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study (FIS) of McHenry County
prepared by the FEMA and dated November 16, 2006.
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 90-25
AN ORDINANCE READOPTING THE MUNICIPAL CODE    OF THE VILLAGE OF BARRINGTON
HILLS PURSUANT TO THE VILLAGE'S HOME RULE AUTHORITY
   WHEREAS, at a referendum held in connection with the general election of
November 6, 1990, the voters of the Village of Barrington Hills elected to
become a Home Rule municipality in accordance with the terms and conditions of
Article VII, Section 6 of the 1970 Illinois Constitution; and
   WHEREAS, the Village President and Board of Trustees deem it to be in the
best interest of the Village to readopt the Municipal Code of the Village (the
"Village Code") so as to ensure that all of the ordinances contained therein
are properly authorized by either the Village's Home Rule power or the
Village's statutory power.
   NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Barrington Hills, Cook, Kane, Lake, McHenry Counties, Illinois, as
follows:
   Section One: That the Village Code consisting of Titles 1 through 10
inclusive, as prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under the direction of the
Board of Trustees subsequent to the adoption of Village Ordinance of 78-1, be
and it hereby is readopted pursuant to the Village's authority as a Home Rule
municipality as and shall constitute the Village Code of the Village of
Barrington Hills, Illinois.
   Section Two: That all ordinances or parts thereof in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed; provided, that said repealer
shall not affect any offense committed against such former ordinance, as set
forth in Section 1–2–3 of the Village Code.
   Section Three: This Ordinance and the Village Code readopted hereby pursuant
to the authority of the Village as a Home Rule municipality shall be in full
force and effect from and after ten (10) days following its passage and
approval according to law, as printed and published in book form by order of
the President and Board of Trustees.
PASSED and APPROVED this  17th  day of  December , 1990.
AYES: 6 , NAYS: 0 , ABSENT: 1 .
APPROVED THIS  17th  DAY OF  December, 1990.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-6: Fee And Penalty Schedule
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of the Village of
Barrington Hills. This Village Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as
the Barrington Hills Municipal Code, and it is hereby published by authority of
the Board of Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for
said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1977 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1977 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code. (1977 Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this Code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent to Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required to
constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud
any person.
   (B)   Liability of Employers and Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this Village Code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person
actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said
person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set
forth. (1977 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this Village Code shall make
every effort to maintain this Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the Village
Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the
Village Board. (1977 Code)
1-1-6: FEE AND PENALTY SCHEDULE:
The Village Clerk for the Village shall maintain a Village Fee and Penalty
Schedule, as amended from time to time by Ordinance, which schedule shall be
made available for public inspection and shall be published on the Village
website. In the event there exists an express conflict between the Village Fee
and Penalty Schedule and any provision of this Code, the Village Fee and
Penalty Schedule shall take precedence and control. (Ord. 25-04, 2-24-2025)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as
being still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections),
from which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries, and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; ordinances granting special uses or
approving planned developments; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing
the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the Village; all special ordinances; ordinances designating
depositories for money or securities; and administrative ordinances or
resolutions not in conflict with or inconsistent with these provisions. (1977
Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or
by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this Village Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such
provisions only. (1977 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable.
   (B)   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1977 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   (A)   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
   (B)   When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code
by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any section of this code which contains any express
provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content
may be repugnant thereto.
   (C)   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has
been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/
or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the village's ordinances is not meant to amend
the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1977 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto. In the event that a following definition shall conflict with
a definition contained in a particular title, the definition contained in the
title shall govern:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the board of trustees of the
village.
CODE: The municipal code of Barrington Hills and amendments thereto.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Barrington Hills".
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the village is hereby established to be January
1 until December 31.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent", as well as "neglect", "negligence" and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Barrington Hills".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
SHALL: Whenever the word "shall" appears in this code it shall be considered
mandatory and not directory.
STATE: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the state of Illinois.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Barrington Hills in the counties of Cook, Lake, Kane
and McHenry, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN; IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (Ord. 57-7, 5-20-1957; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 06-14, 8-28-2006; Ord.
07-01, 1-22-2007)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person convicted of or found liable for a violation of any section
of this code shall be fined in a sum not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for
any one offense, excepting any specific section of this code wherein the
maximum fine is limited to a lesser amount.
   (B)   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this code or any ordinance of the village shall be deemed a
public nuisance.
   (C)   Each and every offense in violation of the provisions of this code, or
ordinances of the village, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
each day such unlawful act continues to persist.
   (D)   Injunctive Relief: In addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalty or
other remedy provided in the code, the Hearing Officer or the Circuit Court,
whatever the case may be, may enter an order enjoining any ongoing or repeated
violation of the code or otherwise mandating compliance with the code. If there
is any conflict between this section and any other section of the code
concerning the availability of injunctive relief, this section shall control.
   (E)   Restitution. In addition to any penalty or other remedy provided in
the code, the Hearing Officer or the Circuit Court, whatever the case may be,
may enter an order providing a victim of any offense of the village code
restitution for injury to property, including but not limited to injury to
animals.
   (F)   Community Service. Where circumstances warrant, the Hearing Officer or
the Circuit Court, whatever the case may be, may enter an order requiring
community service for a violation of the village code concerning minors.
Community service requirements are subject to the direction or order of the
Hearing Officer or the Circuit Court. (Ord. 08-09, 4-28-2008; amd. Ord. 21-03,
3-29-2021; Ord. 23-05, 9-25-2023; Ord. 24-03, 1-22-2024)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued to him by the village may be revoked by a court of
competent jurisdiction or by the board of trustees. (1977 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
   (A)   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this code.
   (B)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created
by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced.
   (C)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1977
Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election of President; Term of Office
1-5-2: President Pro Tem
1-5-3: Oath of President
1-5-4: Powers and Duties of President
1-5-5: Appointment of Officers
1-5-6: Compensation of President
1-5-7: Election of Trustees
1-5-8: Oath of Trustees
1-5-9: Board of Trustees
1-5-10: Time and Place of Meetings
1-5-11: Committees; Appointments, Reports
1-5-12: Ordinance Passage Procedure
1-5-13: Appropriation and Tax Levy Ordinances
1-5-14: Quorum; Voting Requirements
1-5-15: Order of Business
1-5-16: Referral of Claims
1-5-1: ELECTION OF PRESIDENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village President shall be elected every other odd- numbered year for a
term of four (4) years, and serve as President of the Board of Trustees, as
provided by statute. (1977 Code)
1-5-2: PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
One of the Board of Trustees shall be chosen by the Board of Trustees to act as
President Pro Tem in the absence of the President. (1977 Code)
1-5-3: OATH OF PRESIDENT:
The President shall take the following oath of office:
   I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United
States, and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of President according to the
best of my ability.
(Ord. 94-13, 11-21-94)
1-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF PRESIDENT:
The President is the chief executive officer of the Village, and shall perform
all duties required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall be responsible for
the enforcement of all laws and ordinances. He shall supervise the executive
officers of the Village, and have the power and authority to inspect all books
and records kept by any officer of the Village at any time. (1977 Code)
1-5-5: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
   (A)   The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, all officers of the Village whose appointment or election is
not otherwise provided for.
   (B)   He may delegate to any officer any duty to be performed; and whenever
there is a question as to the respective duties and powers of any officer of
the Village, this shall be settled by the President. (1977 Code)
1-5-6: COMPENSATION OF PRESIDENT:
The President shall serve without compensation. (1977 Code)
1-5-7: ELECTION OF TRUSTEES:
There shall be six (6) persons elected as Trustees at a general Municipal
election, each to serve four (4) years in the manner provided by statute.
Trustees shall serve without compensation. (1977 Code)
1-5-8: OATH OF TRUSTEES:
Trustees shall take the oath required by statute. (1977 Code)
1-5-9: BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The Board of Trustees shall consist of the President and Trustees. The
President, or the President Pro Tem, shall preside at all meetings of the Board
of Trustees. (1977 Code)
1-5-10: TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS:
   (A)   The Village Board of Trustees shall hold its regular meetings at the
Barrington Hills Village Hall, 112 Algonquin Road, or at such other place
within the Village as shall be designated in the call of the meeting, on the
fourth Monday of each month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M., or at such other
times as it may by resolution appoint. The President or any two (2) Trustees
may call special meetings of the Village Board, to be held at such place within
the Village and at such time as the call shall specify. Notice of each special
meeting shall be given by the Village Clerk to the President and to all
Trustees of each special meeting by e-mail transmission to the e-mail address
provided therefor in accordance with 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/20, at
least forty eight (48) hours prior to the time of such meeting; provided,
however, such notice may be dispensed with as to any Trustee or as to the
President if personal notice shall have been given at least twenty four (24)
hours prior to such meeting, or in instances where such Trustee or the
President shall waive email notice and consent to the holding of the meeting.
   (B)   All meetings shall be open to the public except for meetings held on
topics which are closed to the public under applicable provisions of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq. (Ord.
17-24, 12-19-2017)
1-5-11: COMMITTEES, APPOINTMENTS, REPORTS:
   (A)   Appointments: There shall be appointed by the President, with the
approval of the Trustees, ten (10) standing committees of the Board of Trustees
consisting of two (2) or three (3) members each, as specified and identified
below, with each member to be a Trustee and the President an ex officio member
of each, as follows:
Building and Zoning
Environment
Finance (to consist of 3 members)
Health
Insurance
Municipal Building and Grounds
Planning
Public Safety
Roads and Bridges
Village Personnel (to consist of 3 members)
The President, with the approval of the Trustees, may appoint such other
committees as may be deemed necessary.
   (B)   Reports: Committees to which matters are referred shall report in
writing on the request of any member of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 09-06, 5-
18-2009)
   (C)   Electronic Participation In Meetings: The members of all committees,
commissions and boards appointed by the Village President and approved by the
Board of Trustees may participate in all meetings of such committees,
commissions and boards to the extent permitted in the Illinois Open Meetings
Act, 5 ILCS 120/7, which Act is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code as
if fully set forth herein. Each committee, commission and board that elects to
allow electronic participation as provided by said Act shall adopt such rules
regarding such participation as provided in said Act. (Ord. 13-17, 10-28-2013;
amd. Ord. 21-17, 11-18-2021)
1-5-12: ORDINANCE PASSAGE PROCEDURE:
   (A)   The procedure for the passage of an ordinance shall be as follows: An
ordinance may be introduced by any member of the Board of Trustees. When first
introduced, said ordinance shall be read to the Board of Trustees by the Clerk
and a motion shall be made to have the same engrossed by the Clerk upon the
records of the proceedings of the meeting at which said proposed ordinance is
introduced. The ordinance may then be referred to the proper committee for
consideration and report, or may be called up for passage at the meeting at
which it was introduced, or any subsequent meeting, when it shall again be
read. The voting upon the passage of an ordinance shall be by ayes and nays,
and the Village Clerk shall call upon each Trustee and record his or her vote.
If a majority of the trustees present constituting a quorum to do business
shall vote aye, said ordinance shall be declared passed. If a tie vote results,
the president shall cast the deciding vote and declare the result thereof. If
the president shall approve of an ordinance, he shall sign it.
   (B)   Any ordinance imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment, or forfeiture,
or making any appropriation, shall: 1) be printed or published in book or
pamphlet form, published by authority of the corporate authorities, or 2) be
published at least once, within ten (10) days after passage, in one or more
newspapers published in the village, or if no newspaper is published there,
then in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village.
(Ord. 57-1, 4-25-1957; amd. 1977 Code)
1-5-13: APPROPRIATION AND TAX LEVY ORDINANCES:
   (A)   The finance committee shall prepare, each year, and present to the
board of trustees, on or before the first meeting in June a draft of an
appropriation ordinance appropriating such sums of money as may be deemed
necessary to defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the village,
specifying particularly the objects and purposes for which such appropriations
are made and the amount appropriated for each such object and purpose. The
board of trustees shall pass such ordinance within the first quarter of the
fiscal year.
   (B)   The board of trustees shall, on or before the second Tuesday in
September of each year, ascertain the total amount of appropriations legally
made for all corporate purposes to be provided for by the tax levy of that
year, and shall pass a tax levy ordinance which shall incorporate the
appropriation ordinance as originally passed, or may be lawfully amended, which
ordinance shall specify in detail the purposes for which such appropriations
are made, or have been made, and the amount appropriated for each purpose,
respectively, and which shall levy the amount so ascertained upon all the
property subject to the taxation within the village as that property is
assessed and equalized for state and county purposes for the current year. The
board of trustees shall also pass a separate tax levy ordinance for street and
bridge purposes, if appropriate. The village clerk shall thereupon file a
certified copy of said tax levy ordinances with the county clerks of Cook,
Lake, McHenry and Kane Counties, as required by statute. (Ord. 57-1, 4-25-1957;
amd. 1977 Code)
1-5-14: QUORUM; VOTING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Quorum: A majority of the village authorities shall constitute a
quorum. (Ord. 57-7, 5-20-1957)
   (B)   Power Of Majority: The action of the board of trustees shall be
controlled by a majority vote of those present; provided that, for all
ordinances and any resolution or motion to create any liability against the
village or for the expenditure or appropriation of any money, the concurring
vote of a majority of all members then holding office, including the president,
shall be required. (1977 Code)
   (C)   Trustees Present Required To Vote: Every trustee who shall be present
when a question is stated from the chair shall vote thereon unless excused by a
majority of the trustees present. (Ord. 57-1, 5-24-1957)
1-5-15: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The order of business to be observed at all meetings of the board of trustees
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Roll call of members.
   (B)   Reading of minutes of the previous meeting and approval thereof.
   (C)   Reports of officers and committees.
   (D)   Unfinished business.
   (E)   New business.
   (F)   Adjournment.
The above order of business may be suspended upon a majority vote of the
trustees present.
The village president shall decide all questions of order and shall be governed
in his decisions by parliamentary law as prescribed by "Robert's Rules Of
Order" as revised from time to time. (Ord. 57-1, 5-24-1957)
1-5-16: REFERRAL OF CLAIMS:
No claim against the village shall be allowed by the trustees until the same
has been referred to the finance committee for examination and approval. (Ord.
57-1, 5-24-1957)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-6-1: Village Officers
1-6-2: Bonds Of Officers
1-6-3: Director Of Administration
1-6-4: Village Clerk
1-6-5: Village Treasurer
1-6-6: Village Attorney
1-6-7: Village Engineer
1-6-8: Chief Of Police
1-6-9: Building And Zoning Enforcement Officer
1-6-10: Freedom Of Information Act Officer
1-6-11: Open Meetings Act Officer
1-6-1: VILLAGE OFFICERS:
In order that the policies, regulations and ordinances of the village, as
permitted by statute, are effectively discharged, there are hereby created the
offices of director of administration; village clerk; village treasurer;
village attorney; village engineer; chief of police; building and zoning
enforcement officer; freedom of information act officer; and open meetings act
officer. The village president, by and with the approval of the board of
trustees, may appoint qualified persons to such offices, prescribe their terms,
duties, compensation and the amount of any bond required. (Ord. 86-1, 1-27-
1986; amd. Ord. 09-14, 12-21-2009; Ord. 09-15, 12-21-2009)
1-6-2: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
   (A)   Bond Required: Before entering upon the duties of the respective
offices, all village officers, except trustees, shall execute a bond with
security to be approved by the board of trustees. The bond shall be payable to
the village in the penal sum as may from time to time be directed by a
resolution of the board of trustees; provided, in no case shall the bond of the
president of the board of trustees be in an amount less than three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00) and in no case shall the village treasurer's bond be in an
amount that is less than three (3) times the latest federal census population
or any subsequent census figure used for motor fuel tax purposes.
   (B)   Condition Of Bond: The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all money received
by the officer according to law and the ordinances of the village.
   (C)   Corporate Surety:
      1.   The surety on said bonds shall be a corporate surety authorized to
transact business in the state and approved by the board of trustees.
      2.   Such bonds may provide that the obligation of the surety thereunder
shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure or closing of
any bank or savings and loan association organized and operating either under
the laws of the state or the United States in which any officer has placed
funds in the officer's custody, if the bank or savings and loan association has
been approved by the board of trustees as a depository for those funds.
   (D)   Filing: All bonds shall be filed with the village clerk, except the
bond of the village clerk, which shall be filed with the village treasurer.
(Ord. 94-7, 6-27-1994)
1-6-3: DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   Creation Of Office, Appointment; Term; Compensation: There is hereby
created the office of director of administration. The director of
administration shall be appointed by the village president with the approval of
the board of trustees and shall serve at the pleasure of the president and the
board of trustees. His compensation and other provisions of employment shall be
fixed by the board of trustees.
   (B)   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The village president shall be the immediate supervisor
of the director of administration and all administrative policies, directives
or orders from the director shall be made by or transmitted through the village
president as executive head of the village government. The director shall
report directly to the village president, and shall assist those elected or
appointed village officials, boards or commissions as the president may from
time to time authorize.
      2.   Administrative Supervision: The director of administration shall, on
behalf of the president and board of trustees, supervise the affairs of the
village in regard to planning, roads, zoning, building and general
administration. With the advice and consent of the board of trustees, the
director shall represent or appear on behalf of the president in matters of
interest to the village. He shall assist other village officers in a manner
consistent with the responsible discharge of their duties; provided, however,
that in no event shall the director's supervisory duties be construed to
include the police department or the office of treasurer.
      3.   Investigation of Complaints: The Director of Administration shall
receive and transmit for investigation by the appropriate committee chairman,
Trustee, Village officer, board or commission all complaints in relation to
matters concerning the administration of the government of the Village or
services rendered by the Village.
      4.   Budget Preparation, Responsibility: The Director of Administration
together with the Village Treasurer, upon direction of the Village President,
shall assist in the preparation of budgets, other than the Police Department
budget, and submit such budgets, through the appropriate committee chairman,
with his opinion and recommendations covering their important features for the
review and approval by the Board of Trustees. He shall assume responsibility,
together with the Village Treasurer and the Chief of Police, for the
administration of the budget after its adoption.
      5.   Recommendation: The Director of Administration shall recommend,
through the appropriate committee chairman, the consideration by the Board of
Trustees of such policies, resolutions or ordinances as he may deem necessary
or suitable for the health, safety or welfare of the Village, or for the
improvement of the services rendered by the Village.
      6.   Other Additional Duties: The Director of Administration shall
perform such other duties or dispense such instructions on policy or service as
may be required by the Village President in a manner consistent with the
applicable provisions of the Village Code.
      7.   Administrative Adjudication. In consultation with and upon
recommendation of the Village Attorney, the Director of Administration may
accept a reduction in fines issued in administrative adjudication proceedings
in all matters, except for violations of village police, vehicle and health and
sanitation regulations. (Ord. 86-1, 1-27-86; amd. Ord. 23-05, 9-25-2023)
1-6-4: VILLAGE CLERK:
   (A)   Appointment; Term: The Village Clerk shall be appointed by the Village
President with the concurrence of the Board of Trustees pursuant to a
resolution adopted by affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Board for
such term as shall be determined by the Board. (Ord. 84-37, 10-22-84)
   (B)   Compensation: The salary of the Village Clerk shall be fixed by the
Board of Trustees in advance of the commencement of his term of office.
   (C)   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The Village Clerk shall be ex officio Clerk of the Board
of Trustees, and in addition to the duties required to be performed by the
Clerk of the Board of Trustees, it shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to
keep an office at the Village Hall, to make copies of all ordinances,
resolutions and other papers duly filed in said office and transcripts from the
journals and other records and files of said office, certified by the Village
Clerk under the Corporate Seal of the Village, to be furnished to any of the
Trustees or officers of the Village without the payment of any fee therefor,
and to be furnished to any other persons upon application therefor and the
payment of the fee therefor prescribed by ordinance. It shall also be the duty
of the Village Clerk to perform such other duties as may be required by
ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees or otherwise required by law.
(Ord. 57-1, 4-25-57; amd. 1977 Code)
      2.   Recording Ordinances: All ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees
shall be recorded by the Village Clerk in a book to be kept for that purpose,
before the next regular meeting after their passage.
      3.   Docketing and Filing Documents: It shall be the duty of the Village
Clerk to number, docket and file in regular order all official documents coming
into his custody and control as such officer, indexing the same in such a
manner that they can be readily referred to at all times.
      4.   Notification of Election or Appointment: It shall be the duty of the
Village Clerk, within five (5) days after the result of any election is
declared or appointment made, to notify all persons elected or appointed to any
Village office, of their election or appointment. (Ord. 57-1, 4-25-57)
      5.   Administering Oaths: The Village Clerk shall have power to
administer oaths and affirmations on all lawful occasions.
      6.   Deputy Clerk; Appointment, Powers and Duties, Compensation: The
Village Clerk is hereby authorized to appoint one Deputy Clerk, which Deputy
shall have the power and duty, in the absence of the Village Clerk from the
place where the Clerk's office is maintained, to execute all documents required
by law to be executed by the Village Clerk and affix the seal of the Clerk
thereto wherever required. Compensation of the Deputy, if any, shall be fixed
by the Board of Trustees. (1977 Code)
1-6-5: VILLAGE TREASURER:
   (A)   Appointment, Compensation, Bond: The President and Trustees of the
Village shall appoint a Village Treasurer who shall hold his office at the
pleasure of the Board of Trustees. The salary of the Village Treasurer shall be
fixed by the Board of Trustees. Before entering upon the performance of his
duties, the Treasurer so appointed shall furnish a surety company bond
satisfactory to the Board of Trustees and in such amount as shall be designated
by the Board of Trustees. Such bond shall name the depository in which the
Village funds are to be placed and shall be accompanied by an agreement between
the Treasurer and the surety company that the said funds shall be so placed and
maintained. The premiums for such bond shall be paid by the Village. (Ord. 57-
7, 5-20-57; amd. 1977 Code)
   (B)   Warrants, by Whom Signed: The Village funds shall be deposited in the
name of the Village and the only checks which shall be honored against said
funds shall be Village warrants drawn upon the Treasurer, signed by the
President or the President Pro Tem and countersigned by the Clerk and endorsed
by the Treasurer. Each such warrant shall state the particular fund or
appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable.
All interest on Village funds shall be placed to the credit of the Village.
   (C)   Accounts, How Kept: The Village Treasurer shall receive all monies
belonging to the Village, and shall keep all necessary books and accounts
according to good accounting practice, and such books and accounts shall always
be subject to the inspection of any member of the Board of Trustees. Said books
shall be kept by him or under his direction, so as to show at all times the
exact condition of the monies under his control, and of such accounts with the
several funds or appropriations, and of all disbursements by him made, and
shall be by him handed over to his successor, with the other books and accounts
pertaining to his office. Said books shall be balanced at least monthly.
   (D)   Transfer of Funds: No person shall be paid from the Treasury upon any
warrant except from the monies belonging to the particular funds, or
appropriation, or items thereof, upon which such warrant shall be drawn; nor
shall money be transferred by the Treasurer from one fund to another, after it
has been received by him, nor appropriated to any other purpose than that for
which it has been collected or paid, without the express vote of a majority of
the members of the Board of Trustees. (1977 Code)
   (E)   Village Depositories: Whenever the Village Treasurer shall request the
Board of Trustees to designate and approve a bank or savings and loan in which
the funds and monies of the Village in the custody of the Treasurer may be
kept, and the Board of Trustees has designated and approved such bank or
savings and loan, and such bank or savings and loan shall have furnished the
Board of Trustees with copies of the last two (2) sworn statements of resources
and liabilities which such bank or savings and loan is required to furnish to
the Commissioner of Banks and Trust Companies, the Comptroller of the Currency,
the Commissioner of Savings and Residential Finance or to the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, as applicable, and shall, while acting as such
depository, furnish to the Board of Trustees a copy of all statements of
resources and liabilities which it is required to furnish to the Commissioner
of Banks and Trust Companies, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Commissioner
of Savings Residential Finance or to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
as applicable, and the Village Treasurer shall so deposit such funds or monies
in an amount not exceeding seventy five percent (75%) of the capital stock and
surplus of any such bank, or seventy five percent (75%) of the net worth of
such savings and loan association as defined by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, the Village Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for
any such funds or monies deposited in any such bank in an amount not in excess
of such limitation of seventy five percent (75%) of the capital stock and
surplus of any bank or seventy five percent (75%) of the net worth of such
savings and loan association.
   (F)   Investment of Public Funds: The Village Treasurer is hereby authorized
to invest funds and monies of the Village as follows:
      1.   In bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills or
other securities now or hereafter issued, which are guaranteed by the full
faith and credit of the United States of America as to principal and interest;
      2.   In bonds, notes, debentures or other similar obligations of the
United States of America or its agencies;
      3.   In interest bearing savings accounts, interest bearing certificates
of deposit, or interest bearing time deposits, or any other investments
constituting direct obligations of any state or national bank which is insured
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; or
      4.   In money market mutual funds registered under the investment company
act of 1940, 15 USCA section 80a-1 et seq., provided that the portfolio of any
such money market mutual funds is limited to obligations described in
subsections (F)1 and (F)2 of this section and to agreements to repurchase such
obligations.
The board of trustees shall designate such accounts, agencies or brokers which
may so invest such funds upon the direction of the village treasurer. (Ord. 94-
16, 12-19-1994)
   (G)   Responsibility For Securities: The village treasurer is hereby
authorized to keep all securities received by him by virtue of his office on
account of any funds authorized to be created or maintained by any law of the
state or any ordinance of the village in a bank or trust company qualified by
ordinance as a depository for funds or monies, of the village in the custody of
the village treasurer in the manner required by the provisions of subsection
(E) of this section and the laws of the state. Whenever such securities are
deposited by the village treasurer, in a bank or trust company so qualified as
a depository, the village treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for
any such securities deposited in any such bank in an amount not in excess of
the limitation imposed by subsection (E) of this section and the laws of the
state. (1977 Code)
   (H)   Village Depositories Designated: Whenever the provisions of
subsections (E) and (F) of this section have been complied with, the village
treasurer is hereby authorized to deposit all funds, monies, or securities in
his custody belonging to the village in the depositories designated by the
board of trustees by ordinance. (Ord. 85-8, 5-20-1985)
   (I)   Preparing And Filing Annual Accounts: Prior to September 1 of each
year, the treasurer shall prepare and file with the village clerk, for
publication by said clerk, an account of all monies received and expenditures
incurred during the preceding fiscal year, and shall file copies of the same
with the county collectors of taxes who collect village taxes as required by
statute. (1977 Code)
   (J)   Deputy Treasurer:
      1.   Appointment, Powers, Duties And Compensation: The village president,
with the advice and consent of the trustees, may, from time to time as
necessary, appoint a deputy village treasurer to fulfill all of the duties of
the village treasurer in the absence of the village treasurer for a period not
to exceed one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. Compensation of the deputy
village treasurer, if any, shall be paid by the board of trustees. (Ord. 08-05,
3-24-2008)
1-6-6: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
   (A)   Creation Of Office, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
village attorney. The village attorney shall be appointed by the president, by
and with the approval of the board of trustees.
   (B)   Compensation: The compensation of the village attorney shall be fixed
by the board of trustees.
   (C)   Duties:
      1.   Written Opinions: The village attorney shall give his legal opinion
in writing to the board of trustees or any member thereof, on legal questions
arising under any ordinance of the village, and on legal questions and subjects
in which the village shall be legally interested.
      2.   Attend Board Meetings: He shall attend the meetings of the board of
trustees. (Ord. 69-0, 7-25-1960)
      3.   Other Duties: In addition to the duties herein expressly set forth
or implied appertaining to this office, the village attorney shall prepare and
draft any proposed ordinance requested of him by any members of the board; he
shall when directed give the necessary attention to all suits and proceedings
in every court of record in which the village is a party or directly
interested, and he shall be the attorney and secretary of the board of local
improvements; he may also serve as the attorney for the zoning board of appeals
created by title 2, chapter 4 of this code, and of the plan commission created
by title 2, chapter 2 of this code and such boards and commissions that from
time to time may require his expertise.
   (D)   Special Counsel; Appointment, Compensation, Duties:
      1.   Appointment: Legal counsel in addition to the village attorney may
be retained at the discretion of the president.
      2.   Compensation: The compensation of special counsel shall be fixed by
the board of trustees.
      3.   Duties: The duties of such special counsel may be for such purposes
as the president may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 90-2, 1-29-1990)
1-6-7: VILLAGE ENGINEER:
   (A)   Creation Of Office, Appointment, Eligibility, Term: There is hereby
created the office of village engineer. The president, by and with the approval
of the board of trustees, shall appoint a village engineer. No person shall be
appointed as village engineer unless such person is registered under the
provisions of "the Illinois professional engineering act", 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 325/1 et seq., as is amended from time to time. The village
engineer shall hold office at the pleasure of the corporate authorities. (Ord.
83-6, 8-22-1983)
   (B)   Assistants: He shall, with the approval of the corporate authorities,
appoint and remove such assistants as he may require and prescribe their
duties.
   (C)   Salary: The salary and compensation of the village engineer and of
each of his assistants shall be fixed from time to time by the corporate
authorities. (Ord. 60-8, 7-25-1960)
   (D)   Duties: The village engineer and each assistant shall perform such
duties as shall be prescribed by the corporate authorities from time to time,
including, however, but not limited to, the design, supervision and maintenance
of all public streets, roads, bridges, culverts, storm sewers, drains and all
other structures pertaining thereto within the corporate limits and
responsibility of the village, and performance of the duties imposed upon him
by specific reference in this code 1 . (Ord. 83-6, 8-22-1983)
   (E)   Other Duties: In addition to the duties provided above, the village
engineer shall administer and enforce the floodplain ordinance set forth in
title 4, chapter 5 of this code. (Ord. 07-03, 1-22-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See titles 4 and 6 of this code.
1-6-8: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   (A)   Creation Of Office; Appointment; Term; Compensation: There is hereby
created the office of chief of police, an officer of the village. The chief
shall be appointed by the village president with the approval of the board of
trustees. He may be removed from office with or without cause by the president
with the approval of the board of trustees. His salary and other provisions of
employment shall be fixed by the board of trustees.
The village president shall be the immediate supervisor of the chief of police,
and all policies, directives and orders from the village government to the
chief of police shall be made by or transmitted through the village president
as executive head of village government. The chief of police shall report
directly to the village president, and shall assist such other committee
chairmen, trustees, official personnel or bodies, including the village
personnel committee, as the president may from time to time designate. (Ord.
84-37, 10-22-1984)
   (B)   Duties And Powers: The chief of police shall direct the administration
and operations of the police department and be responsible for the faithful and
efficient conduct and operation of the department. In addition to execution of
the policies transmitted to him by the village president and the performance of
such duties as may be imposed by law and the ordinances of the village, he
shall establish such policies, directives, rules and regulations for the
administration and operations of the department as he shall determine to be
appropriate. The chief of police shall serve as appointing authority for
appointments to any position within the department other than his own, and
shall have the power to demote, promote, suspend or dismiss any police officer
or department employee, consistent with the provisions of state law, related
ordinances of the village, and any specific rules or regulations established by
the village board of trustees not in conflict therewith.
The foregoing demotion, promotion, suspension and dismissal authority shall be
subject to referrals, if any, by the village president to any village personnel
committee and to any action taken in connection therewith. (Ord. 09-10, 9-28-
2009)
   (C)   Duties Regarding Emergency Response: In addition to the other powers
granted to the chief of police by this code, the chief of police is hereby
granted primary responsibility for the organization, administration, training
and operation of the village's response to disasters and emergencies within its
boundaries, all subject to the authority of the Village President. In
connection therewith, he is authorized to: 1) represent the Village in
negotiations with other villages, cities, municipalities, townships, counties
and the State of Illinois regarding cooperative arrangements concerning
disaster and emergency response; 2) enter into agreements with said villages,
cities, municipalities, townships, counties and the State of Illinois as shall
be approved by the Village Board of Trustees; and 3) appoint Village employees
to work with him with regard to the organization, administration, training and
operation of the Village's disaster preparedness program and to act in his
absence.
   D.   Administrative Adjudication. In consultation with and upon
recommendation of the Village Attorney, the Chief of Police may accept a
reduction in fines issued in administrative adjudication proceedings in matters
involving violations of village police, vehicle and health and sanitation
regulations. (Ord. 95-5, 5-22-95; amd. Ord. 23-05, 9-25-2023)
1-6-9: BUILDING AND ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
   (A)   Creation of Office: There is hereby created the office of Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer, who may also be referred to in the Code as the
Building Officer or Official or Commissioner, the Enforcing Officer, or the
Health Officer.
   (B)   Appointment, Eligibility and Term: The President by and with the
approval of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint a Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer. No person shall be appointed as Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer unless such person is certified in building code
enforcement by the Building Officials and Code Administrators (BOCA)
organization. He shall serve at the pleasure of the President and Board of
Trustees.
   (C)   Salary: The salary and other provisions of compensation for the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be fixed from time to time by the
Board of Trustees. (Ord. 84-35, 10-22-84)
   (D)   Duties: The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the
duty to enforce all titles of the Village Code pertaining to buildings, zoning,
and health and sanitation, and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said
enforcement, he shall: (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-92)
      1.   Administer and enforce the provisions of Titles 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the
Village Code.
      2.   Issue all zoning certificates, and certificates of compliance, and
make and maintain records thereof.
      3.   Examine and approve all plans for construction, alteration, and
demolition of buildings or structures prior to the issuance of building permits
and make and maintain records thereof.
      4.   Issue all building permits and site development permits and make and
maintain records thereof.
      5.   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land as
frequently as may be necessary to insure compliance with the approved plans and
the applicable provisions of the Village Code.
      6.   Issue permits regulating the erection and use of tents and make and
maintain records thereof. (Ord. 84-35, 10-22-84)
      7.   Provide and maintain information for the public relative to all
zoning and building matters arising out of applicable provisions of the Village
Code. (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-92)
      8.   Receive, file and forward to the Board of Trustees all applications
for special uses and amendments to the Zoning Title.
      9.   Receive, file and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals all
applications for appeals or variations or for other matters on which such Board
is required to pass pursuant to the Zoning Title.
      10.   Maintain permanent and current records pertaining to the
administration of the Zoning Title, including but not limited to, all maps,
amendments and special uses, variations, appeals and applications thereof.
(Ord. 84-35, 10-22-84)
      11.   Other Duties: In addition to the duties herein expressly set forth
or implied appertaining to this office, the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall serve as the Safety Officer in matters regarding safety and
health standards for the employees of the Village, at a minimum, meeting
periodically with Village officers to discuss safety problems, meeting monthly
with workers, and making periodic safety inspections of the workplace. Actions
shall be taken in the discharge of the duties of Safety Officer as are or may
be required by the provisions of the Illinois Safety Inspection and Education
Act. (Ord. 92-4, 2-24-92)
      12.   Administer and enforce such ordinances and regulations as may be
assigned form time to time by the Board of Health. (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-92)
   (E)   Intergovernmental Agreement: The board of trustees may enter into an
intergovernmental agreement under which the duties described in subsection
1-6-7(D) of this chapter are performed by the building officer of an adjacent
municipality or governmental body. (Ord. 84-35, 10-22-1984)
1-6-10: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICER:
   (A)   Creation Of Office: There is hereby created the office of the freedom
of information act officer.
   (B)   Appointment, Eligibility And Term: The president by and with the
approval of the board of trustees, shall appoint a freedom of information act
officer. Each person appointed as the freedom of information act officer shall,
within thirty (30) days after such appointment satisfy the requirements of 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/3.5(b). Such officer shall serve at the pleasure
of the president and board of trustees.
   (C)   Salary: The salary and other provisions of compensation for the
freedom of information act officer shall be fixed from time to time by the
board of trustees.
   (D)   Duties: The freedom of information act officer shall have the duties
as prescribed in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/3.5(a). (Ord. 09-14, 12-21-
2009)
1-6-11: OPEN MEETINGS ACT OFFICER:
   (A)   Creation Of Office: There is hereby created the office of the open
meetings act officer.
   (B)   Appointment, Eligibility And Term: The president by and with the
approval of the board of trustees, shall appoint an open meetings act officer.
Each person appointed as the open meetings act officer shall, within thirty
(30) days after such appointment satisfy the requirements of 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 120/1.05. Such officer shall serve at the pleasure of the
president and board of trustees.
   (C)   Salary: The salary and other provisions of compensation for the open
meetings act officer shall be fixed from time to time by the board of trustees.
   (D)   Duties: The open meetings act officer shall have the duties as
prescribed in the open meetings act 1 . (Ord. 09-15, 12-21-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 7
CONTRACTS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Interest In Village Contracts, Business Prohibited
1-7-2: Contracts For Public Improvements; Bids Necessary
1-7-3: Limited Purchase And Contract Authority
1-7-1: INTEREST IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS, BUSINESS PROHIBITED:
No officer of the Village shall be directly or indirectly financially
interested in any contract, work or business of the Village, or the sale of any
article, the expense, price or consideration of which is paid from the
Treasury, or by any assessment levied by any act or ordinance; or in the
purchase of any real estate or other property. (Ord. 57-1, 4-25-1957)
1-7-2: CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; BIDS NECESSARY:
All contracts for the making of any public improvement to be paid for, in whole
or in part, by a special assessment and any work or other public improvement,
when the expense thereof shall exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, after not less than ten (10)
days notice of a call for such bids published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village and after posting such call for bids at Village
Hall. Such contracts shall be approved by the Trustees and executed by the
President of the Village. Provided, however, any such contract except one for
the making of a public improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by
special assessment, may be entered into by the Village President, without
advertising for bids, and without such approval, if specially authorized by the
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Trustees then in office. (Ord. 18-04, 3-19-
2018)
1-7-3: LIMITED PURCHASE AND CONTRACT AUTHORITY:
The Director of Administration and the Chief of Police shall be authorized to
make purchases and enter contracts for goods and services necessary for the
effective administration of their official duties and in the best interests of
the Village in an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord.
15-07, 4-27-2015)
CHAPTER 8
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-8-1: Seal Established
1-8-2: Custody of Seal
1-8-1: SEAL ESTABLISHED:
The Village Seal shall bear the inscription, "Village of Barrington Hills,
Illinois Corporate Seal" and is hereby established and declared now to be the
Seal of the Village. (Ord. 57-1, 4-25-57)
1-8-2: CUSTODY OF SEAL:
The Village Seal, as established in the foregoing Section shall remain in the
custody of the Village Clerk, to be used by the said Village Clerk and the
President of the Village whenever required by law. (Ord. 57-1, 4-25-57)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1060.gif]
 
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL REVENUE
SECTION:
1-9-1: Police Protection Tax
1-9-2: Drug/Gang/DUI Fund
1-9-3: Credit Cards
1-9-1: POLICE PROTECTION TAX:
There shall be levied, annually, a tax of forty-hundredths percent (0.40%) of
the full, fair cash value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Local
Government Affairs, of all taxable property within the Village, for the purpose
of police protection in the Village, in addition to and in excess of all taxes
authorized by law to be levied and collected in the Village. (Ord. 60-10, 8-21-
1960; amd. Ord. 75-4, 2-24-1975)
1-9-2: DRUG/GANG/DUI FUND:
There shall be established a special fund known as the "Drug/Gang/DUI Fund" for
the purpose of, among other things, purchasing law enforcement equipment that
will assist in the prevention of alcohol related criminal violence with funds
received by the Village pursuant to subsection 5/11-501(j) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code. (Ord. 06-06, 3-27-2006)
1-9-3: CREDIT CARDS:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
    AUTHORIZED OBLIGATION: Any fee, charge or cost imposed by, owing to or
collected by or on behalf of the Village, such items as: building permits, re-
inspection fees, over weight permits, vehicle escort fee, extra details,
document copy fees, accident report copy fees, raffle licenses, liquor
licenses, target shooting permits, veterinary fees, surplus property sales. The
list set forth herein is for purposes of example, and is not meant to be
exhaustive or exclusive.
   CREDIT CARD: An instrument or device, whether known as a credit card,
bankcard, charge card, debit card, authorized teller machine card, secured
credit card, smart card, electronic purse, prepaid card, affinity card, issued
with or without fee by an issuer for the use of the holder to obtain credit,
money, goods, services or anything else of value.
   (B)   Acceptance Of Credit Cards: Credit cards will be accepted under the
following conditions:
      1.   The Village is authorized, but not required, to accept the payment
of funds for any authorized obligation by credit card.
   (C)   Fees:
      1.   As set forth herein, the Village may, but is not required to, impose
a convenience fee or surcharge upon a cardholder making payment by credit card
in an amount to wholly or partially offset, but in no event exceed, the amount
of any discount or processing fee incurred by the Village. Such convenience fee
or surcharge may be applied only when allowed under the operating rules and
regulations of the credit card involved, or as applied by the service provider,
such as Illinois e-pay and Oxcart. Such fees are not remitted in any part to
the Village. When a cardholder elects to make a payment by credit card and a
convenience fee or surcharge is imposed, the payment of the convenience fee for
surcharge shall be deemed voluntary by the cardholder and shall not be
refundable.
      2.   No fee, or accumulation of fees, that exceeds the lesser of twenty
dollars ($20.00) or five percent (5%) of the principal amount charged may be
imposed in connection with the issuance of any license, sticker, or permit, or
with respect to any other similar transaction. No fee, or accumulation of fees,
that exceeds the lesser of twenty dollars ($20.00) or five percent (5%) of the
transaction involved may be imposed in connection with the payment of any fine.
No fee, or accumulation of fees, in excess of the lesser of forty dollars
($40.00) or three percent (3%) of the principal amount charged may be imposed
in connection with the payment of any tax.
      3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (C)2 of this section:
a) a minimum fee of one dollar ($1.00) may be imposed with respect to any
transaction, b) a fee may be imposed if the: 1) fee is no greater than the fee
charged by the financial institution or service provider accepting and
processing credit card payments on behalf of the Village, 2) the financial
institution or service provider accepting and processing the credit card
payments was selected by competitive bid, and 3) the Village discloses the fee
to the cardholder.
   (D)   Relief From Underlying Obligation: A person who makes a payment by
credit card to the Village shall not be relieved from liability for the
underlying obligation except to the extent that the Village realizes final
payment of the underlying obligation in cash or cash equivalency acceptable to
the Village. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other
guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, then the underlying
obligation shall survive and the Village shall retain all remedies for
enforcement that would have applied if the credit card transaction had not
occurred. A person making payment by credit card is not liable for any discount
or fee paid to a credit card issuer or other party by the Village.
   (E)   Liability Of Village Employees: A Village employee who accepts payment
by credit card in accordance with this section and any applicable rules
established by the Village, shall not incur personal liability for the final
collection of the payment. (Ord. 17-19, 11-20-2017)
CHAPTER 10
VILLAGE ENTITLEMENTS
SECTION:
1-10-1: Village Relief, Approvals
1-10-1: VILLAGE RELIEF, APPROVALS:
Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, no building permits,
occupancy permits, zoning certificates, business licenses, or any other Village
issued permit, license or approval of any kind or type shall be issued to any
applicant therefor if such applicant is indebted to the Village for any
outstanding fee or fine, or overdue bill, or if the property for which the
license, permit, zoning certificate, or other Village relief or approval is
sought is in violation of any Village regulation or code or is subject to any
code enforcement proceeding, except to the extent the application for relief or
approval would, if granted, cure the matter at issue regarding the property.
(Ord. 19-03, 1-28-2019)
CHAPTER 11
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM
SECTION:
1-11-1: Establishment And Scope
1-11-2: Definitions
1-11-3: Jurisdiction
1-11-4: Qualifications Of Hearing Officers
1-11-5: Hearing Procedures Not Exclusive
1-11-6: Instituting Adjudication Proceedings
1-11-7: Subpoenas; Defaults
1-11-8: Continuances; Representation At Hearings
1-11-9: Hearing; Evidence
1-11-10: Prima Facie Evidence
1-11-11: Determination
1-11-12: Review Under Administrative Review Law
1-11-13: Enforcement Of Final Determination
1-11-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND SCOPE:
   (A)   There is hereby established an administrative adjudication system so
as to provide a fair and efficient method of enforcing the regulations set
forth in this Code and Village ordinances through administrative adjudication
to the extent permitted by the Illinois Constitution.
   (B)   An "administrative adjudication system" means the adjudication of any
violation of this Code or other Village ordinances, except for proceedings not
within the home rule authority of the Village or as otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
1-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
definitions shall have the meanings ascribed:
CODE OR VILLAGE CODE: Means the Barrington Hills Municipal Code, as amended
from time to time.
HEARING OFFICER: Means a qualified individual, whose duty it is to:
   (A)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a Code or ordinance violation exists; and
   (B)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a Code or ordinance violation; and
   (C)   Preserve the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence
introduced at the hearing; and
   (D)   Issue and sign a written determination stating whether a Code or
ordinance violation exists.
ORDINANCE OR VILLAGE ORDINANCE: Means any regulation approved and adopted by
the Village Board of Trustees that is in effect but that has not been codified
in this Code.
VILLAGE: Means the Village of Barrington Hills, Illinois. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-
2019)
1-11-3: JURISDICTION:
Those matters subject to administrative adjudication are charges for violation
of any regulation of this Code and ordinances except for traffic regulations
governing the movement of vehicles under the Illinois Vehicle Code; liquor
control regulations; and except as otherwise prohibited by law. (Ord. 19-06, 2-
25-2019)
1-11-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS:
Prior to conducting proceedings under this chapter, a Hearing Officer shall
successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following:
   (A)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
   (B)   Orientation to each subject area of the Code or ordinance violations
that they will administer;
   (C)   Observations of administrative hearings; and
   (D)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
In addition, every Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law
in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years, and be in good standing
with the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission of the Supreme Court
of Illinois. A Hearing Officer is not required to be a resident of the Village.
(Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
1-11-5: HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The Village is not precluded from using other methods to enforce the provisions
of this Code and ordinances such as instituting an action in a court of law or
using other administrative enforcement methods set forth in this Code. The
existence of other administrative enforcement methods set forth in this Code
shall not preclude the Village from using the administrative adjudication
procedures provided in this chapter, except for matters involving the Village's
liquor control regulations. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
1-11-6: INSTITUTING ADJUDICATION PROCEEDINGS:
When a Village police officer or other individual authorized to issue a Code or
ordinance violation finds a Code or ordinance violation to exist, he or she
shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form
that indicates: a) the name and address of the defendant, b) the type and
nature of the violation, c) the date the violation was observed, d) and the
penalties for failure to appear at the initial appearance and hearing date.
The violation notice shall include a docket number on all copies and an initial
appearance and hearing date shall be indicated. The initial appearance and
hearing date shall not be less than twenty (20) days after the date of
violation notice.
One copy of the violation notice shall be maintained in the files of the
Village and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of the violation
notice shall be returned to the individual representing the Village in the case
so that he or she may prepare evidence of the Code or ordinance violation for
presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the
violation notice shall be served to the defendant, along with a command that
the defendant to appear at the hearing. Parties shall be served with the
violation notice in a manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice,
including, as appropriate, personal service of process upon a party or its
employees or agents; service by mail at a party's last known address; or notice
that is posted upon the property where the violation is found when the party is
the owner or manager of the property.
In the case of violations involving vehicles, the violation notice shall
additionally include:
   (A)   The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle;
   (B)   The registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the
violation;
Service of a violation notice involving vehicles may additionally be made by
affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully parked
vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of a vehicle if he or she is
present and by sending such notice, by mail, to the address of the registered
owner of the cited vehicle. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
1-11-7: SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the Hearing Officer assigned to hear the
case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for hearing the defendant or his
or her attorney fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may find the defendant in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a Code or ordinance violation.
The Hearing Officer may set aside any determination entered by default and set
a re-hearing date, upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days after the
issuance of the determination of default, if the Hearing Officer determines
that the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at
any time if the petitioner establishes that the Village did not provide proper
service of process. Such petition is a procedural prerequisite for judicial
review. If any default determination is set aside, the Hearing Officer shall
have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded
for any debt due and owing the Municipality as a result of the vacated default
determination. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
1-11-8: CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT HEARINGS:
No continuances shall be authorized by the Hearing Officer in proceedings under
this chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the defendant upon good cause shown. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. The case for the defendant may be
presented by the defendant or his or her attorney. A business entity defendant
shall only be represented by a licensed attorney. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
1-11-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE:
At the hearing a Hearing Officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall
accept any evidence relevant only as to the existence or non-existence of a
Code or ordinance violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
1-11-10: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
Concerning vehicles, a parking, standing or compliance violation notice issued,
signed and served in accordance with this chapter, a copy of the notice, or the
computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie
evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. The notice, copy,
or computer generated record shall be admissible in any subsequent
administrative or legal proceedings. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
1-11-11: DETERMINATION:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a Code or ordinance violation exists. The determination shall be
in writing. The final determination shall include: a) a finding as to liability
on the violation and if liability is determined; b) the issuance of an
applicable fine and/or an order of compliance.
In the event the Hearing Officer makes a finding of liability on a Code or
ordinance violation, each respondent shall pay an administrative adjudication
assessment in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which assessment is
intended to defray prosecution costs and expenses. The administrative
adjudication assessment is in addition to the issuance of any applicable fines.
Any sanctions imposed under this title shall be subject to the penalty
provisions in this Code applicable to the specific violation. Otherwise, such
sanctions shall be governed by the penalty provisions set forth in chapter 4 of
this title as amended from time to time. A copy of the determination shall be
served on the defendant within five (5) days after it is issued. Service of
determination may be made by personal service upon a party or its employees or
agents, by mail to a party's address or by electronic mail to the party's
electronic mail address. For the purpose of judicial review, the date of
service shall constitute the date upon which the determination was personally
served upon the party or the date upon which the determination was deposited in
the mail addressed to the party. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019; amd. Ord. 21-03, 3-29-
2021)
1-11-12: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
The final determination of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to review in
the Circuit Court of Cook County. The provisions of the Administrative Review
Law 1 , and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every
action for the judicial review of a final determination of a Hearing Officer
under this chapter. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
1-11-13: ENFORCEMENT OF FINAL DETERMINATION:
Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law shall be a debt due and owing the Village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the Code
or ordinance violation, the Village may enforce final determinations pursuant
to section 1-2.1-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code and pursuant to the
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code. Such enforcement may include
enforcement of unpaid monetary sanctions or compliance orders issued by the
Hearing Officer. (Ord. 19-06, 2-25-2019)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation Of Board
2-1-2: Powers And Duties
2-1-1: CREATION OF BOARD:
There is hereby created a board of local improvements for the village. This
board shall consist of the president of the village and the village trustees.
The village president shall be ex officio president of the board. (Ord. 57-1,
4-25-1957)
2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of local improvements shall have such powers and duties as are or may
be given to it by the statutes of the state, or the ordinances of the village.
(Ord. 57-1, 4-25-1957)
CHAPTER 2
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Creation And Purpose
2-2-2: Membership; Terms; Organization
2-2-3: Compensation
2-2-4: General Powers
2-2-5: Land Subdivision Or Resubdivision
2-2-6: Official Plan; Reservation Of Power
2-2-1: CREATION AND PURPOSE:
In order that adequate provision may be made for the preparation and
enforcement of a comprehensive village plan for the guidance, direction and
control of the development of the village, a plan commission is hereby created
under the authority of section 11-12-4 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord.
62-7, 8-27-1962)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; ORGANIZATION:
The plan commission shall consist of the village president, as ex officio
member, and nine (9) members appointed by the president, by and with the advice
and consent of the board of trustees. (Ord. 62-7, 8-27-1962; amd. Ord. 85-10,
5-20-1985)
The village president shall serve for the term of his elective office. All
other members shall serve respectively for the following terms: three (3) for
one year, three (3) for two (2) years and three (3) for three (3) years, as
designated by appointment. Upon the expiration of the term of each member so
appointed, the successor shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Vacancies
shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. (Ord. 62-7, 8-27-
1962)
The village president, with the approval of the trustees, shall appoint a
chairman from among the members to serve for a term of one year, and until his
successor shall be appointed and qualified. Except as to the chairman, the plan
commission shall organize itself, and elect a vice chairman, a secretary, and
such other officers as it may desire. (Ord. 77-6, 3-28-1977)
Every member who shall be present when a question is stated from the chair
shall vote thereon, including the chairman unless excused by a majority of the
commissioners present or unless such member has recused himself. (Ord. 11-05,
3-28-2011)
2-2-3: COMPENSATION:
No member of the plan commission shall receive any compensation from the
village for his services on the commission; provided, that the board of
trustees may provide a salary for the secretary, who need not be a member of
the commission. (Ord. 62-7, 8-27-1962)
2-2-4: GENERAL POWERS:
The plan commission shall have the following powers:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a comprehensive
plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the village.
Such a plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional
parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan,
or part thereof, of the village. This plan may include reasonable requirements
with reference to streets, alleys, public grounds and other improvements.
The plan, as recommended by the plan commission, and as thereafter adopted by
the president and board of trustees, may be made applicable, by the terms
thereof, to land situated within the corporate limits and contiguous territory
not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not
included in any other municipality.
Such plan may be implemented by ordinances: 1) establishing reasonable
standards of design for subdivisions and resubdivisions of unimproved land and
of areas subject to redevelopment, and 2) establishing reasonable requirements
governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets,
highways, alleys, ways for public facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for
residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution,
sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment.
   (B)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the village, and the
recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
   (C)   To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official comprehensive
plan.
   (D)   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities plans for
specific improvements, in pursuance of the official comprehensive plan.
   (E)   To give aid to the village officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further making
of these projects, and generally, to promote the realization of the official
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 62-7, 8-27-1962)
   (F)   Except as may be otherwise expressly provided by law or ordinance, the
authority of the plan commission shall be limited to a recommendatory function
to the village board of trustees. (1977 Code)
   (G)   To exercise such other powers as may be conferred by the village board
of trustees or by statute. (Ord. 62-7, 8-27-1962)
   (H)   To prepare and submit to the board of trustees a report and
recommendation regarding each petition for disconnection of territory from the
village, following public hearing and consideration of testimony and evidence.
(Ord. 91-18, 6-24-1991)
   (I)   To the extent provided in title 4 of this code, to hear and decide
appeals from and review orders, requirements, decisions or determinations made
by the village building and zoning and enforcement officer under the building
regulations set forth in title 4 of this code. (Ord. 92-15, 8-24-1992)
   (J)   To prepare and submit to the board of trustees a recommendation
regarding a petition for relief from the setback requirements of subsection
5-3-9(E) of this code, following a public hearing and consideration of
testimony and evidence. (Ord. 03-04, 2-24-2003)
2-2-5: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION:
Following the adoption of an official plan, or a part thereof, in the manner
prescribed in section 11-12-7 of the Illinois municipal code, no map or plat of
any subdivision or resubdivision affecting land within the corporate limits of
the village, or any contiguous territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles
of the village limits, and not included in any other municipality, shall be
approved by the plan commission, unless such subdivision or resubdivision
complies with all of the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the
village. (Ord. 62-7, 8-27-1962)
2-2-6: OFFICIAL PLAN; RESERVATION OF POWER:
The board of trustees shall retain the power to prepare or originate any
official plan for the village, and to amend, revise or modify such official
plan from time to time as may be deemed necessary or desirable. (Ord. 62-7, 8-
27-1962)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Commission Established
2-3-2: Submit Recommendations
2-3-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created an electrical commission consisting of six (6) members
appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees. The chief electrical inspector shall be a member and ex officio
chairman of such commission; of the other five (5) members, one shall be a
registered professional engineer, one an electrical contractor, one a
journeyman electrician, one a representative of an inspection bureau maintained
by the Fire Underwriters (or, if no such representative resides in the village,
then the chief of the fire department), and one a representative of an
electrical supply company. If there is no person residing in the village who is
qualified under any one of these descriptions, the village president may
appoint some other person to fill that position. Such members shall be
appointed for five (5) years and shall serve until their successors have been
appointed and qualified. (Ord. 76-4, 4-26-1976)
2-3-2: SUBMIT RECOMMENDATIONS:
The electrical commission shall recommend safe and practical standards and
specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment
in the village designed to meet the necessities and conditions in the village,
shall recommend reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of
permits, and fees to be paid; however, such standards and specifications, rules
and regulations, and fees shall not be effective until adopted by ordinance.
(Ord. 76-4, 4-26-1976)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Creation And Membership
2-4-2: Jurisdiction, Authority
2-4-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
The zoning board of appeals is hereby authorized to be established. The word
"board", when used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean the zoning board
of appeals. The said board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the
president of the village board and the board of trustees. No member of the
zoning board shall receive compensation for his services on the board. The
members of the board shall serve, respectively, for the following terms, or
until their respective successors are appointed: (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd.
1977 Code)
One for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four
(4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years, and one for seven (7)
years. The successor to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of five
(5) years.
One of the members of the zoning board of appeals shall be designated chairman
of said board, at the time of his appointment. The president of the village
board and the board of trustees shall have the power to remove any member of
said board for cause and after public hearing. Vacancies upon said board shall
be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant,
in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such member. (Ord. 63-1,
4-1-1963)
Every member of said board who shall be present when a question is stated from
the chair shall vote thereon, including the chairman unless excused by a
majority of the members present or unless such member has recused himself.
(Ord. 11-05, 3-28-2011)
2-4-2: JURISDICTION, AUTHORITY:
The zoning board of appeals is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction
and authority:
   (A)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the enforcing officer under the zoning
regulations of this code 1 .
   (B)   To hear and pass upon applications for variations from the terms
provided in the zoning regulations of this code in the manner prescribed by,
and subject to, the standards established therein.
   (C)   To hear all applications for special uses and amendments to the zoning
regulations of this code in the manner prescribed by, and subject to, the
standards established therein, and report said findings and recommendations to
the board of trustees.
   (D)   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under the zoning regulations of this code as prescribed by
statute. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (E)   To adopt rules as determined by the board, not inconsistent with this
code, which are reasonable and necessary for the implementation of any
provision of the zoning regulations of this code 2 . (Ord. 91-13, 3-25-1991)
   (F)   To prepare and submit to the board of trustees a report and
recommendation regarding each petition for disconnection of territory from the
village, following public hearing and consideration of testimony and evidence.
(Ord. 91-18, 6-24-1991)
   (G)   To the extent provided in title 4 of this code, to hear and decide
appeals from and review orders, requirements, decisions or determinations made
by the village building and zoning enforcement officer under the building
regulations set forth in title 4 of this code. (Ord. 92-14, 8-24-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5 of this code.
2 1. See title 5 of this code.
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
(Ord. 15-17, 9-28-2015)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-6-1: Creation And Purpose
2-6-2: Membership; Terms; Organization
2-6-3: Compensation
2-6-4: General Powers
2-6-1: CREATION AND PURPOSE:
In order to protect the public health and welfare of the residents of the
village and to provide a vehicle for the administration and enforcement of
village ordinances relating to public health and welfare, the board of health
is hereby created pursuant to the authority of section 11-16-1 of the Illinois
municipal code. (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-1992)
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; ORGANIZATION:
The board of health shall consist of the village president, as an ex officio
member, and not fewer than three (3) nor more than five (5) other members, all
of which shall be appointed by the village president on the basis of their
ability or experience, by and with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees.
Members shall serve for three (3) year terms. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointments, as provided for in the previous paragraph, for unexpired terms
only.
The village president, with the approval of the board of trustees, shall
appoint a chairman from among the members to serve a term of one year and until
a successor shall be appointed and qualified. Except as to the chairman, the
board of health shall organize itself and elect a vice chairman, a secretary
and such other officers as it may desire. (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-1992)
Every member of said board who shall be present when a question is stated from
the chair shall vote thereon, including the chairman unless excused by a
majority of the members present or unless such member has recused himself.
(Ord. 11-05, 3-28-2011)
2-6-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the board of health shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses. (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-1992)
2-6-4: GENERAL POWERS:
The board of health shall have the following powers:
   (A)   To administer and enforce section
4-2-7, "Private Sewage Disposal", of this code;
   (B)   To provide and maintain information for the public relative to all
health and sanitation matters arising out of applicable provisions of this
code;
   (C)   To fulfill the duties given to it by the ordinances of the village;
   (D)   To exercise such other powers as may be conferred upon it by the
village board of trustees or by statute; (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-1992)
   (E)   To review and approve, where appropriate, final plats of subdivision
with respect to sewage disposal systems, as provided for in section 2 of the
Illinois plat act and title 6 of this code; and (Ord. 92-14, 8-24-1992)
   (F)   To review the installation of water wells in the village and to make
recommendations regarding the adoption of regulations in order to preserve the
quantity of potable water available to the residents of the village. (Ord. 06-
02, 1-23-2006)
CHAPTER 7
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE POLICE PENSION FUND
SECTION:
2-7-1: Creation And Purpose
2-7-2: Definitions
2-7-3: Membership; Terms; Organization
2-7-4: Compensation
2-7-5: Powers And Duties
2-7-6: Operation
2-7-1: CREATION AND PURPOSE:
In order to establish and administer a police pension fund for the benefit of
its police officers and of their surviving spouses, children and certain other
dependents, the board of trustees of the police pension fund is hereby created
pursuant to the authority of section 3-128 of the Illinois pension code 1 .
(Ord. 04-5, 4-1-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et al.
2-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms are defined as follows:
BOARD OR BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The board of trustees of said pension fund.
POLICE: Full time police officers or full time police officers entitled to
participate in the benefits of said pension fund as provided by said article 3
of said Illinois pension code. (Ord. 04-5, 4-1-2004)
2-7-3: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; ORGANIZATION:
The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall consist of five (5)
members, two (2) of which shall be appointed by the village president, two (2)
of which shall be elected by and from the active participants of the pension
fund and one of which shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries of the
pension fund.
The first appointed member of the board shall serve one 1-year term. All other
members shall each serve one 2-year term. All successor members shall each
serve two (2) year terms. All members' terms begin on the second Tuesday in May
after the village adopts article 3 of the Illinois pension code.
Elections for elected members shall take place biennially on the third Monday
in April according to rules and regulations prescribed by the appointed
members.
Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any elected board member,
his or her successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special
election, to be called by the board of trustees of the police pension fund and
held in the same manner as the biennial election. Upon the death, resignation
or inability to act of any appointed board member, his or her successor shall
be appointed by the village president for the unexpired term. (Ord. 04-5, 4-1-
2004)
2-7-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of the board of trustees of the police pension fund shall neither
receive nor have any right to receive any salary from the pension fund for
services performed as trustees of that office. (Ord. 04-5, 4-1-2004)
2-7-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall have the powers and
duties stated in sections 3-132 through 3-140.1 of the Illinois pension code in
addition to other powers and duties provided under article 3 of the Illinois
pension code. (Ord. 04-5, 4-1-2004)
2-7-6: OPERATION:
Such board shall be appointed and elected as herein provided; shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties that shall be required of them by law. All
monies and securities belonging to said fund shall be held by the municipal
treasurer subject to the order of the board of trustees of the pension fund. An
annual list of beneficiaries and report of funds shall be made as required by
law. (Ord. 04-5, 4-1-2004)
CHAPTER 8
EQUESTRIAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-8-1: Creation And Purpose
2-8-2: Membership; Terms; Organization
2-8-3: Compensation
2-8-4: Powers And Duties
2-8-1: CREATION AND PURPOSE:
In order to protect the public health and welfare of the residents of the
village and to provide expertise in the area of best equine management
practices and equestrian activities within the village to the village board,
various village committees and village staff, the equestrian commission is
hereby created pursuant to the authority of section 11-16-1 of the Illinois
municipal code. (Ord. 05-01, 6-17-2005; amd. Ord. 19-17, 9-23-2019)
2-8-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; ORGANIZATION:
The equestrian commission shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall
be village residents appointed by the village president on the basis of their
ability or experience, by and with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees and at least one of whom shall be a member of the Riding Club Of
Barrington Hills or such similar body existing at the time of appointment.
Members shall serve for a period of one year beginning on May 1. Vacancies
shall be filled by appointments, as provided in the previous paragraph for
unexpired terms only.
The village president, with the approval of the board of trustees, shall
appoint a chairman from among the members to serve a term of one year and until
a successor shall be appointed and qualified. (Ord. 06-13, 7-24-2006)
Every commissioner who shall be present when a question is stated from the
chair shall vote thereon, including the chairman unless excused by a majority
of the commissioners present or unless such member has recused himself. (Ord.
11-05, 3-28-2011)
2-8-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the equestrian commission shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses. (Ord. 05-01, 6-17-2005)
2-8-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The equestrian commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(A)   Provide the official repository for equestrian issues and expertise for
the village;
(B)   Provide recommendations for trail design, trail routing and trail signage
as permitted.
(C)   Provide expertise on equestrian activity management;
(D)   Disseminate information regarding equestrian legislation in Illinois;
(E)   Monitor equestrian activity in other communities as it may relate to the
village; and
(F)   Assist and make recommendations to the plan commission regarding the
location of equestrian trails within new subdivisions. (Ord. 05-01, 6-17-2005;
amd. Ord. 19-17, 9-23-2019)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES AND PERMITS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Issuance; Forms
3-1-1: ISSUANCE; FORMS:
In all cases where a license or a permit is required by Village ordinance, or
by this Code, such licenses or permits shall be issued by the Village Clerk,
except where otherwise provided. Forms of licenses and permits shall be
prescribed by and provided by the Village Board. (Ord. 57-1, 4-25-57)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Short Title
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-4: Licenses
3-2-5: Sales
3-2-6: Revocation, Suspension, Complaints
3-2-7: Fines for Violations
3-2-8: Adoption of State Law, Severability
3-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Barrington Hills
Liquor Control Ordinance.
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, words and phrases in this Chapter shall
be construed in accordance with the definitions set forth herein below:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic, ethyl
alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being
consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this Chapter shall
not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in
accordance with acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to
any liquid or solid containing not more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of
alcohol by volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and
the like.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of the State, solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members, through the payment of
annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building,
of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable
and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests, and
provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment
for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their
guests; provided that such club's affairs and management are conducted by a
board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members
at their annual meeting, and that no member, or any officer, agent or employee
of the club is paid or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary
or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic
liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests, beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members
or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue
of the club.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead, or
other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and convey any
alcoholic liquor.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, club, partnership, corporation, company,
association joint venture, or joint stock company. Whenever used in a clause
describing or imposing a fine or term of imprisonment, or both, the term
"person" shall mean the partners or members and directors or officers thereof.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and
regularly served at tables, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve to its customers or guests.
RESTAURANT LOUNGE AREA: A separate area associated, managed and operated in
conjunction with a restaurant, as defined above, containing seats numbering not
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the seating capacity of the associated
restaurant, to be used primarily for restaurant patrons waiting to be seated in
the associated restaurant, and secondarily for other patrons whether or not
incidental and complementary to the service of meals or food, but only to
patrons who are seated.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, for a
consideration and includes and means all sales made directly or indirectly by
any person, including any principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SALE AT RETAIL, SELL AT RETAIL, RETAIL SALE: Sales for use or consumption and
not for resale in any form.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substances in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise
mixed with alcohol or other substances.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined.
3-2-3: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   (A)   President Designated Liquor Control Commissioner. The Village
President is hereby designated the Liquor Control Commissioner in and for the
Village of Barrington Hills.
   (B)   Duties. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following
duties:
      1.   To administer such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic
liquor as may be enacted by the Board of Trustees, and of such other
legislation as may become applicable within the Village with respect to the
sale of alcoholic liquor.
      2.   To issue or renew liquor licenses in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
      3.   To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a liquor
license he has determined to be ineligible therefor in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
      4.   To suspend for cause for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke
for cause, any liquor license previously granted by the Village in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
      5.   To receive and act upon complaints from any citizen that any of the
provisions of this Chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, or any other applicable rules or regulations have been or are being
violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided.
      6.   To receive local license fees and forward the same forthwith to the
Village Treasurer for proper deposit and accounting.
      7.   To keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued
under this Chapter and to furnish the Village Clerk, Village Treasurer and
Chief of Police each with a copy thereof.
      8.   To report, whenever requested by the Board of Trustees, all of his
acts taken to enforce this Chapter and all acts taken in regard to the
collection of liquor license fees, including the data collected, and date the
fees were turned over to the Village Treasurer.
   (C)   Other Powers. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following
other specific powers:
      1.   To appoint one or more persons to assist him in the exercise of such
powers and the performance of such duties as he may deem necessary.
      2.   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a
local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served as provided by Statute, and to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant or
licensee; to hear testimony and take proof of information in the performance of
his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in
any part of this State.
      3.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder, to determine whether any of the
provisions of this Chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by any
other agency having the authority to do so, have been or are being violated,
and at the time of such entry to examine such premises in connection therewith.
      4.   To extend, by written order, closing hours upon occasion for good
cause.
3-2-4: LICENSES:
   (A)   Unlicensed Sale and Sale in Violation of Restrictions Prohibited.
      1.   Except as provided in subsection (A)2 hereof, it shall be unlawful
for any person not having a current, valid license, authorized and issued
hereunder, to sell or offer for sale in the Village any alcoholic liquor.
      2.   No license shall be required for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
by civic, political, fraternal, educational or charitable organizations and
not-for-profit organizations dedicated to the promotion, enhancement or
appreciation of museums, libraries, parks, gardens or the fine arts for the
purpose of minor fund-raising events, festivals, outings, picnics and other
similar special events. Any event shall be considered minor when no more than
one hundred (100) people are anticipated to attend.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale in
the Village any alcoholic liquor except in the manner authorized by and in
compliance with the terms and restrictions of a license issued hereunder.
   (B)   Application for License.
      1.   Application Generally. Application for a license hereunder shall be
made to the Liquor Control Commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant,
if an individual, or by one of the partners, if a partnership, or by the duly
authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by an oath or
affidavit.
      2.   Background Information. Each application shall include the following
background information:
         (a)   The name, age and address of the applicant; in the case of a
partnership, also the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the
case of a corporation for profit, or a club, also the officers and directors
and persons controlling in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the
voting shares of stock.
         (b)   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization; in the case of a
corporation or club, the place of incorporation.
         (c)   The character of business of the applicant and, in the case of a
club or corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
         (d)   The length of time that the applicant has been in business of
the character specified in response to subsection (B)2(c) above, or in case of
a club or corporation, the date on which its charter was issued.
         (e)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license.
      3.   Statements Required. Each application must include the following
statements:
         (a)   A statement as to whether the applicant has a current license
issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
         (b)   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted
of a felony under any Federal or State law.
         (c)   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted
of a violation of any Federal or State law or local ordinance concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or has ever forfeited his
bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
         (d)   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted
of a gambling offense as prescribed by any State or Federal law or regulation.
         (e)   A statement as to whether the applicant has had a similar
license issued under State or Federal law or under the ordinances of any
municipality revoked within ten (10) years of the date of the present
application.
         (f)   A statement as to whether the applicant has had a similar
license issued under State or Federal law or under the ordinances of any
municipality suspended more than once within one year of the present
application.
         (g)   A statement as to whether the applicant is a Village employee or
law enforcing official of any government agency.
         (h)   A statement as to whether the applicant has been issued a
Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp by the Federal
government for the current tax period.
         (i)   A statement as to whether a Federal gaming device stamp has been
issued for the current taxable year with respect to the premises for which the
license is sought.
         (j)   A statement as to whether the premises for which a license is
sought comprise a store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such
minors.
         (k)   A statement as to whether the retail sale of alcohol on the
premises for which a license is sought will violate any provision of the
Barrington Hills Zoning Ordinance, 1  and as to whether the lot line of such
premises are within one hundred feet (100') of the lot line of any church,
school, hospital, home for the aged, children, or indigent persons, or any
military or naval station.
         (l)   A statement as to whether the applicant is a permanent resident
of the Village of Barrington Hills.
         (m)   A statement as to whether the applicant beneficially owns the
premises for which a license is sought, or has a lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued.
         (n)   A statement as to whether the applicant is the beneficial owner
of the business to be licensed.
         (o)   A statement as to whether the applicant will be personally,
actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed.
         (p)   A statement as to whether the business is or will be managed by
a manager or agent. All required statements pertaining to an individual
licensee must be supplied with respect to such manager or agent.
         (q)   A statement that the applicant is not disqualified from
receiving a license by reason of any matter or item contained in the laws of
this State, this Chapter, or other ordinances of the Village.
         (r)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any laws of this
State or of the United States, or this Chapter, or other ordinances of the
Village in the conduct of his businesses.
         (s)   If the applicant is a partnership, all required statements above
pertaining to an individual licensee must be supplied with respect to each
partner; provided, however, that the statement concerning active involvement in
subsection (B)3(o) above is required of only one such partner.
         (t)   If the applicant is a corporation, all required statements above
pertaining to an individual licensee must be supplied with respect to each
officer, manager or director thereof, and any stockholder or stockholders
controlling in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the voting stock of
such corporation; provided, however, that the statement concerning Village
residency in subsection (B)3(l) above and the statement concerning active
involvement in subsection (B)3(o) above, shall not be required of such
officers, managers, directors and five percent (5%) aggregate stockholders;
provided, further, that the statement concerning the issuance of a Federal
gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp for the current taxable year in
subsection (B)3(h) above shall only be required of a stockholder or
stockholders who control in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%),
rather than five percent (5%) of the voting stock of such corporations.
   (C)   Ineligibility for License.
      1.   No license of any kind shall be issued or renewed to:
         (a)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or
State law, if the Liquor Control Commissioner determines, after investigation,
that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
trust.
         (b)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or
State law or local ordinance concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer
charges for any such violation.
         (c)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as
prescribed by any State or Federal law or regulation.
         (d)   A person whose liquor license issued under State law or any
municipal ordinance has been revoked for cause within ten (10) years of the
date of the present application.
         (e)   A person whose liquor license issued under this Chapter has been
suspended more than once for cause within one year of the present application.
         (f)   Any Village employee, law enforcing official, the President and
any member of the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a bona fide not-for-
profit private club or charitable or educational organization, owned and
operated by its members, one or more of which members is a Village employee,
law enforcing public official, the President or a member of the Board of
Trustees.
         (g)   A person to whom a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period.
         (h)   A person applying for a license with respect to premises for
which a Federal gaming device stamp has been issued for the current taxable
year.
         (i)   A person applying for a license with respect to any store or
other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school
age or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school
supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
         (j)   A person applying for a license with respect to premises upon
which the retail sale of alcoholic liquor will violate any provision of the
Barrington Hills Zoning Ordinance, or which lot line of such premises are
within one hundred feet (100') of the lot line of any church, school, hospital,
home for the aged, children, or indigent persons, or any military or naval
station; provided that no distance shall be required with respect to a State
university or other institution of higher learning.
         (k)   A person, other than a corporation, who is not a permanent
resident of the Village of Barrington Hills.
         (l)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
         (m)   A person who is not the beneficial owner of the business to be
licensed.
         (n)   A person who will not be personally, actively involved in the
operation of the business to be licensed.
         (o)   A person whose place of business is managed by a manager or
agent unless said manager or agent possesses the qualifications required of the
applicant for the license.
         (p)   A partnership, unless all members thereof shall be qualified to
obtain a license; provided, however, that the requirement of active involvement
in subsection (C)1(n) above shall apply only to one such partner.
         (q)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or
any stockholder or stockholders controlling in the aggregate more than five
percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible, except by
reason of the Village residency requirement in subsection (C)1(k) above or the
requirement of active involvement in subsection (C)1(n) above, to receive a
license hereunder; provided, however, that the ineligibility of a corporate
applicant premised on a stockholder or stockholders having received a Federal
gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp for the current taxable year in
subsection (C)1(g) above shall apply only to the extent that such stockholder
or stockholders control in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%), rather
than five percent (5%), of the stock of such corporations.
      2.   All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be conditioned
upon the acquisition by the applicant of a State license issued by the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission. Any license so conditionally issued shall not
authorize the retail sale of any alcoholic liquor until proof of acquisition of
such State license is furnished to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. In
the event that the applicant is refused a State license by said Commission, the
license conditionally issued under this paragraph shall become null and void
and the license fee and surety bond required by this Chapter shall be returned
to the applicant.
      3.   In addition to other grounds specified in this Chapter, the Liquor
Control Commissioner, on complaint of the State Department of Revenue may
refuse the issuance or renewal of a license, or suspend or revoke such license,
for any of the following violations of the "Retailer's Occupation Tax Act".
         (a)   Failure to make a tax return.
         (b)   The filing of a fraudulent return.
         (c)   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally
determined to be due.
         (d)   Failure to keep books and records.
         (e)   Failure to secure and display a certificate or sub-certificate
of registration.
         (f)   Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the State
Department of Revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax
liability.
   (D)   Classification and Schedule of Fees. There shall be the following
classes of licenses and respective license fees; provided, however that no such
license shall be issued in excess of the number, if any, specified in
subsection (H) for each such license.
      1.   Class A Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors for consumption only on the premises where sold to members or guests of
members by clubs, as determined in Section
3-2-2 of this Chapter, organized under the laws of this State not for pecuniary
profit. The annual fee for such license shall one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      2.   Class B Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor by restaurants, but only when such sale is incidental and complementary
to the sale and service of complete meals and for consumption only on the
premises where sold. The annual fee for such license shall be two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00).
      3.   Class C Licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in restaurant lounge areas, as defined in Section
3-2-2 of this Chapter, for consumption only on the premises where sold. Such
license may only be issued to the holder of a valid Class B license. The annual
fee for such license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      4.   Special Class D Licenses, which shall authorize, subject to the
following restrictions, the retail sale of alcoholic liquor by not-for-profit
organizations dedicated to the promotion, enhancement or appreciation of
museums, libraries, parks, gardens, or the fine arts and civic, political,
fraternal, riding clubs, educational or charitable organizations. Such licenses
shall be issued to such organizations only for major fund-raising events,
festivals, outings, picnics, and other similar special events, only for
consumption on the premises or within the area specifically designated in such
license, and shall in no event be valid for longer than five (5) days. Any
event shall be considered major when more than one hundred (100) people are
anticipated to attend. The fee for such licenses shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) per day.
   (E)   Proration of Fees. The fee to be paid for licenses issued under the
provisions of this Chapter shall be reduced in proportion to the number of
calendar months which have expired in the license year prior to the issuance of
the license. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fee paid for
any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such
license in accordance with the provisions of subsection (J) due to the death of
the licensee. There shall be no refund where a license is suspended, revoked or
involuntarily terminated pursuant to State law or this Chapter.
   (F)   Cost Assessment. The applicant shall be liable for all costs incurred
by the Village in processing the application and investigating the statements
and information provided therein. All such costs shall be in addition to the
annual license fee payable under the provisions of subsection (D) above. No
such cost assessment shall be made in connection with applications for a Class
D license.
   (G)   Payment and Disposition of Fees and Costs Assessment. Additional costs
assessments shall be paid within fourteen (14) days of billing. All fees for
licenses issued under this Chapter shall be paid to the Liquor Control
Commissioner before the day on which the license applied for is to become
effective. In the event the license applied for is denied, any fee submitted
shall be returned to the applicant after costs incurred by the Village in
excess of the two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) non-refundable costs
assessment have been deducted. The applicant shall remain liable for any costs
in excess of the fee and costs assessment submitted. If the license is granted,
then the fee and costs assessment shall be deposited in the general corporate
purposes fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the
President and Board of Trustees by motion, resolution or ordinance.
   (H)   Number of Licenses. The following shall be the number of licenses
available to be issued for each class:
      Class A   2
      Class B   2
      Class C   2
      Class D   2
   (I)   Bond. Before any license may be issued, the applicant shall furnish a
surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the Village of
Barrington Hills. Such bond shall be forfeited automatically upon revocation of
the license for which the bond was furnished if revocation was for cause. This
bond shall not be required for Class D licenses.
   (J)   License is a Personal Privilege. A license issued under this Chapter
shall be purely a personal privilege to expire on the last day of April next
following the issuance thereof and shall not constitute property, nor shall it
be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable
or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered
or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution but shall, except as provided in subsection (K)1 of this
Chapter, cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or
administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic
liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order
of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such
insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but no longer
than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
   (K)   Changes in Personnel.
      1.   Any changes in a partnership, or in officers, directors or persons
holding directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock of a
corporation or ownership interest, or managers, of establishments licensed
under this Chapter shall be reported in writing to the Liquor Control
Commissioner within ten (10) days of the change. All new personnel shall meet
all the standards of this Chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor
license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the Liquor
Control Commissioner.
      2.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate.
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 5 of this Code for Zoning Regulations
3-2-5: SALES:
   (A)   Sales Restricted to Authorized Premises; Change of Location. A license
shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the
application and license, and only in the manner therein authorized and in
compliance with the terms thereof. Such location may be changed only upon the
issuance of a written permit to make such change issued by the Liquor Control
Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws
of this State, this Chapter and other ordinances of the Village.
   (B)   Displaying License. Every licensee shall cause his current alcoholic
beverage license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises.
   (C)   Hours of Business.
      1.   Consumption on the Premises. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer
for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises in the
Village between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:
00) A.M. on Monday through Friday, and it shall be unlawful to sell or offer
for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises in the
Village between the hours of two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. on either Saturday or Sunday.
      2.   New Years Day. The foregoing provisions shall not prohibit the sale
at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises in the Village
past the normal closing hours of the day before, and until the hour of five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. on New Years Day.
      3.   Hours for Other Business. Licensed premises may remain open for the
sale of food during the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public on
such premises during such hours.
   (D)   Civil Rights in Licensed Premises. No licensee licensed under the
provisions of this Chapter shall deny, or permit his agents or employees to
deny, any person the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodation, advantages,
facilities and privileges of any premises in which alcoholic liquors are
authorized to be sold, subject only to the conditions and limitations
established by law and applicable alike to all citizens. This provision shall
not be construed to prevent a good faith refusal to serve alcoholic liquor to
any intoxicated person or to any person who reasonably appears to be
intoxicated, mentally deficient, or otherwise mentally impaired.
   (E)   Sales to Intoxicated Persons.
      1.   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of any licensee shall sell, give or deliver any alcoholic
liquor to any person who is, or who appears to be, intoxicated.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise
obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to
an intoxicated or apparently intoxicated person.
   (F)   Minors.
      1.   Sales to Minors.
         (a)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of any licensee shall sell, give or deliver any alcoholic
liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
         (b)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years; provided, however, that this shall not
prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in the performance of a
religious ceremony; provided, further, that this shall not prevent the
consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in his own home pursuant to the
condonation and supervision of his parents or legal guardians.
         (c)   In any place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold,
there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed card
which shall be supplied by the Village Clerk and which shall read substantially
as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE. YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $500.00
UNDER AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF BARRINGTON HILLS IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR, OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
         (d)   If a licensee, his agents or employees, believes or has reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because
the prospective recipient may be less than twenty one (21) years of age, he
shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of
positive identification containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in
the performance of his official duties. (Ord. 81-28, 6-9-81)
      2.   Sales by Minors. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or person in
charge of premises licensed hereunder to permit any person less than twenty-one
(21) years of age to sell, serve, draw, pour, mix or deliver any alcoholic
liquor in any licensed retail premises. (Ord. 84-23, 9-24-84)
      3.   Purchases by Minors.
         (a)   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall purchase
or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession
except as provided in Sections
3-2-5(F)1(b) and (F)2 above.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent his or her
age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in
the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
         (c)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification
card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card or obtain an identification card by means of false
information, where such card may enable such person to circumvent the
provisions of this Chapter.
         (d)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian intentionally or
negligently to permit any child under the age of twenty one (21) of which he or
she is parent or guardian, to violate any provision of this Chapter. (Ord. 81-
28, 6-9-81)
      4.   Permitting Minors to Remain on License Premises. It shall be
unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license, or his agent or
employee, to suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to be
or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in
the room or place where such license premises is located unless the underaged
person is accompanied by his/her parent or guardian or the license premises
derives its principal business from the sale or service of commodities other
than alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 84-24, 9-24-84)
   (C)   Peddling Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor
in the Village.
3-2-6: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, COMPLAINTS:
   (A)   Violation Determined by Commissioner.
      1.   The Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend for not more than thirty
(30) days, or revoke any license issued by him if he determines that there has
been any violation of any State law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor,
any provision of this Chapter, Section
6-1-4 of the Village Code, or any other Village ordinance, or any applicable
rules or regulations established by the Liquor Control Commissioner, or the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission, or for the failure to pay any license cost
or fee or any tax imposed on alcoholic liquor or the sale thereof. However,
except as hereinafter provided, no such license shall be revoked or suspended
except after a public hearing by the Liquor Control Commission, to commence not
sooner than three (3) days after written notice shall have been transmitted to
the licensee at the licensed premises personally or by United States mail,
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. Such notice shall
state the date, time and place of the hearing. If the Liquor Control
Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of any
particular licensed premises will threaten the welfare of the community, he
may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such
conclusion and without notice or hearing order a licensed premises closed for
not more than seven (7) days pending a hearing on the suspension or revocation
of the license therefor. Such order shall contain notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing thereon, which hearing shall commence not less than five
(5) nor more than seven (7) days from the date of service, personally or by
certified United States mail, of said notice upon the licensee or his agent, or
any employee thereof in charge of the licensed premises. The Liquor Control
Commissioner shall hold the hearing at the date, time and place set forth in
such notice, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard, and shall make his
decision not later than five (5) days from the conclusion of the hearing. If
such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or
businesses on the licensed premises, such initial closing order shall not be
applicable to such other business or businesses.
      2.   Appeals shall be taken to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission and
the Illinois Circuit Court in the manner provided by law.
   (B)   Violation Determined by Court.
      1.   Whenever any licensee shall be convicted in court of any violation
of State law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or any provision of
this Chapter, or any applicable rules or regulations established by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner or the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, or any
law or regulation pertaining to liquor license fees or taxes, the license of
said licensee may in the discretion of the Liquor Control Commissioner be
revoked. Such revocation need not be preceded by notice or a hearing for such
licensee. However, such licensee shall have a right to a public hearing by the
Liquor Control Commissioner for the purpose of showing cause for reissuing the
revoked license by petitioning for such a hearing within fifteen (15) days of
the revocation of such license. The hearing shall be held within a reasonable
time and shall allow the licensee an opportunity to be heard, and the Liquor
Control Commissioner shall make his decision not later than five (5) days from
the conclusion of the hearing.
      2.   Whenever an officer, director or manager or other employee of any
licensee under this Chapter shall be convicted of any violation of any law,
ordinance or provision as provided in subsection (A) above, while engaged in
the course of his employment or while on the premises described in said
license, said license may be revoked in the discretion of the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, subject to a subsequent hearing as provided in subsection
(A) above.
   (C)   Complaints. Any person may file a complaint with the Liquor Control
Commissioner alleging that any licensee has been or is violating State law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or the provisions of this Chapter
or the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be in
writing, in the form prescribed by the Liquor Control Commissioner, and shall
be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state
the particular law, provisions, rule or regulation believed to have been
violated and the facts in detail upon which such belief is based. If the Liquor
Control Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a
violation and finds probable cause to believe the same, he shall set the matter
for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of
such hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint, such hearing to
take place not sooner than five (5) days from the date upon which such notice
is served upon the licensee at the address of the licensed premises, personally
or by United States mail.
3-2-7: FINES FOR VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Fines in General. Any person who violates any provision of this
Chapter shall for a first offense be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and for a second or subsequent
offense shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (B)   Separate Offenses. Each day on or during which any person violates any
of the provisions of this Chapter, and each separate act or transaction in
violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Vicarious Liability. Every act or omission of whatsoever nature
constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, by any
officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be
deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and said employer
or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission
had been done by him personally.
3-2-8: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW, SEVERABILITY:
   (A)   All the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act and the rules
and regulations issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, as amended,
pertaining to local control of alcoholic beverages are hereby incorporated into
and declared to be a part of this Chapter the same as if expressly set forth
herein.
   (B)   The sections and subsections of this Chapter shall be deemed to be
severable, and the invalidity of any portion of this Chapter shall not affect
the validity of the remainder. (Ord. 81-28, 6-29-81)
CHAPTER 3
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Permit Requirement
3-3-3: Permit Application
3-3-4: Standards For Permit Issuance
3-3-5: Denial Of Permit
3-3-6: Revocation Of Permit
3-3-7: Appeal Of Permit Denial Or Revocation
3-3-8: Exemptions
3-3-9: Individual Privacy And Soliciting
3-3-10: Other Regulations And Standards Of Conduct
3-3-11: Penalty
3-3-12: Severability
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, except where
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CHARITABLE OR NONPROFIT PURPOSE: Philanthropic, religious, political, or other
nonprofit objectives, including, but not limited to, the benefit of poor,
needy, sick, refugee, or handicapped persons; the benefit of a church or
religious society, sect, group or order; the benefit of a patriotic or
veterans' association or organization; the benefit of a political party, group,
or candidate; or the benefit of an educational institution.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, firm, company, trust, society, religious sect, league or
other legal entity, including any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or similar
representative.
SOLICITATION: Conduct whereby any person obtains or seeks to obtain funds or
anything of value for any cause whatsoever by means of traveling from place to
place, or requests the donation of money, property, or anything of value; or
sells or offers to sell any property, tangible or intangible, whether of value
or not, including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets,
publications or subscriptions to publications, or brochures. Solicitation shall
include the delivery of handbills or circulars door to door for the
solicitation of money, products, services or other items of pecuniary value.
Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, regardless of whether the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale.
SOLICITOR: Any person engaging in solicitation. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except those expressly exempted in this
chapter, to engage in the business or activity of solicitation in the village
without having first applied for, obtained, and maintained a valid solicitor's
permit as hereinafter provided. A permit shall not be issued to any person
under seventeen (17) years of age. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-3: PERMIT APPLICATION:
   (A)   Application for a solicitor's permit shall be made in writing,
notarized, on a form provided by and filed with the village police department.
Each applicant shall state the following information under oath:
      1.   The applicant's full name, all addresses of applicant's residence
during the past two (2) years, the length of time of the applicant's residence
at each address, and the applicant's business address if other than their
current residence address;
      2.   The applicant's place and date of birth, social security number,
driver's license number and state of issuance or current state or federal
identification card, and physical description of applicant;
      3.   The name and address of the business or other person or entity by
whom the applicant is employed or whom the applicant represents, and the
initial date of such employment or representation;
      4.   A description of the nature of the applicant's solicitation;
      5.   The dates for which the applicant seeks a solicitor's permit;
      6.   Information, including date information, regarding any prior
application or use of a solicitor's permit by applicant in the village, or any
revocation of a solicitor's permit issued by the village to applicant;
      7.   Information regarding any prior conviction of the applicant of a
felony under any state or federal law; and
      8.   Information regarding prior or current violations, if any, by the
applicant of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of the solicitation
regulations of any local, state, or federal government.
   (B)   Village police department personnel will photograph each applicant and
affix such photograph to applicant's solicitor's permit, if issued.
   (C)   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for the investigation and administration of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-4: STANDARDS FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a solicitor's permit, the
chief of police or an authorized agent shall cause an investigation to be made
as to the applicant's criminal record, if any, and compliance with all
applicable laws and ordinances of the state and the village. Applicants shall
cooperate with such investigation and furnish such additional information as
may be reasonably requested by the chief of police or an authorized agent in
furtherance of said investigation.
   (B)   Within five (5) business days of receiving an application, or within
such extended time period as may be necessary, the chief of police or an
authorized agent shall issue a solicitor's permit if a determination is made
that:
      1.   The material statements made in the application are true;
      2.   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony under any state or
federal law within five (5) years of the date of the application;
      3.   The applicant has not had a previously issued solicitor's permit
revoked by the village or by any other municipality within five (5) years of
the date of the application; and
      4.   The applicant has not been convicted of violating any provisions of
this chapter within five (5) years of the date of application.
   (C)   All the permits issued hereunder shall indicate the date or dates on
which such permit shall be valid, and the hours when solicitation within the
village is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. An
expired permit may be renewed under the same terms and conditions as the
original application and will be subject to the same fees.
   (D)   The village police department shall maintain a record of every
application received and acted upon, together with all other information and
data pertaining thereto, copies of all solicitor's permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter, and a record of all applications denied or revoked
pursuant to provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-5: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
If the chief of police or an authorized agent determines and finds that the
applicant has not met one or more of the above conditions, the chief of police
or any authorized agent shall deny issuance of the solicitor's permit and shall
give written notification of such denial to the applicant. Such notice shall be
delivered in person or by U.S. mail addressed to the residence address set
forth in the permit application, stating the action taken and the reasons
supporting such action. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-6: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Any solicitor's permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the chief of
police or an authorized agent if the holder of the solicitor's permit:
      1.   Violates any of the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   Has made a false statement or misrepresentation in the permit
application;
      3.   Perpetrates a fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting
solicitation activities;
      4.   Transfers any solicitor's permit to a person other than the person
for whom the permit was issued;
      5.   Uses or allows the use of a solicitor's permit by any person other
than the person to whom the permit was issued;
      6.   Conducts solicitation activities in an unlawful manner or in such
manner as to create a public nuisance or in such way as to constitute a danger
to the health, safety or welfare of the public; or
      7.   Is convicted of any felony subsequent to the issuance of a
solicitor's permit.
   (B)   Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be
given by the chief of police or an authorized agent to the permit holder, in
person or by U.S. mail addressed to the residence address set forth in the
permit application, stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such
action. Immediately upon the delivery or mailing of such notice, the
solicitor's permit shall become null and void. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-7: APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
   (A)   Any person denied a solicitor's permit or whose solicitor's permit has
been revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the village
president.
   (B)   Appeals must be taken in writing and must be filed with the chief of
police within ten (10) business days after revocation or denial of the permit,
and shall contain a statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The
appealing party shall submit whatever documentation they desire to have the
village president consider with the written appeal.
   (C)   The written decision of the village president shall be made available
to the appealing party not later than ten (10) business days after the village
receives the written appeal.
   (D)   The decision of the village president is final. No new application for
a permit will be considered for six (6) months after denial or revocation,
unless said denial or revocation is without prejudice or is conditional and the
conditions have been satisfied as determined by the village president. (Ord.
03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-8: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   The following persons engaged in the activities set forth below in the
village shall first register with the chief of police or an authorized agent in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and by furnishing proof that
they are actually engaged in such activity in the village, the chief of police
or an authorized agent shall issue to such person a registration certificate
exempting them from the terms and conditions of this chapter and from paying a
fee therefor, namely:
      1.   Persons seeking the signature of a village resident for a zoning or
election petition;
      2.   Persons engaging in the sales or deliveries of goods, wares,
foodstuffs, merchandise or services on regularly established routes within the
village or sales or deliveries by other persons having an established list of
customers within the village to whom they make periodic deliveries; and
      3.   Persons engaged in solicitation at the invitation or request of the
person contacted.
   (B)   Any person engaging in solicitation of the nature listed in subsection
(A) of this section need not obtain a solicitor's permit, but must file a
registration certificate with the chief of police or an authorized agent and,
when requested, must provide information to verify the permit exemption. In
addition, any such person shall disclose their organizational affiliation and
purpose of the solicitation to any village resident upon request.
   (C)   Solicitation related to children's activities, including, but not
limited to, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts and Big Brothers and Sisters, may involve
children under the age of seventeen (17), and such participation must be noted
in the registration certificate. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to fail to file a registration certificate prior to engaging in
solicitation.
   (D)   Charitable or nonprofit organizations and their representatives
distributing handbills or pamphlets only for the purpose of communicating
issues of general interest to the public need not register with the chief of
police or pay a permit fee.
   (E)   This chapter shall not apply to any village festival as designated by
the village president. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-9: INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY AND SOLICITING:
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that the
occupants of any residence located within the village shall make the
determination of whether any solicitor shall be, or shall not be, invited to
their respective residences.
   (B)   Any person conducting solicitations who is not, pursuant to the
provisions contained herein, invited onto the premises of any resident or who
has obtained entrance to such premises and does not immediately and peacefully
leave the same upon being so requested by the occupant of such premises, shall
be deemed a trespasser.
   (C)   No person, whether registered or not under this chapter, shall solicit
within the village on any premises if the same are posted against solicitation
by means of a notice, prominently displayed, bearing the words "No Solicitors",
"No Trespassing", "No Solicitors Invited" or any other similar notice
indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises desire not to have
their right of privacy disturbed, unless such occupant has specifically
requested such solicitation.
   (D)   Any premises shall be deemed to be posted against solicitation if
there is exhibited on or near the main entrance to the property, or on or near
the main door, a sign measuring at least three inches by four inches (3" x 4")
bearing the applicable words with letters at least one-third inch (1/3") in
height.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of each solicitor upon going onto any premises in
the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the premises for
the notice provided for in this chapter. If a notice is posted, then the
solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peaceably depart.
(Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-10: OTHER REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS OF CONDUCT:
   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful and shall constitute an offense for any
solicitor, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go in or upon any
premises within the village for the purpose of soliciting at any time before
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. or on any Sunday
or state or national holiday.
   (B)   Each solicitor registered hereunder shall at all times while
soliciting in the village wear the solicitor's permit on the solicitor's outer
clothing, in such a way that the permit may be easily seen and read while in
the course of solicitation activities.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct solicitation on any
public property, way, or place in a manner that completely or substantially
impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in, on, or around such
public property, way or place.
   (D)   No person conducting solicitation shall have the exclusive right to
any public property, way or place, nor to establish a permanent stationary
location for such solicitation.
   (E)   No person shall stand in or on a public street for the purpose of
soliciting contributions from the occupant of a motor vehicle.
   (F)   Solicitors shall conduct themselves at all times in an orderly and
lawful manner and shall not make, or cause to be made, any loud or obnoxious
noise of such volume sufficient to disturb the peace of the residents of the
village.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to cheat, deceive, or
misrepresent any product, service, or organization, whether individually or
through an agent or employee, while acting as a solicitor in the village, or to
sell or barter any goods, merchandise or wares other than those specified in
their permit application. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
3-3-11: PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall for a
first offense be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and for a second or subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day on or during which any person violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may avoid
prosecution for said violation by returning the issued citation or other notice
of violation and paying the village treasurer within ten (10) days from the
date appearing on said notice of violation, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00)
in cash or by certified check. Any person making such payment shall receive a
receipt from the village treasurer. If payment is not made within ten (10)
days, legal action may be instituted against the violator. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-
2003)
3-3-12: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any other provision of this
chapter. (Ord. 03-18, 9-4-2003)
CHAPTER 4
SUMMER THEATERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: License Required, Application
3-4-2: Term Of License
3-4-3: Inspection Of Premises
3-4-4: Conditions Of License
3-4-5: Posting License
3-4-6: Revocation Of License
3-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a theater without first having
secured a license therefor. (Ord. 69-5, 7-28-1969)
All applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the clerk of the
village and shall be delivered to the clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to
the date of opening of such proposed theater. Applicant shall pay the sum of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for such license at the time application is made
therefor. (Ord. 69-5, 7-28-1969; amd. 1977 Code)
3-4-2: TERM OF LICENSE:
The license issued hereunder shall be an annual license and shall be applied
for only in the year in which it is to be effective. No license shall be issued
for a period of time prior to May 1 of any one year or extending beyond October
30 of the same year. (Ord. 69-5, 7-28-1969)
3-4-3: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to inspect the structure and
location of any proposed theater to ensure conformity with this chapter and any
other ordinance applicable thereto. It shall be the duty of the applicant to
obtain from the fire marshal of the fire protection district a certificate that
the proposed theater, structure or building is in compliance with the
reasonable requirements of the fire marshal. (Ord. 69-5, 7-28-1969)
3-4-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Compliance With Fire Protection Requirements: No license shall be
issued hereunder until applicant has complied with the requirements of the Fire
Marshal relative to exits, exit signs and fire prevention equipment to be
established on the site.
   (B)   Zoning Requirements: No license shall be issued hereunder for the
operation of a theater in any location where such structure, building or
business is prohibited by the zoning regulations of this Code. 1
   (C)   Nuisance: No theater licensed hereunder shall be so conducted or
operated as to amount to a public nuisance.
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 5 of this Code.
3-4-5: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a theater to keep his license
posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such business at all
times.
3-4-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license may be revoked by the President of the Board of Trustees at any
time during the term of such license for any violation by the licensee of any
of the provisions hereof or of any Village ordinance relating thereto. (Ord.
69-5, 7-28-69)
CHAPTER 5
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Service Occupation Tax
3-5-2: Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-5-3: Telecommunication Carrier Surcharge
3-5-4: Use Tax
3-5-5: Taxation of Gas, Electricity and Communication Services
3-5-1: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the Village in the business of
making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of
all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the
form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as incident to
a sale of service in accordance with section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal
Code. (Ord. 69-9, 11-24-69)
3-5-2: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the Village in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail, at the rate of one percent (1%)
of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business in
accordance with section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. (Ord. 69-10, 11-
24-69)
3-5-3: TELECOMMUNICATION CARRIER SURCHARGE:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this Section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
ACT means the Illinois Emergency Telephone System Act as set forth at Illinois
Revised Statutes, chapter 134, paragraph 30.01 et seq.
BASIC SYSTEM means a telephone service which automatically connects a person
dialing the digits "
9-1-1" to an established public safety answering point in the Village through
normal telephone service facilities.
ENHANCED SYSTEM means a basic system with the additional capacity of automatic
identification of the caller's number, holding the incoming call, reconnection
on the same telephone line, clearing a telephone line, automatic call routing
or any other capability or features or combinations of such capabilities of
emergency telephone service; such a system is also known as a sophisticated,
enhanced
9-1-1 or E
9-1-1 system.
NETWORK CONNECTION means the number of voice grade communication channels
directly between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier's public
switched network without the intervention of any other telecommunications
carrier's switched network which would be required to carry the subscriber's
interpremises traffic, which connection is capable of providing access through
the public switched network to a
9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGE shall have the meaning ascribed to the term in paragraph
8-11-2 of chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER means any person, as that term is defined in
paragraph 8-11-5 of chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, engaged in the
business of transmitting messages by means of electricity originating within
the corporate limits of the Village and terminating within the State of
Illinois, but for the purposes of this Section shall not include cellular or
other mobile communication carriers. (Ord. 89-15, 11-20-89; amd. Ord. 92-11, 6-
22-92)
   (B)   Surcharge: A surcharge is hereby imposed at a maximum rate of one
dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per month per in-service network connection upon all
telecommunications carriers for funding an enhanced system.
   (C)   Effective Date: The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the
month following the expiration of ninety (90) days from the date the Village
Clerk certifies to the individual telecommunications carriers the approval by a
majority of the electors of the Village voting on the proposition to impose the
surcharge.
   (D)   Exempt Network Connections: The Village Clerk shall provide any
telecommunications carrier subject to the surcharge with a certified list of
those network connections assigned to the Village to be exempt from imposition
of the surcharge. The certified list may be revised by the Village on sixty
(60) days' prior written notice provided to such telecommunications carriers.
   (E)   Collection Charge: In lieu of telecommunications carriers imposing a
three percent (3%) accounting and collection charge on its subscribers as
permitted under the Act, each telecommunications carrier is hereby authorized
and required to recover said accounting and collection charge by deducting
three percent (3%) from the amount of surcharge otherwise due and owing the
Village prior to remittance to the Village Treasurer.
   (F)   Carrier Remittance: Every telecommunications carrier shall remit to
the Village Treasurer the amount of the surcharge due and owing for each
calendar month within thirty (30) days following expiration of each calendar
month to which the surcharge applies, net of any network, enhanced or other
9-1-1 system charge then due such telecommunications carrier as shown on an
itemized bill and the three percent (3%) accounting and collection charge.
   (G)   Carrier Information: Simultaneously with the remittance of the
surcharge each telecommunications carrier shall deliver a return to the Village
Treasurer for the period to which the remittance applies stating as follows:
      1.   The name of the telecommunications carrier.
      2.   The telecommunications carrier's principal place of business.
      3.   The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies.
      4.   The amount of surcharge due.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the Village
Treasurer may require to determine compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
   (H)   Credited Claims: If it shall appear that a surcharge has been paid
which was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as the result
of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any surcharge due, or to become due, under this Ordinance from the
telecommunications carrier who made the erroneous payments; provided, that no
amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a
claim therefor shall be so credited. Ninety (90) days' prior notice shall be
given to the Village Treasurer on any credit against a surcharge due.
   (I)   Time Limit For Recovery: No action to recover any amount of surcharge
due under the provisions of this Chapter shall be commenced more than three (3)
years after the due date of such amount. (Ord. 89-15, 11-20-1989)
3-5-4: USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-6 of
the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of using in the Village any item
of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail
from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of Illinois
government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price
of such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in
the Use Tax Act, approved July 14, 1955.
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for the
Village and shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for
the personal property is issued. (Ord. 76-2, 4-26-1976)
3-5-5: TAXATION OF GAS, ELECTRICITY AND COMMUNICATION SERVICES:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
(Ord. 91-19, 6-24-1991)
      1.   GROSS RECEIPTS means the consideration received for the transmission
of messages, the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, and the consideration
received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling water for use or
consumption and not for resale, and for all services rendered therewith valued
in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of transmitting such messages, without any deduction on account of the cost of
the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expenses whatsoever. "Gross receipts" shall not
include amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Fee Act. For purposes of this
Section, "gross receipts" shall not include: a) amounts added to customers'
bills under section 9-221 of the Public Utilities Act, or b) charges added to
customers' bills to recover the surcharge imposed under the Emergency Telephone
System Act. In the case of persons engaged in the business of transmitting
messages through the use of mobile equipment, such as cellular phones and
paging systems, the gross receipts from the business shall be deemed to
originate within the corporate limits of the Village only if the address to
which the bills for the service are sent is within the corporate limits of the
Village. If, however, that address is not located within the Village, then: a)
if the party responsible for the bill is not an individual, the gross receipts
from the business shall be deemed to originate within the corporate limits of
the municipality where that party's principal place of business in Illinois is
located, and b) if the party responsible for the bill is an individual, the
gross receipts from the business shall be deemed to originate within the
corporate limits of the municipality where that party's principal residence in
Illinois is located. (Ord. 99-4, 5-24-1999)
      2.   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES means, in addition to the usual and popular
meaning of person-to-person communication, the furnishing, for a consideration,
of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in
connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in
turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include
such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of
messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for consideration, by such other persons
to other persons, for the transmission of messages. (Ord. 91-1, 1-28-1991)
      3.   PERSON means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation,
limited liability company, municipal corporation, the State or any of its
political subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
(Ord. 99-4, 5-24-1999)
      4.   TREASURER means the Treasurer of the Village.
      5.   TAXPAYER means a person engaged in the business of transmitting
messages by a means of electricity, or distribution, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, or distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale. (Ord. 91-1, 1-28-1991)
      6.   QUARTER PERIOD means any three (3) consecutive calendar months,
commencing March, April and May of 1991. (Ord. 91-1, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 91-3,
2-25-1991)
      7.   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE means any
person having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or
other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent, or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in
this State permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or
other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
      8.   PUBLIC UTILITY has the meaning ascribed to it in section 3-105 of
the Public Utilities Act and shall include telecommunications carriers as
defined in section 13-202 of that Act and alternative retail electric suppliers
as defined in section 16-102 of that Act.
      9.   PURCHASE AT RETAIL means any acquisition of electricity by a
purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not
include the use of electricity by a public utility directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
      10.   PURCHASER means any person who uses or consumes, within the
corporate limits of the Municipality, electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail.
   (B)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations
or privileges:
      1.   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity or radio magnetic waves, or fiber optics, at a rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts from that business originating within the corporate
limits of the Village.
      2.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits
of the Village, and not for resale, at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts therefrom.
      3.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the Village and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of
the gross receipts therefrom. The tax imposed by this subsection (B)3 shall not
apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution,
supply, furnishment or sale of electricity when the use or consumption of the
electricity is subject to the tax imposed by subsection (B)4 of this Section.
      4.   Effective as of the date of the first bill issued on or after August
1, 1999, for residential customers and effective as of the earlier of: a) the
date of the first bill issued in accordance with section 16-104 of the Public
Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104, or b) the date of the
first bill issued on or after January 1, 2001, for nonresidential customers,
the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
         a.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.526 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         b.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.345 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         c.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.310 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         d.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.302 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         e.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.293 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         f.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.276 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         g.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.272 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         h.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.267 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         i.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.263 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
         j.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month, 0.259 cents per kilowatt-hour.
      5.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling water for use or consumption within the corporate limits
of the Village, and not for resale, at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts therefrom. (Ord. 99-4, 5-24-1999)
   (C)   Additional Tax: Such tax as provided for in this Section shall be in
addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to
the Village by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys
or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or
thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of
the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 91-1, 1-28-1991)
   (D)   Exempt Entities: No tax is imposed by this Section with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made the subject of taxation by this State or any political subdivision
thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages
or distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity be subject
to taxation under the provisions of this Section for such transaction as are or
may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Taxation Act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, as amended. (Ord. 92-10, 6-22-1992)
   (E)   Taxpayer Remittance And Information: On or before the last day of the
month following a quarter period, each taxpayer shall make a return to the
Treasurer for such quarter period, stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
      4.   The amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the Treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed; provided,
that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report
and pay an amount based upon his total billing of business subject to the tax
during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts
previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any
differences between such billings in the taxable gross receipts.
   (F)   Credited Claims: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been
paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as the
result of a mistake of fact or error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this Section from the taxpayer who
made the erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts paid in error more than
three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
   (G)   Time Limit For Recovery: No action to recover any amount of tax due
under the provisions of this Section shall be commenced more than three (3)
years after the due date of such amount.
   (H)   Penalties: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return or who makes a
fraudulent return or who wilfully violates any provision of this Section shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 91-1, 1-28-1991)
   (I)   Collection: The tax authorized by subsection (B)4 of this Section
shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of
business in this State who delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner
as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to subsection (B)4 of this Section and any such tax
collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to
the Village by such person delivering the electricity, provided, that the
person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to
deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as
uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter
collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. For
purposes of this subsection, any partial payment not specifically identified by
the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such
tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity, in the manner
prescribed by the Village. Persons delivering electricity shall also be
authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of
the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expenses
incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns,
remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village upon request. If the person
delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the
purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Municipality in the
manner prescribed by the Village. Persons delivering electricity who file
returns pursuant to this subsection shall, at the time of filing such return,
pay the Village the amount of the tax collected pursuant to subsection (B)4 of
this Section. (Ord. 99-4, 5-24-1999)
CHAPTER 6
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
3-6-3: Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
3-6-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration Of Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fees
3-6-5: Compliance With Other Laws
3-6-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
3-6-7: Penalties
3-6-8: Enforcement
3-6-9: Severability
3-6-10: Conflict
3-6-11: Waiver And Fee Implementation
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office
channel provided within the Village. However, "gross charges" shall not
include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: 1) the fee imposed by this Section, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 3)
amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 4) the
tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6)
the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
Village;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the Village;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices; or
   (I)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the Village.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit
the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right-of- way" shall not include any real or personal Village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include Village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: (A) Any telecommunications retailer; and
   (B)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this Section. The Village may, in its discretion upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the Village.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services. (Ord. 97-10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   (A)   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Chapter shall
register with the Village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this Chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the Village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection
3-6-4(C) of this Chapter, shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this Section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the Village
pursuant to subsection (A) of this Section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
3-6-4(C) of this Chapter, as the case may be, to the Village within thirty (30)
days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided
by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent
return on file with the Village. (Ord. 97-10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   (A)   A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent
(1.0%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to
service addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or
received in the Village.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Chapter, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the Village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in Section
3-6-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES:
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Treasurer the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in
which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%)
of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the Village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village Treasurer,
which shall contain such information as the Village Treasurer may reasonably
require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this Chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under subsection
(A) of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the Village Treasurer may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the Village within the applicable
statutory period of limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment
made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory
period of limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
   (G)   The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Chapter
to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by
the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the Village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any
costs incurred by the Village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in
an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the Village within twenty one (21) days
after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The Village Treasurer, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this Chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to Section
3-6-2 of this Chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 97-10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided; and
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right-of-way. (Ord. 97-
10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the Village entered into before the effective date of this
Chapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according
to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived. (Ord. 97-10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord.
97-10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 97-10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 97-10, 11-24-1997)
3-6-10: CONFLICT:
This Chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto
which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 97-10,
11-24-1997)
3-6-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   (A)   The Village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the Village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing Village franchise,
license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the Village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter is subject to being lawfully
imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
Village has a franchise.
   (C)   The Village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
Chapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than ninety (90) days after the Village provides written notice by
certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the Village has an
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement that the Village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected
by the retailer and remitted to the Village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as
established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 97-10, 11-24-1997)
CHAPTER 7
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Short Title
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: License Required
3-7-4: Authority For Issuance
3-7-5: Licenses
3-7-6: Application For License
3-7-7: License Fee
3-7-8: Restrictions On Licensees
3-7-9: Conduct Of Raffles
3-7-10: Manager; Bond
3-7-11: Maximum Prizes And Prices; Duration
3-7-12: Records
3-7-13: Regulations
3-7-14: Construction
3-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the BARRINGTON HILLS
RAFFLES ORDINANCE. (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be construed in accordance with the definitions set forth below:
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the community.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their
scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by
the government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
operations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted
on a nonprofit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of
the operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in the criminal code of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter in
which:
   (A)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   (B)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by a random act or set of random
acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the raffle, except
that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS' ORGANIZATION: An organization or association, comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation is to conduct a raffle in the village without
first having obtained a license pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-
2002)
3-7-4: AUTHORITY FOR ISSUANCE:
The village president is hereby designated as the licensing authority to issue
licenses for raffles subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-5: LICENSES:
Licenses for raffles shall be issued only to bona fide nonprofit, business,
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations
which operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making
application for a license, and have had during that entire five (5) year period
a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to a
nonprofit fundraising organization that the village determines is organized for
the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual
or group of individuals suffering extreme hardship as a result of illness,
disability, accident or disorder. A license issued by the village shall
authorize the sale of raffle chances only within the borders of the village.
The corporate authorities shall act on a license application within thirty (30)
days from the date of application. (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   (A)   Application for a license shall be made in writing, no fewer than
thirty (30) days before the intended sale of raffle chances, on forms provided
by the village clerk's office.
   (B)   Each license and application for license shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant.
      2.   The area within the village in which the raffle chances will be sold
and issued.
      3.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued.
      4.   The date, time, manner and locations of determining the winning
chances.
      5.   A sworn statement attesting to the nonprofit character of the
applicant, signed by its presiding officer and secretary.
      6.   A copy of the applicant's articles of incorporation and/or charter.
      7.   Such other information as the village clerk may require.
   (C)   Each license issued under this chapter shall be valid for one raffle.
(Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-7: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for each raffle conducted under the terms of this chapter shall
be ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-8: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSEES:
No raffle license shall be issued under this chapter to:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character.
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection (A),
(B) or (C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or
in which such person is active or employed.
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not.
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
"raffle" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-9: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles in the village is subject to the following:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (B)   No person, except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization,
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises in which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this chapter.
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   (F)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-10: MANAGER; BOND:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffle manager designated by the organization. If the individual or
combined value of all items to be raffled exceeds ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), the manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount
determined by the village clerk, in favor of the organization, conditioned upon
his or her honesty in the performance of his or her duties. Terms of the bond
shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less
than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. The village clerk may waive
this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license issued to
an organization under this chapter, provided that a unanimous vote of the
village board of trustees has approved the waiver of the raffle manager's bond.
(Ord. 16-18, 9-26-2016)
3-7-11: MAXIMUM PRIZES AND PRICES; DURATION:
   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00).
   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle
shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   (D)   A license shall be valid for only one hundred eighty (180) days after
issuance, and no chances may be sold upon expiration of the license. (Ord. 02-
14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-12: RECORDS:
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, amount and date
of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization and placed in a separate
account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The
person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the village, its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as
required in this section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-13: REGULATIONS:
The corporate authorities of the village, or its designated agent, may publish
rules and regulations consistent with this chapter or state law governing the
conduct of raffles licensed hereunder. (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
3-7-14: CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or
operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than a
raffle provided for herein. (Ord. 02-14, 9-23-2002)
CHAPTER 8
CHARTER TRANSPORTATION DROP-OFF LICENSE
SECTION:
3-8-1: Applicability
3-8-2: Requirement To Coordinate Drop-Offs With The Village
3-8-3: Impoundment Of Unpermitted Drop-off Commercial Motor Vehicles
3-8-4: Penalty
3-8-1: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   This chapter applies to all persons engaged in the operation of
commercial motor vehicles which involve the disembarking of three (3) or more
passengers in the village engaged in the transport of individuals seeking
assistance, other than on a predictable and recurring basis, that do not follow
a schedule that is published in advance and available to the public, or do not
provide service open to the public in exchange for paying a fare (“Drop Off
Commercial Motor Vehicles”). Drop Off Commercial Motor Vehicle is defined for
purposes of this chapter as a vehicle of any type or description, public or
privately owned, which is designed to transport three (3) or more persons,
including the driver. This definition does not include recreational vehicles,
when operated solely for personal use, or any vehicle used in police, fire or
other emergency situations of similar nature.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to school bus service or other bus
services providing local services to educational institutions, nor shall it
apply to the disembarking of passengers arriving in the Village for purposes of
participating in a Village sponsored event, an event at a non-commercial event
facility, or a private event sponsored by an individual or individuals such as
a wedding or party for which transportation has been arranged. The intent of
this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the Village and
its residents, by ensuring that when large numbers of individuals are dropped
off in the Village without housing or other resources, and that the Village is
prepared to respond to an influx of a population in need of housing or other
services. (Ord. 24-01, 12-3-2023)
3-8-2: REQUIREMENT TO COORDINATE DROP-OFFS WITH THE VILLAGE:
   (A)   Application to Coordinate Drop-off Required. The owner, operator, or
driver of any Drop Off Commercial Motor Vehicle shall file an application with
the Village’s Police Department. The completed application shall contain all
required information set forth in subsection (B) herein and shall be submitted
at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date of the proposed disembarking
date.
   (B)   Information Required in Application to Coordinate Drop-Off. The Police
Chief or designee shall prepare an application form which shall, at a minimum,
require the following information:
      1.   The full name, full address, and landline and mobile telephone
numbers of the owner, operator, and driver of the Drop Off Commercial Motor
Vehicle.
      2.   The full name, full address, mobile and land-line telephone numbers
of the entity or individuals that have either directed, paid for, or financed
the transport of persons who will disembark in the village.
      3.   The full name of all passengers that are proposed to be dropped off
in the village, along with copies of identification for said passenger(s) to
the extent such identification exists and is in the possession of the passenger
(s).
      4.   The name, address, or location in the village at which the applicant
proposes to allow passengers to disembark.
      5.   The date and time at which the applicant’s passengers will disembark
in the village which shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on a Monday through
Friday, excluding any federal, state, or village holidays.
      6.   The name and address of all locations from which all the passengers
are being picked-up for transport to the village.
      7.   Any additional information the Police Chief may require, provided
that such information is related to the intent of this chapter as described in
Title 3,
chapter 8 .
   (C)   Review of Application to Coordinate Drop-Off. Subject to the
provisions of subsection (C)(2), below, upon receipt of an application pursuant
to this chapter, the Police Chief shall verify its truth and authenticity. If
the application is not complete, the Police Chief shall, in writing, advise the
applicant of the additional items needed to complete the application. Within
four (4) calendar days after receiving a completed application, the Police
Chief shall inform the applicant that the application is approved for the
stated location, date and time, unless the Police Chief has received bona fide
information that the application contains materially false information or
unless the Police Chief proposes an alternative date, time, or location
pursuant to subsection(C)(2), below.
      1.   The Police Chief may propose an alternative date and time if the
Police Chief finds that the interests of the health, safety and welfare of the
village may be compromised by the originally proposed location, date and time,
provided that such alternative location, date and time shall not be more than
24 hours before or after the proposed date and time. Any applicant who does not
accept a proposed alternative date, time or location may appeal the decision to
the Board of Trustees, which shall meet as soon as practicable to hear the
appeal, at a time permitted in keeping with the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
      2.   Upon approval of an application, the Police Chief shall provide the
applicant, or a person designated thereby, with a written one-time permit at no
cost and with a telephone number to coordinate the arrival of the Drop-Off
Commercial Motor Vehicle in the village.
      3.   If the Police Chief denies an application made under this chapter,
the Police Chief shall put findings in writing and transmit the same to the
applicant within four (4) calendar days. The applicant may submit a new
application or may appeal the decision to the Board of Trustees which shall
meet as soon as practicable to hear the appeal, at a time permitted in keeping
with the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
      4.   Disqualification. The Police Chief shall not approve an application
from any person who has supplied materially false or misleading information in
connection with an application made under this chapter. (Ord. 24-01, 12-3-2023)
3-8-3: IMPOUNDMENT OF UNPERMITTED DROP-OFF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES:
   (A)   Any drop-off commercial motor vehicle that is used in the village in
violation of section 3-8-2 of this chapter may be seized and impounded pursuant
to this section. If a drop-off commercial motor vehicle is seized and impounded
pursuant to this section, the owner and/or operator of the vehicle shall be
liable to the village for an administrative penalty of $500.00 plus any towing
and storage fees applicable under section
9-4-3  of this Code. This subsection shall not apply if the vehicle used in the
violation was stolen and reported as provided by Section
9-4-3  of this Code.
   (B)   Whenever an authorized employee or agent of the village has probable
cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant
to this section, he may provide for the towing of the vehicle to a storage
facility. If a vehicle is towed pursuant to this subsection, the authorized
employee or agent of the village shall notify the license holder or any person
who was in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation that the
vehicle was seized, and the license holder has a right to request a vehicle
impoundment hearing as provided in section
9-4-3  of this Code.
(C)   The hearing procedures of section 9-4-3 shall apply whenever a motor
vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. (Ord. 24-01, 12-3-
2023)
3-8-4: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership as owner or operator of an
unpermitted commercial motor vehicle found guilty of violating any provision of
this chapter shall be jointly and severally liable for a fine in the amount of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), plus one thousand and 00/100 dollars
($1000.00) per passenger, excluding the driver. Each day on or during which any
person, corporation, firm or partnership violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 24-01, 12-3-2023)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
4-1-1: Administration, Enforcement; Generally
4-1-2: Building Permits
4-1-3: Right To Enter Premises
4-1-4: Conflicting Provisions
4-1-5: Rules Available For Public
4-1-6: Fees
4-1-7: Enforcement Procedure
4-1-8: Appeals
4-1-9: Violations And Penalties
4-1-1: ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT; GENERALLY:
The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all
provisions of this title and such related codes and regulations adopted by
reference by the Board of Trustees. Wherever in this title the term "Building
Official", "Building Officer", or "Building Commissioner" is used, the Building
and Zoning Enforcement Officer appointed pursuant to subsection
1-6-9(B) of this Code, is intended. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-1-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
   (A)   When Permit Is Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge,
alter, remove or demolish a building or change the occupancy of a building from
one use group to another requiring greater strength, exitway or sanitary
provisions; or to change to a prohibited use; or to install or alter any
equipment for which provision is made or the installation of which is regulated
by the International Code series or by other provisions of this chapter or
other codes adopted herein, without first filing an application with the
Building Officer in writing and obtaining the required permit therefor; except
the ordinary repairs as defined in section 102.0 of said International Building
Code and the International Residential Code or in other relevant codes which do
not involve any code violation shall be exempt from this provision.
   (B)   Issuance Of Permit: No permit shall be issued unless the application
and supporting documentation are in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and all other provisions of this Code and unless the applicable fee in
section
4-1-6 of this chapter has been paid.
   (C)   Form Of Application: Application for such permits shall be made to the
Building Department, with the number of copies from time to time required, upon
the form prepared by the Village.
      1.   An application fee shall accompany every application in accordance
with the Village’s Fees and Penalties Schedule.
      The application fee shall be applied toward the applicable fee owed by
the applicant under section
4-1-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Every application for a building permit shall be deemed to be or
shall include as a part thereof an application for an occupancy permit (which
may also be referred to as an application for a compliance certificate under
the zoning regulations of the Village).
   (D)   By Whom Application Is Made: Application for a permit shall be made by
the owner or lessee of the building or structure, or agent of either, or by the
licensed engineer or architect employed in connection with the proposed work.
The full names and addresses of the owner, lessee, applicant and of the
responsible officers, if the owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall be
stated in the application.
   (E)   Description Of Work: The application shall contain a general
description of the proposed work, its location, the use and occupancy of all
parts of the building or structure and of all portions of the site or lot not
covered by the building and such additional information as may be required by
the Building Officer. The application must also contain a plat of survey
prepared by a registered Illinois land surveyor showing lot dimensions, total
area, all existing improvements, all easements of record and all building and
setback lines required by the zoning regulations of the Village or any recorded
document. After the foundation for a new building or any addition to an
existing building has been completed, the applicant shall furnish a survey
prepared by a registered Illinois surveyor showing the location of such
foundation; this may be shown upon a recertification of the plat filed at the
time the building permit was secured. In the event that such plat is not filed
within fifteen (15) days after said foundation is completed, all further work
shall cease until said plat is filed; if the further work has been completed,
no occupancy permit shall be issued until said plat is filed.
   (F)   Engineering Details: The Building Officer may require adequate details
of structural, mechanical and electrical work including computations, stress
diagrams and other essential data to be filed. All engineering plans and
computations shall bear the signature of the engineer or architect responsible
for the design. Plans for buildings more than two (2) stories in height shall
indicate how required structural and fire resistance rating integrity will be
maintained, and where a penetration will be made for electrical, mechanical,
plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems.
   (G)   Amendments To Application: Subject to the limitations of subsection
(H) of this section, amendments to a plan, application or other records
accompanying the same may be filed at any time before completion of the work
for which the permit is sought or issued; and such amendments shall be deemed
part of the original application and shall be filed therewith.
   (H)   Time Limitation Of Application: An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned sixty (60) days after the
date of filing, unless such application has been diligently prosecuted. Any
documents, plans or other records submitted with such abandoned application
shall be returned to the applicant without further responsibility for their
preservation by the Building Officer. The filing fee shall not be returned to
the applicant, but shall be deemed earned upon payment. This supersedes the
time limitations in section 105.3.2 of all adopted codes.
   (I)   Time Limitation For The Start Of Construction: Whenever any building
permit is issued, the construction contemplated by such building permit shall
commence within sixty (60) days from the issuance of such building permit,
exclusive of any days in the months of December, January and February. In the
event such construction is not commenced within said sixty (60) day period, the
building permit shall be null and void and any subsequent construction shall
require a new application and fee submitted to the Building Officer and a new
building permit to be issued pursuant thereto. This supersedes the time
limitations in section 105.3.2 of all adopted codes.
   (J)   Time Limitation For The Completion Of Construction: Whenever any
construction contemplated by a building permit is commenced within the
prescribed period, such construction shall be completed within the following
times from the date of the issuance of said building permit, exclusive of any
days within the months of December, January and February, or shall be deemed to
have been abandoned:
      1.   New single-family residence: Eighteen (18) months;
      2.   Single family remodeling and additions of all buildings: Twelve (12)
months;
      3.   Agricultural, commercial, industrial and other nonresidential
buildings and structures: Time set by terms of the building permit;
      4.   Accessory buildings and/or uses, including swimming pools, tennis
courts, satellite antenna with screening which shall be completed concurrently:
Six (6) months;
      5.   Septic repairs: Three (3) months; and
      6.   Site development, including artificial lakes: Time set by terms of
the site development permit.
In the event that said construction is not completed within the prescribed
period, the owner shall be liable for a fine as provided in the Village’s Fees
and Penalties Schedule for each day the building, structure, or site
development remains incomplete and shall further be liable for any cost
incurred by the Village to remove any hazard or threat to public safety that
may exist because of the abandoned construction. Nothing in this section shall
prevent the Building Officer from requiring completion of such construction by
an earlier prescribed date in those instances where there exists immediate or
imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
   (K)   Extensions Of Time: Upon a written request, which provides justifiable
cause and a demonstrated need of any applicant or building permit holder, the
Building Officer may grant for reasonable cause one or more extensions of time
not exceeding ninety (90) days each, to any prescribed period in this chapter.
This supersedes the time limitations in section 105.3.2 of all adopted codes.
The fee for such granting of each extension shall be provided in the Village’s
Fees and Penalties Schedule.
   (L)   Additional Requirements: To the extent that further applicable
building permit requirements are imposed by any code adopted by reference in
this title or the regulation for satellite antennas, swimming pools, wells,
private sewage disposal systems, hereafter referred to in this title, said
further building permit requirements shall be complied with in addition to the
applicable requirements of this section.
   (M)   Construction Hours: Section 105.8 Construction Hours adds a new
section to read: Construction may commence between the hours of 7:00 AM until
8:00 PM for Monday through Friday, from 8:00 AM until 6:00 PM on Saturday and
from 9:00 AM until 6:00 PM on Sunday.
   (N)   Mud On Street: The owner or contractor is responsible for all delivery
trucks doing damage to public property. Mud deposited on the streets must be
cleaned immediately. All lots shall be kept clean of all construction debris.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-28-2025)
4-1-3: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES:
   (A)   The Building Officer is hereby empowered, during reasonable hours, to
lawfully enter upon any premises or into any building or structure or portion
thereof, whether completed or in process of construction, alteration or repair,
when necessary to do so in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by this
Code or any order or resolution of the Village Board.
   (B)   Periodic inspections may be made on all premises to determine whether
unsightly or unhealthful conditions exist due to septic system failure. (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-1-4: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
If a general provision or requirement of this chapter, or any code adopted by
reference, conflicts with a specific provision of this chapter or any code
adopted by reference, then the specific provision shall govern. If any
provision or requirement of this chapter conflicts with any provision or
requirement of any codes adopted by reference, the more restrictive provision
or requirement shall govern. This supersedes the requirements in section
102.4.2 of all adopted codes. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-1-5: RULES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC:
Not less than three (3) copies of the codes and rules and regulations adopted
by reference by this chapter shall be and remain on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018,
eff. 1-1-2019)
4-1-6: FEES:
   (A)   All fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit or the
commencement of an inspection or the issuance of a certificate in accordance
with the Village’s Fees and Penalties Schedule.
   (B)   Zoning Certificates: Zoning certificates, as required by section
5-10-2 of this Code shall require a charge as provided in the Village’s Fees
and Penalties Schedule.
   (C)   Certificate Of Compliance: A certificate of compliance, as required by
section
5-10-3 of this Code shall require a charge as provided in the Village’s Fees
and Penalties Schedule plus the resolution of all violations of this Code and
the payment of all fines and penalties assessed against the owner or the
property under any of the provisions of this Code as provided in section
5-10-3 of this Code.
      A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued at the discretion of
the building official when a premises is substantially completed, all life
safety and sanitary requirements are complete, and the premises are fit for the
purpose constructed. The maximum time frame for a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy is at the discretion of the building official but not to exceed one
hundred eighty (180) days. The fee for a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy is
as provided in the Village’s Fees and Penalties Schedule.
   (D)   Construction Without a Permit Fee: In the event construction work is
started where a building permit is required to be issued a fee may be assessed
as provided in the Village's Fees and Penalties Schedule in addition to costs
of enforcement, including attorneys fees, which fee shall be collected if
construction or alterations are started before a required permit is issued.
   (E)   Stop Work Order Fee: In the event construction activity has taken
place when a building permit is required by this chapter a fee as provided in
the Village’s Fees and Penalties Schedule is required to be paid to the Village
prior to removing the stop work order. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019;
amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-28-2025)
4-1-7: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation, or any agent, employee or contractor of such, to erect, construct,
alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any building or
structure or equipment regulated by the provisions of this Code or cause same
to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any provisions
of this title.
   (B)   Notice Of Violation:
      1.   Whenever the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
determine, in the course of his duties, that a violation of any provision of
this title exists, the Building Officer shall issue to the owner of the
property and, in the Building Officer's sole discretion, to any known agents of
the property owner a written notice of violation, which notice may be in letter
form containing the following information:
         a.   Description of nature and location of violation;
         b.   Village Code provision being violated;
         c.   Potential penalty for continued violation;
         d.   A request for the activity constituting the violation to
immediately cease and/or a request for immediate appropriate action to remedy
the violation; and
         e.   Notification that a re-inspection for compliance will occur on a
specified date not less than seven (7) days after date of the notice.
      2.   Upon re-inspection, if the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer
finds that the violation continues, the Building Officer shall at his
discretion issue to the property owner and, to any known agents of the property
owner a second written notice of violation, attaching a copy of the first
notice of violation. The second notice of violation shall state that if
compliance is not achieved by a second re- inspection to occur on a specified
date not less than seven (7) days after the date of the second notice, the
matter will be referred to the Village Attorney for appropriate action.
      3.   Upon receipt of appropriate notification from the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Village Attorney shall notify the property
owner and, in the Village Attorney's sole discretion, any known agents of the
property owner in writing that if the violation is not abated within the later
of ten (10) days from the date of said notice or the expiration of the right of
the property owner to appeal the determination of the Building Officer pursuant
to section
4-1-8 of this chapter, the Village will undertake legal action.
   (C)   Stop Work Order:
      1.   Whenever the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
determine, in the course of his duties, that any activity regulated by the
provisions of this title is proceeding in an unsafe and dangerous manner or
poses an immediate or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare,
that officer shall have the authority to serve notice, either written or
orally, for that activity to immediately stop, notwithstanding the provisions
of this section.
      2.   The stop work order shall be in a written form and shall be
prominently posted on the property so as to provide notice to the owner,
owner's agent, and to all persons working or seeking to work on the property.
The order shall state the conditions under which activity may resume and any
other information that may assist in the rescission of the order.
      3.   If compliance with the conditions described in the stop work order
is not obtained within twenty four (24) hours, the officer shall refer the
matter to the Village Attorney, in consultation with the Village Administrator,
to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity necessary to
address the unsafe conditions.
      4.   Upon removal of the cause for the stop work order, the officer shall
rescind the order; however, until such removal, any other person removing or
defacing the notice shall be fined as provided in the Village’s Fees and
Penalties Schedule.
   (D)   Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue the activity after
having been served with a notice of violation or who shall continue or commence
any work on property posted with a stop work order, except such work as the
individual has been directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
conditions, shall be liable for a fine as provided in the Village’s Fees and
Penalties Schedule. Each day that the individual continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (E)   Abatement Of Violation: The procedure for enforcement herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Village Attorney, in consultation with the
Village President, from instituting such other action as may be deemed
necessary to prevent construction or occupancy of a building or structure or
other use of property in conflict with the provisions of this title, or to
stop, restrain, correct or abate an act or omission in violation of the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 25-
08, 4-28-2025)
4-1-8: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any action taken, order issued or determination made
pursuant to this chapter, other than a stop work order issued pursuant to
subsection
4-1-7(C) of this chapter, may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of section
5-10-5 of this Code, upon payment of a filing fee as provided in the Village’s
Fees and Penalties Schedule. This supersedes the Board of Appeals sections in
all ICC Codes. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-28-
2025)
4-1-9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter,
including provisions adopted by reference, or to remedy a hazard of fire,
explosion, collapse, contagion or spread of infectious disease found to exist
and duly ordered eliminated, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day during which any violation thereof is committed, continued
or permitted and, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be
punished by a as provided in the Village’s Fees and Penalties Schedule for each
offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any
person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to
abate said violation of this chapter, including, where appropriate, the
restoration of the property to the condition existing prior to commission of
the violation, and to bear the expense of such abatement or restoration. This
supersedes the penalty sections in the adopted ICC Codes. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-
2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-28-2025)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Short Title
4-2-2: International Building Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-3: International Fire Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-4: NFPA 70 National Electrical Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-5: International Mechanical Code Adopted
4-2-6: Water Well Construction
4-2-7: Private Sewage Disposal
4-2-7-1: Appendices
4-2-8: International Residential Code Adopted; Additions; Exceptions
4-2-9: Illinois State Plumbing Code Adopted; Additions; Exceptions
4-2-10: Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance Adopted; Exceptions;
Additions
4-2-11: International Fuel Gas Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-12: International Wildland Urban Interface Code Adopted; Exceptions;
Additions
4-2-13: International Swimming Pool And Spa Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-14: International Existing Building Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-15: International Property Maintenance Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-16: International Energy Conservation Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-17: Illinois Accessibility Code Adopted; Exceptions; Additions
4-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter, including the rules and regulations it adopts by reference, is
entitled the BUILDING CODES. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-2: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Code Council Building Code 2015
edition is hereby adopted by reference as the Building Code of the Village
subject to such deletions and additions of sections as are hereinafter
provided.
   (B)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Additions To The International Building Code:
      1.   Section 101. Insert the Village of Barrington Hills
      2.   In lieu of section 107.2.5 Site plan:
FOUNDATION PERMITS - The code official is authorized to issue a permit for the
construction of foundations of a building or structure for all but One and Two
Family Dwellings and Townhomes, before the entire plans and specifications for
the whole building or structure have been themselves approved, provided that
adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
of the pertinent requirements of this code and the applicant provides the
village with adequate assurances, including a guarantee complying with section
6-5-1 of title 6 of the village code, that the building will be completed or
the foundation removed. The holder of such a permit for the foundation shall
proceed with construction, but only at the holder's own risk with the building
operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be
granted.
      3.   Section 202 Add the following definition: New numbering
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL wherever references throughout this chapter or the adopted
codes refer to the Fire code, this shall be held to the Director of
Administration, Building and Zoning Official or such designee as determined by
the Village President and the Board of Trustees for the Village of Barrington
Hills.
      4.   Add section 427 Radio and television antennas:
         a.   Permits Not Required: A building permit is not required for the
erection and/or maintenance on the roof of any building of: (i) antenna
structures for private radio or television reception (other than satellite
antennas, private, as defined in title 5 of the village code) which are not
more than twelve feet (12') in height; or (ii) satellite antennas, private, as
defined in title 5 of the village code, with an overall diameter of not more
than five feet (5') and a total height of not more than twelve feet (12'). Such
antenna shall be erected so as not to injure the roof covering and, when
removed from the roof, the roof covering shall be repaired to maintain weather
and water tightness. No antenna shall be erected nearer to any required yard or
dedicated right- of-way than the total height of the particular antenna, nor
shall any antenna be installed nearer to an electric power line than permitted
by the standards in the National Electrical Code 1 .
         b.   Permits Required: A building permit shall be obtained from the
Building Official for the installation and maintenance of any satellite
antenna, private, and any other antenna exceeding twelve feet (12') in height.
The application for a building permit shall be accompanied by detailed drawings
of the structure, methods of anchorage, and provisions for wind loads and
screening. All service connections from the antenna to the building shall be
installed below grade in such a manner as not to conflict with any below-grade
utility lines, water supply lines, or sanitary facilities. The size, screening
and location on the lot of a satellite antenna, private, shall comply with the
accessory use requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, Title 5 of the village
code, and such compliance shall be made part of the conditions for the issuance
of a building permit.
            (1)   Loads: Every ground-mounted satellite antenna shall be
securely assembled, braced and anchored without using guy wires to resist a
wind of not less than twenty five (25) pounds per square foot (psf) on the net
surface area of both sides of the antenna component plus the wind on ice-
covered sections when subject to freezing temperatures. In computing wind
loads, due allowance shall be made for the effect of shape and contour of the
antenna as provided in Chapter 16 of the International Building Code, as
adopted by the Village.
            (2)   Dead Loads: Every ground-mounted antenna shall be anchored in
a concrete platform of a sufficient size and design to accommodate the dead
load plus ice load.
            (3)   Uplift: Adequate anchorage to the concrete platform shall be
provided, without using guy wires, to resist two (2) times the calculated wind
uplift.
         c.   Grounding: All antenna masts, cables and components thereof,
whether erected on the roof or mounted on the ground, shall be permanently and
effectively grounded using lightning arrestors or similar protective devices as
recommended in the National Electric Code.
      5.   Delete Swimming Pool Section and insert the following
Add section E4203.8 of the International Residential Code and insert the
following language:
            (1)   No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private
residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within fifteen
feet (15') of said pools.
            (2)   All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to
private residential swimming pools which might become electrically alive as a
result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause,
shall be effectively grounded.
      6.   Revise Fire Alarm Systems transmitting alarms 907.6.6
Fire Protection Systems/Supervision (Section 907.6.6)
      1.   In lieu of section 907.6.6 Fire Protective Signaling Systems:
All required fire protective signaling systems shall transmit alarm and trouble
signals to a central station or as determined by the Village of Barrington
Hills.
New Section added below
      7.   Chapter 11 Insert the following: Any conflicts with Chapter 11 and
the Illinois Accessibility Code will require the stricter of the two
requirements being enforced.
      8.   Chapter 18 Delete all references to wood footings and foundations.
Wood footings and foundations are not allowed.
      9.   Add 1901.7 Cold weather requirements is deleted in its entirety and
substituting in lieu thereof the following:
Definitions and requirements: Cold weather defined by the American Concrete
Institute (ACI) 306 as: a period of more than three consecutive days where all
of the following occur:
The average daily temperature is less than forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit.
The air temperature is not greater than fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit for more
than one-half of any 24 hour period.
The average daily air temperature is the average of the highest and lowest
temperatures occurring during the period from midnight to midnight.
When cold weather concrete is in effect; footings, trenches, foundations, and
piers shall be poured only on frost-free soil. The architect and/or engineer of
record shall provide to the building official a cold weather concrete outline
meeting ACI 306 requirements for review. Concrete must be protected for not
less than forty eight (48) hours with insulating blankets.
Flatwork: After the first frost, the Building Official shall determine whether
flatwork can continue. No flatwork will be allowed outside of buildings or
garages from November 15th to April 1st without the approval of the Building
Official. Flatwork is allowed in a building or garage, as long as the inside
temperature is maintained at not less than fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit for
not less than 48 hours.
The use of heaters that expel gases into the area above a concrete floor shall
be vented to the outside to avoid carbonation, which may cause dusting to the
concrete surface.
      10.   Chapter 29 Plumbing is amended to delete "International Plumbing
Code" and replace in lieu thereof the "2014 State of Illinois Plumbing Code".
      11.   Chapter 35 Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code
and insert the Illinois Plumbing Code
Adopt the following appendices: C, F, H105, H106,
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
   (D)   Temporary Swimming Pools:
      1.   In accordance with the powers set forth herein, the President and
Board of Trustees, adopt the following rules to supplement and supersede BOCA
relative to temporary swimming pools.
         a.   Defined: A temporary swimming pool is a non-permanent structure
which is erected for the purpose of swimming or bathing for use for a period to
commence May 15 and terminate September 15. Such pools are generally termed
"seasonal" or "portable".
         b.   Regulations Applicable:
            (1)   Electric: All electric to the pool shall be protected by
ground fault circuit interrupters, which shall be GFCI receptacle outlets or
GFCI circuit breakers. All electric shall be in approved conduit. Receptacles
not serving the swimming pool equipment shall be located a minimum of ten feet
(10') from the swimming pool wall. All receptacles shall have a weatherproof
enclosure whether or not the receptacle is being used. All swimming pool
equipment shall be properly grounded. Underground wiring shall be a minimum of
five feet (5') from the swimming pool walls. An extension cord is not an
acceptable means to supply power to the swimming pool pump;
            (2)   Allowance: A temporary swimming pool shall not be allowed:
               A.   Within the first fifty (50') of any lot line; and
               B.   On any portion of a lot which would result in it being
visible at street height from the street or from the ground level of any
adjacent property owner's principal dwelling;
            (3)   Decking: There shall be no permanent decking constructed,
used or allowed as part of the erection of the temporary swimming pool.
            (4)   Cover: No pool cover shall extend more than six feet (6')
above the water level of the temporary swimming pool;
            (5)   Size: The maximum size of a temporary swimming pool shall be
no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
            (6)   Permit Required:
               A.   Application: Prior to erection of a temporary pool each
year, an application for erection of a temporary pool shall be made on a form
made available through the Village.
               B.   Fee: One hundred dollars ($100.00) (plus $100.00 CO fee)
which includes the required final inspection. Payable upon permit application.
Each additional inspection required for Code compliance shall result in an
additional fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) per inspection.
               C.   Inspection: An inspection is required when work to install
the pool is complete, and pool must pass inspection prior to use. Failure to
schedule an inspection shall result in permit revocation for the season. An
inspection to confirm removal of the structure may be required on September 15
of each year.
               D.    Submittal Requirements:
                  i.   Executed permit application;
                  ii.   Plat of survey (11 x 17 maximum size) showing all
existing structures, including fences and gates, the location of the proposed
pool and where the GFCI outlet is located.
                  iii.   Product and specification sheets for pool and
equipment.
Permit applications will not be processed without complete information and
permit fee.
         c.   Enforcement:
            (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or
any agent, employee or contractor of such, to allow the erection of a temporary
swimming pool in violation of the provisions of this subsection.
            (2)   Whenever the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
determine, in the course of his duties, that a violation of any provision of
this subsection exists, the Building Officer shall issue to the owner of the
property and, in the Building Officer's sole discretion, to any known agents of
the property owner a written notice of violation, which notice may be in letter
form containing the following information:
               A.    Description: Description of nature and location of
violation;
               B.    Violation: Village Code provision being violated;
               C.    Penalty: Potential penalty for continued violation;
               D.    Request: A request for the activity constituting the
violation to immediately cease and/or a request for immediate appropriate
action to remedy the violation; and
               E.    Notification: Notification that a reinspection for
compliance will occur on a specified date not less than seven (7) days after
date of the notice.
               F.    Reinspection: Upon reinspection, if the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that the violation continues, the Building
Officer shall notify the property owner and, in the Building Officer's sole
discretion, any known agents of the property owner in writing that the matter
is being referred to the Village Attorney and shall forward all relevant
information to the Village Attorney.
               G.    Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue the
activity after having been served with a notice of violation shall be liable
for a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 18-10,
8-27-2018; amd. Ord. 21-09, 5-24-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-2-4 of this chapter.
4-2-3: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Code Council Fire Code, 2015 edition
is hereby adopted by reference as the Fire Code of the Village subject to such
deletions and additions of sections as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Amendments: International Fire Code with additions, deletions and
insertions:
      1.   Section 101.1 insert Village of Barrington Hills
      2.   Enforcement Authority:
         Insert section 103.5 Code Official: It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the building officer of this village as is designated by the
president and board of trustees of this village to enforce the building code of
this village among which is included the fire prevention code and its
provisions herein set forth. The designated enforcement officer of this code is
herein referred to as the code official and shall mean the building officer of
this village.
      3.   Duties and Powers of the Code Official:
         Insert 104.12: The president and board of trustees may adopt rules and
regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   [Reserved]:
      5.   Fire Alarm System Monitoring (Section 907.6.6)
         In lieu of section 907.6.6 Monitoring:
         All required fire alarm systems shall transmit alarm and trouble
signals to the communications console in the Barrington Hills police
department.
      6.   Sections 5704.2.9.6.1, 5706.2.4.4, 5806.2 and 6104.2 are not allowed
without special permission as a Zoning Code Appeal
      7.   Chapter 80 Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code
and insert the Illinois Plumbing Code
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 20-12, 7-21-2020)
4-2-4: NFPA 70 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Adopted: The National Fire Protection Association National Electric
Code, 2014 edition (NFPA 70-2014) is hereby adopted by reference as the
Electrical Code of the Village subject to such deletions and additions of
sections as are hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Exceptions: In lieu of Article 334, Nonmetallic Sheathed Cable: types
NM, NMC and NMS all lighting and receptacle circuits must be enclosed in
electrical metallic tubing, except for flexible metallic drops not to exceed
four feet (4') in length.
   (C)   Wiring System: All wiring system shall be installed in EMT, IMC or
rigid conduit.
   (D)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter as may be
recommended by the Building Officer of the Village acting as Electrical
Commission or the chief electrical inspector. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-
2019)
4-2-5: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The International Code Council Mechanical Code, 2015 edition is hereby adopted
by reference as the Mechanical Code of the Village.
Section 101.1 Insert the Village of Barrington Hills
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-6: WATER WELL CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Proper Location, Construction And Modification Of Water Wells: It is
the purpose of this section to ensure the proper location, construction and
modification of water wells and the proper installation of water well pumps and
equipment in order to protect the public health.
   (B)   Adoption Of Codes: The water well construction and water well pump
installation codes, as amended from time to time by the Illinois Department of
Public Health pursuant to 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/1 et seq., and 35/
1 et seq., are hereby adopted. All potable water well supply systems within the
Village shall comply with said codes and all applicable regulations set forth
in this Code.
   (C)   Construction And Operation: The designated enforcement officer of this
Code is herein referred to as the local authority and shall mean the Building
Officer of the Village.
      1.   The Building Officer shall be provided with adequate proof of
compliance with this section prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      2.   The owner of a potable well shall provide the Building Officer
assurance of a potable water supply by producing a water sample as the term is
defined in the referenced code. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-7: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to ensure the adequacy,
proper location, and proper construction of septic systems in order to protect
the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Applicability And Prohibition: This section shall apply to all sewage
and drainage systems and facilities located within the Village. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this title to perform any work subject to this
section, or to install, use or maintain any facility or system subject to this
section except in strict compliance with the provisions and appendices of this
section
4-2-7 and the provisions of all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the Village and of other governments and agencies having
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
   AEROBIC TREATMENT PLANT: Equipment or devices for the treatment of sewage by
the forced addition of air or oxygen.
   APPROVED OR APPROVAL: Accepted by or acceptable to the Village except as the
context shall explicitly indicate accepted by or acceptable to the Illinois
Department of Public Health.
   BEDROOM: For the purpose of establishing the rate of flow for domestic
sewage, any room, whatever named, which is easily suitable for use regularly as
a room for sleeping, including, but not limited to, a den or study.
   BUILDING SEWER: That part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system
which extends from the end of the building drain, receives the discharge of the
building drain and conveys it to a private sewage disposal system or another
approved point of disposal. The building sewer commences five feet (5') outside
the building foundation wall.
   COUNTY: Any one of four (4) counties, Cook, Kane, Lake and McHenry in the
State of Illinois.
   CURTAIN DRAIN: A drainage system designed and constructed to intercept and
accept surface and ground water which, were it not for such a system, would
travel onto or into the subsurface seepage system of the private sewage
disposal system.
   DEPARTMENT: The Illinois Department of Public Health.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Wastewater derived principally from dwellings, businesses
or office buildings, institutions, food service establishments, and similar
facilities.
   EFFECTIVE SIZE: The size of screen opening where ninety percent (90%) by
weight of a sample of filter media is retained on the screen and ten percent
(10%) passes through the screen.
   HUMAN WASTES: Undigested food and byproducts of metabolism which are passed
out of the human body as may be indicated by the presence of human fecal
coliform group bacteria.
   LIMITING LAYER: A horizon or soil condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes:
      1.   An estimated high water table, whether perched or regional.
      2.   Masses of loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient
fine soil to fill the voids between the fragments.
      3.   Rock formation, other stratum or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of effluent.
   LIQUID CAPACITY: The volume of a tank below the invert of the outlet line.
   MAINTAINED AND SERVICED: The tasks, procedures, and inspections required by
the manufacturer of the component/system or the Village for the private sewage
disposal system to operate within the parameters and requirements of this
section and any other restrictions established as part of the system approval
or as part of a variance.
   NSF: The National Sanitation Foundation, an independent testing laboratory.
   PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust,
partnership, corporation, person doing business under an assumed name, the
State of Illinois or any department thereof, or any other entity.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT: An average waste loading equivalent to that produced
by one person which is defined as one hundred (100) gallons per day.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: An on-site, soil absorption treatment
facility for domestic sewage, commonly referred to as a septic system, which is
designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with this section.
When used with this definition, the word "new" means any such system installed
after the effective date of this section.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the
business of constructing, installing, maintaining, servicing, or cleaning of
private sewage disposal systems or the hauling or disposal of wastes removed
therefrom.
   PROPERTY OWNER: The person in whose name legal title to the real estate is
recorded.
   REPAIR: The construction necessary to correct prohibited discharges or
improve an existing private sewage disposal system which fails by operation or
design to be in compliance with this section.
   SEPTAGE: The solid and liquid wastes removed from private sewage disposal
systems.
   SHALL: The stated provision is mandatory.
   SOIL BORING: An observation pit, dug by hand or backhoe, or an undisturbed
soil core taken intact and undisturbed by a probe.
   SOIL CLASSIFIER: One of the following:
      1.   A certified professional soil classifier (CPSC) who is certified by
the Illinois Soil Classifiers Association (ISCA) or a certified soil classifier
with the American Registry of Certified Professionals in Agronomy, Crops, and
Soils (ARCPACS).
      2.   A person who is a full member or associate member of the Illinois
Soil Classifiers Association (ISCA), provided that direct supervision is
provided to this person by an ISCA certified professional soil classifier or
ARCPACS certified soil classifier who accompanies the person on at least twenty
five percent (25%) of the soil investigations and reviews and signs all of that
person's soil investigation reports.
   SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE SYSTEM: All approved components of a subsurface seepage
field, seepage bed, chamber system or buried sand filter.
   UNIFORM COEFFICIENT: A number obtained by dividing that size of sand in
millimeters of which sixty percent (60%) by weight is smaller, by that size of
sand in millimeters of which ten percent (10%) by weight is smaller.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Barrington Hills in the Counties of Cook, Kane, Lake
and McHenry, State of Illinois.
   WASTE: Either human waste or domestic sewage or both.
   WATER TABLE: The upper limit of the portion of the soil or rock formation
that is completely saturated with water.
   (D)   General Requirements: Every private sewage disposal system shall be
designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the minimum
standards as specified in the following regulations:
      1.   Rate Of Flow For Domestic Sewage: Each unit of the private sewage
disposal system shall be designed to treat the volume of domestic sewage and
human wastes discharged to it.
         a.   Volume Design Requirements: The volume of sewage flow shall be
determined in accordance with section
4-2-7-1, appendix A of this section
4-2-7. For nonresidential establishments, the Building Officer will consider,
in addition to the methods set out in section
4-2-7-1, appendix A of this section
4-2-7, the use of documented flow volumes obtained from similar installations.
Flows shall conform with subsection (D)7 of this section unless approval has
been obtained from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the
Village.
         b.   Additions Or Enlargements: In terms of the permit issued
therefor, any change to the volume of sewage flow to that system shall
constitute a repair situation and be corrected in compliance with this section.
         c.   Credit For Existing Septic Systems: For new construction or the
addition of one or more bedrooms that will utilize an existing septic system,
credit will be assigned based on the age and use of the existing seepage field
upon the date of the building permit application. For existing systems less
than ten (10) years old, one hundred percent (100%) credit is assigned to the
length of distribution lines in place. For existing systems less than twenty
(20) years old but greater than ten (10) years old, fifty percent (50%) credit
is assigned to the length of distribution lines in place, unless an inspection
of the existing system by the Village Health Officer warrants that additional
credit can be assigned; up to one hundred percent (100%) credit can be assigned
for systems less than twenty (20) years old. For existing systems greater than
twenty (20) years old, no credit is assigned to the length of the distribution
lines in place; up to fifty percent (50%) credit can be assigned based on an
inspection of the existing system by the Village Health Officer.
         d.   Credit For Existing Chamber Septic Systems: For new construction
or the addition of one or more bedrooms that will utilize an existing chamber
septic system, credit will be assigned based on the age and use of the existing
chamber system upon the date of the building permit application. For existing
chamber systems less than fifteen (15) years old, one hundred percent (100%)
credit is assigned to the length of distribution lines in place. For existing
chamber systems less than thirty (30) years old but greater than fifteen (15)
years old, fifty percent (50%) credit is assigned to the length of distribution
lines in place, unless an inspection of the existing chamber system by the
Village Health Officer warrants that additional credit can be assigned; up to
one hundred percent (100%) credit can be assigned for systems less than thirty
(30) years old. For existing systems greater than thirty (30) years old, no
credit is assigned to the length of the distribution lines in place; up to
fifty percent (50%) credit can be assigned based on an inspection of the
existing chamber system by the Village Health Officer.
      2.   Type Of Waste: A private sewage disposal system shall be designed to
receive and treat only domestic sewage. No cooling water, groundwater,
discharges from roof drains, footing tile drains, water softeners nor swimming
pool wastewater, or other clear water discharges shall be directed to the
private sewage disposal system. No automotive grease, oil, toxic wastes, nor
any waste other than domestic and human wastes shall be discharged to a private
sewage disposal system. Wastes from floor drains in areas where vehicles or
motorized equipment are serviced and parked shall be connected to a holding
tank. The holding tank shall be constructed of the same materials required for
gas and oil interceptors meeting the requirements of section 890.25 of the
Illinois Plumbing Code.
      3.   Individual Service: A private sewage disposal system shall serve
only the lot on which the system is located.
      4.   Water And Sewer Line Separation: The following criteria shall govern
the separation of water supply lines and sewer lines:
         a.   Horizontal Separation: Sewers shall be installed at least ten
feet (10') horizontally from any existing or proposed water line. When site
conditions prevent a lateral separation of ten feet (10'), a sewer may be laid
closer than ten feet (10') to a water line provided that the elevation of the
crown of the sewer is at least eighteen inches (18") below the invert of the
water line.
         b.   Crossings: Where sewer lines must cross water lines, the sewer
line shall be laid at such an elevation that the crown of the sewer line is at
least eighteen inches (18") below the invert of the water line. This vertical
separation shall be maintained for that portion of the sewer line located
within ten feet (10') horizontally of any water line it crosses. When sewer
lines must cross above water lines, the sewer lines shall be schedule 40 or
equivalent material and with watertight joints.
      5.   Acceptable Pipe Materials: All piping located more than five feet
(5') from the building foundation, used to convey wastewater to a private
disposal system, and shall be considered a part of the private sewage disposal
system. All piping located from a point five feet (5') from the building
foundation to a point six feet (6') beyond the septic tank (or distribution box
where used) shall be ductile iron, vitrified clay, asbestos cement, or plastic
pipe. Perforated pipe or open jointed tile shall be used only as provided in
this section.
         a.   Plastic Pipe Materials: Plastic pipe, and fittings utilized in
private sewage disposal system shall be manufactured from the list of approved
materials specified in section
4-2-7-1, appendix B of this section
4-2-7 in accordance with the latest revision of the materials standard
indicated.
         b.   Use Of Plastic Pipe: Use of plastic pipe shall conform to the
uses designated in section
4-2-7-1, appendix C of this section
4-2-7.
      6.   Pipe Size And Slope: All solid pipes carrying gravity flow shall
have an inside diameter of at least four inches (4") and a minimum slope of
twelve inches (12") per one hundred feet (100'). Building sewers in excess of
fifty feet (50') in length shall be provided with at least one cleanout every
fifty feet (50') that terminates at grade.
      7.   Prohibited Discharge: There shall be no discharge of domestic sewage
or septage from any building sewer or private sewage disposal system to the
surface of the ground or to farm tiles, streams, rivers, ponds, lakes, or other
collectors of water, nor to wells, cisterns, caves, tunnels or other such
underground spaces.
      8.   Water Softener Wastewater: Backwash water from a water softener or
similar device shall be discharged to one of the following:
         a.   A separate subsurface seepage system, provided that the seepage
field is designed to accommodate the liquid capacity of the water softener on a
daily basis. A septic tank is not required in front of a seepage field
receiving flow from this device.
         b.   A separate building drain, in accordance with the Illinois
Plumbing Code, that will discharge to a subsurface seepage system, provided
that the seepage field is designed to accommodate the flow from this device on
a daily basis. A septic tank is not required in front of a seepage field
receiving flow from this device.
      9.   Private Sewage Disposal System Development: The following factors
shall govern the location and design of a private sewage disposal system:
         a.   Soil: The area of a subsurface seepage system shall be sized
based upon the absorption capacity of the soil. Soil investigations, prescribed
in subsection (H) of this section shall determine the absorption capacity of
the soil.
         b.   Drainage: A private sewage disposal system shall not be located
in areas of flooding, ponding, surface water or where the limiting layer is
within two feet (2') of the bottom of the trench or bed. Curtain drains shall
be used to minimize surface and ground water in the area of the subsurface
seepage system.
         c.   Water Table: Subsurface seepage systems shall not be constructed
in areas where the groundwater table is within four feet (4') of the bottom of
the trench or the bed.
         d.   Limestone Formations: A subsurface seepage system shall not be
constructed in an area where there is less than four feet (4') of soil between
the lowest point in a subsurface seepage system and the top of a creviced
limestone formation. In areas where creviced limestone is known to occur, a
soil boring or backhoe excavation to a depth of at least four feet (4') below
the bottom of the subsurface seepage system shall be made.
         e.   Topography: The existing grade elevation and vegetation,
especially mature trees, shall be accommodated in the layout of the subsurface
seepage system. Every effort should be made to minimize the alteration of the
topography without jeopardizing the functional capability of a private sewage
disposal system.
         f.   Distances: The location of the various components of a private
sewage disposal system shall comply with section
4-2-7-1, appendix D of this section
4-2-7 so that no component shall be closer than the distances stated to the
various features. The distance shall be increased where required by the other
factors in this subsection (D) peculiar to a specific location.
         g.   Area Reserved For Sewage Disposal: The area to be used for a
private sewage disposal system and the reserved seepage field shall be selected
and maintained so that it is free from encroachment by accessory buildings,
driveways, parking spaces, swimming pools, tennis courts, underground utility
services, pastures, patios, slabs, additions to the original structure, or any
other structure that limits free access to the system for maintenance,
servicing, or proper operation. The property owner and private sewage disposal
system installation contractor shall ensure that the designated area for the
subsurface seepage system shall be secured prior to construction or
modifications to the site and shall be protected throughout the site
development process. The property owner and private sewage disposal system
installation contractor shall secure this area to deter any traffic, compaction
of soil, removal or addition of soil, or encroachment on the area of the
proposed subsurface seepage system. Temporary fencing or a similar restrictive
barrier may be used to restrict access. The area of the proposed private sewage
disposal system shall be protected throughout the site development or
construction process.
      10.   Electrical Devices: All electrical devices shall be wired in
accordance with the National Electrical Code or local Electrical Code,
whichever is more stringent.
         a.   Any component of a private sewage disposal system which is
electrically activated shall be provided with a conspicuously visible and
audible warning device.
         b.   Alarms installed after January 1, 2014, shall be located outside
of the building served. The power supply for the alarm shall be on a dedicated
circuit. The design of the alarm shall meet the requirements specified in
section 5.8 of NSF international/ANSI standard 40. The alarm shall be housed in
a weatherproof box.
         c.   Electrical devices installed after January 1, 2014, shall be
provided with an electrical disconnect that is located within sight of, and not
more than fifty feet (50') away from, the device.
      11.   Variances: In order to address contingencies or provide relief to
practical difficulties, the provisions and appendices of this section
4-2-7 may be varied in accordance with the specific instances hereinafter set
forth:
         a.   New Private Sewage Disposal Systems: Upon a determination by the
Building Officer that the installation of a new private sewage disposal system
cannot be accomplished in compliance with the provisions and appendices of this
section
4-2-7, the applicant may seek a variance in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in subsection
6-3-5(C) of this Code.
         b.   Repairing Private Sewage Disposal System: A variance from the
provisions and appendices of this section
4-2-7, if needed for the repair of a private sewage disposal system, may be
granted or denied by the Building Officer, with an appeal to the Board of
Health. The Building Officer may approve variances allowing up to one foot (1')
of fill material over existing ground to accommodate an otherwise standard
trench system. Variances requesting more than one foot (1') of fill or an
alternate system type may only be approved by the Board of Health. However, no
variance shall be granted unless the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates its
said variance is necessary for the system to comply with the purpose of this
section.
      12.   Detached Guesthouses: Septic systems serving detached guesthouses
having less than three (3) bedrooms shall be designed in accordance with the
minimum requirements for a primary residence.
   (E)   Approved Private Sewage Disposal System:
      1.   General: A septic tank or Imhoff tank followed by a subsurface
seepage system, as described in subsections (F), (G) and (H) of this section is
approved for private sewage disposal when designed, constructed, operated, and
maintained in accordance with this section.
         a.   An aerobic treatment plant discharging to a subsurface seepage
system as provided in subsection (J) of this section, may be approved for
private sewage disposal when the use of a septic tank or Imhoff tank followed
by a subsurface seepage system is demonstrated to not be feasible or desirable
given the constraints of a particular property.
         b.   NSF 350 certified system using membrane technology discharging to
a subsurface seepage system as provided in subsection (J) of this section may
be used for the replacement or repair of a private sewage disposal system.
      2.   Repair: Any system or component thereof approved pursuant to
subsection (E)1 of this section is approved for use in repairs. In addition, an
aerobic treatment plant discharging to a subsurface seepage system as provided
in subsection (J) of this section may be used for the repair of a private
sewage disposal system.
   (F)   Septic Tanks:
      1.   Septic Tank Approval: Manufacturers of prefabricated septic tanks
shall submit three (3) sets of plans for each size and configuration of septic
tank to the department for approval. Such plans shall be drawn to scale and
show all dimensions, baffles, tees, cleanouts, and material specifications. A
written approval for each size tank shall be provided by the department when
the plans are found to conform to the requirements of this section.
         a.   The department shall issue an approval number to each
manufacturer for each series of approved septic tanks, and shall maintain a
listing of the approved manufacturers and approved septic tank series.
         b.   No prefabricated septic tank shall be sold, offered for sale, or
installed other than those which have been approved by the department. The tank
shall bear the manufacturer's approval number and the liquid capacity of the
tank, in gallons, prominently displayed on the outside end wall of the tank
above, or next to, the outlet pipe so that this information is readily visible
after installation and prior to covering.
      2.   Septic Tank Construction: Septic tanks shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with section
4-2-7-1, appendix E of this section
4-2-7 and the following:
         a.   Construction Materials: A septic tank shall be watertight and
constructed of sound and durable materials not subject to excessive corrosion,
decay, frost damage, or cracking due to settling or backfilling.
         b.   Top Dead Load Support: The tank shall support a top dead load of
not less than five hundred (500) pounds per square foot, and concrete tanks
shall have a minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three
thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch (psi).
Tanks shall be designed and constructed so that they will not collapse or
rupture when subject to anticipated earth and hydrostatic pressures when the
tanks are either full or empty. The manufacturer, design engineer, and/or
structural engineer shall certify in writing to the department that the tank is
designed and constructed to meet the load requirements of this section. If
additional loading is anticipated, the tank shall be strengthened to
accommodate the additional loading.
         c.   Materials: Septic tanks shall be constructed of the following
approved materials:
            (1)   Poured in place reinforced concrete.
            (2)   Precast reinforced concrete.
            (3)   Concrete block, provided that the core is filled with
concrete and reinforcing rods are inserted in the core prior to pouring.
         d.   Depth: The minimum liquid depth of the tank shall be forty two
inches (42"), and the maximum liquid depth shall be seventy two inches (72").
         e.   Inlet And Outlet Connections: The invert elevation of the inlet
shall be at least two inches (2") above the liquid level in the tank. The inlet
and outlet openings of the septic tanks shall be provided with cast-in
watertight openings.
         f.   Baffles: Septic tank baffles shall meet the following
requirements:
            (1)   Inlet baffles shall be provided and shall extend at least six
inches (6") below the surface of the liquid and to within at least three inches
(3") of the tank lid.
            (2)   Outlet baffles shall be provided and shall be located no
farther than six inches (6") from the outlet orifice. Outlet baffles shall
extend to a depth of at least forty percent (40%) of the liquid depth. There
shall be a clearance of at least one inch (1") of free space between the top of
the tank and the baffles.
            (3)   Slip in type baffles shall extend the full width of the tank.
            (4)   The sides of "V" or semicircular type baffles shall fit
tightly against the end wall of the tank.
            (5)   Venting shall be provided through all baffles and a free vent
area equal to the cross sectional area of the building sewer shall be provided.
            (6)   Submerged pipe T-branches or sanitary tees may be used at
inlets and outlets in lieu of baffles, provided all of the above stated
distances and depths are maintained. Submerged pipe T-branches used as inlet
baffles shall be six inches (6") in diameter or larger. Outlet baffles shall be
four inches (4") in diameter. Submerged pipe T-branches or sanitary tees shall
meet the requirements of ASTM 2661, ASTM 2665, ASTM 3034, or ASTM 2751,
provided that the pipe does not have an SDR (standard dimension ratio) number
greater than 35.
            (7)   When a single compartment septic tank is manufactured or
used, a gas deflection baffle shall be provided below the outlet baffle of the
tank configured to deflect rising gas bubbles away from the outlet structure
and toward the interior of the tank. This baffle shall be constructed of a
durable material not subject to corrosion or decay. An NSF international/ANSI
standard 46, section 10 septic tank filter may be used in lieu of the gas
deflector baffle. The septic tank filter baffle shall be installed so that it
is extended or suspended to a depth equal to forty percent (40%) of the liquid
level of the tank. The tank access over the filter shall be provided with an
access riser that extends to three inches (3") above the ground surface or
greater.
         g.   Access: Access shall be provided over the inlet and outlet of the
tank to facilitate inspection and cleaning. The manhole or access opening shall
have a fitted lid with a minimum dimension of twelve inches (12") (width or
diameter). Risers shall be watertight and constructed of a durable material. If
the top of the tank is greater than twelve inches (12") below the ground
surface, a riser with a minimum dimension (width or diameter) of twelve inches
(12") shall be provided by the private sewage disposal contractor at a height
to bring access of the tank to the ground surface. If a two (2) compartment
tank is used, and the tank has an opening over the wall between the
compartments, the center opening shall have access provided to the ground
surface.
      3.   Capacity: Septic tanks for individual residences shall be sized in
accordance with section
4-2-7-1, appendix F of this section
4-2-7. When the total flow exceeds one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350)
gallons per day, two (2) or more tanks in series, or a multicompartment tank,
shall be installed. Septic tanks for any establishment other than residential
units shall be sized in accordance with the estimated flow provided in section
4-2-7-1, appendix A of this section
4-2-7, and as follows:
The volume below the liquid level for flows up to five hundred (500) gallons
per day shall be at least seven hundred fifty (750) gallons. For flow five
hundred (500) gallons per day and less than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
gallons per day, the volume shall be equal to at least one and one-half (11/2)
times the estimated daily sewage flow. For flows one thousand five hundred
(1,500) gallons per day, but less than fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500)
gallons per day, the volume shall be one thousand one hundred twenty five
(1,125) gallons plus seventy five percent (75%) of the daily sewage flow. For
flows fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500) gallons per day and greater, the
department and the Village shall be consulted.
      4.   Multiple Tanks Or Compartments: When multiple compartment septic
tanks or multiple septic tanks in series are used, the capacity of the first
compartment or tank shall be one-half (1/2) to two-thirds (2/3) of the total
required capacity. Two (2) compartment tanks shall also comply with the
following:
         a.   The wall separating the first and second compartments shall be
tightfitting and designed to handle the differential in pressure if one side is
pumped.
         b.   The wall separating the compartments shall extend to within three
inches (3") of the tank lid and shall have a free vent area equal to the cross
sectional area of the building sewer.
         c.   The center of the opening between compartments shall be in line
with the center of the inlet and outlet openings.
         d.   The depth to the invert of the opening between compartments shall
be forty percent (40%) of the liquid depth.
      5.   Septic Tank Installation: The contractor shall use his best efforts
to prevent flotation or drifting of the septic tank.
      6.   Abandoned Septic Tanks: Septic tanks, cesspools, and seepage pits
which are no longer in use shall be completely pumped and collapsed in place,
removed or filled with sand or soil.
      7.   Lift Station: If conditions as outlined in subsection (D)9 of this
section prohibit gravity drainage of effluent from the septic tank to the drop
box, then a pump, designated by the manufacturer to handle domestic sewage, may
be used as a component of a private sewage disposal system. Pump discharge head
must be adequate to overcome the elevation differences between the pump and the
drop boxes plus friction loss of discharge pipe. The end of the discharge line
shall be designed to prevent siphoning effluent or groundwater in the seepage
lines back to the lift station. If check valves are required by the
manufacturer, a weep hole above the valve is required to prevent freezing.
Pumping rate shall not exceed the outflow capacity of the drop box.
   (G)   Distribution Boxes:
      1.   General: Distribution boxes may be installed between a septic tank
or aerobic treatment plant and a subsurface seepage system or buried sand
filter. If a distribution box is used, it shall be installed level on
unexcavated earth, and shall provide equal distribution of flow to the
subsequent disposal system.
      2.   Connecting Pipe: The pipe connecting the septic tank to the
distribution box and the pipe connecting the distribution box to the disposal
system shall be watertight.
      3.   Construction: Distribution boxes shall be constructed of a durable
watertight, noncorrosive material. They shall be designed to accommodate the
necessary distribution lines.
      4.   Access: Distribution boxes shall be provided with an opening which
will serve as a ready access for inspection, cleaning, and general maintenance.
   (H)   Subsurface Seepage System Requirements:
      1.   Evaluation Of Soil Characteristics: The requirements of subsection
(D)9a of this section shall be followed for the evaluation of soil
characteristics for a subsurface seepage system. The area of soil required for
each system shall be based on the values listed in section
4-2-7-1, appendix G of this section
4-2-7 as obtained from a soil investigation.
         a.   Procedure For Performing Soil Investigations: Soil investigations
shall be conducted in the following manner:
            (1)   Determination of the soil characteristics on sites proposed
for development with private sewage disposal systems shall be based on soil
boring data collected by a soil classifier.
            (2)   There shall be a minimum of three (3) borings per subsurface
seepage system site. The soil borings shall be at least fifty feet (50') apart,
and the proposed subsurface seepage system shall be located within the area
where the soil borings were located. More soil borings may be necessary for
accurate and appropriate evaluation of a site where there is some concern about
the consistency of the soil materials. One of the borings shall be made at the
lowest elevation of the proposed absorption field area. Borings shall extend a
minimum of sixty inches (60") below the natural ground surface. An observation
pit shall be used in gravelly materials.
            (3)   Observation and determination of soil characteristics may
also be determined from a pit dug by a backhoe or other excavating equipment.
The Village may require soil pits (backhoe excavation) in cases where the
ground is frozen, where the soil materials are considerably varied in texture,
where there has been previous or current fill material or cutting of soils, or
where gravelly soils are encountered. Soil pits shall be prepared at the
perimeter of the expected soil absorption area to minimize damage to natural
soil structure. Soil pits shall extend a minimum of sixty inches (60") below
the natural ground surface.
            (4)   Site characteristics to be described include zones of
seasonal and permanent water saturation, United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) soil textural changes, USDA soil structural features for
each horizon, slope, compaction and depth; soil coloration; consistence;
coatings; depth of limiting layer; depth of soil mottling; internal drainage
classification; permeability range; and other limiting soil characteristics
that may reduce permeability. The following reference materials shall be used
as a guide for describing and classifying soil: "Field Book for Describing and
Sampling Soils", "Soil Taxonomy", and "Soil Survey Manual".
         b.   Qualified To Conduct Soil Investigation: Only those meeting the
definition of soil classifier as described in subsection (C) of this section
shall be qualified to conduct soil investigations.
      2.   Reserve Field: Every private sewage disposal system shall include,
to the satisfaction of the Building Officer, a reserve subsurface seepage field
for future expansion or replacement equal in size to one hundred percent (100%)
of the existing seepage field.
      3.   Construction: Subsurface seepage fields shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with section
4-2-7-1, appendices H and I of this section
4-2-7. Any subsurface seepage field approved in clayey soils as described in
sections
6-7-3 and
6-7-4 of this Code shall be installed in natural or undisturbed soils.
      4.   Bedding Material: The bedding material shall be washed gravel or
washed stone with a particle size ranging from three-fourths inch (3/4")
minimum to one and one-half inches (11/2") maximum, except where a chamber
system is approved. The bedding material shall extend the full width of the
trench as illustrated in section
4-2-7-1, appendix I of this section
4-2-7. The bedding materials shall be covered by straw, newspaper, or untreated
building paper or other pervious material to support the backfill as the laying
of the distribution line proceeds. Tar paper, plastic, or other impervious
material shall not be used between the bedding material and the earth backfill.
Chamber systems may be bedded with material excavated to construct the system.
The backfill material shall not contain large clods of earth, demolition
material or other extraneous material. No straw, newspaper, or untreated
building paper shall be placed between the chamber system and the earth
backfill.
      5.   Distribution Lines: Distribution lines shall be constructed of
materials as approved in section
4-2-7-1, appendix C of this section
4-2-7. The lines shall be perforated or open joint tile. Where open joint tile
is used, the tile sections shall be spaced not less than one-fourth inch (1/4")
nor more than one-half inch (1/2") apart. Perforated piping shall have one-half
inch (1/2") to three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter openings on three inch (3")
to five inch (5") centers with a minimum of two (2) rows. The ends of the lines
shall be looped except in serial distribution systems. Chamber systems shall
include connections between adjacent chambers to prevent soil intrusion. Each
row of a chamber system shall include an inlet end cap and an outlet end cap,
and shall be bent no more than twenty degrees (20°) per unit unless it is
capped and piped to another line.
      6.   Serial Distribution: The following criteria, as illustrated in
section
4-2-7-1, appendix J of this section
4-2-7, shall be used in the design and construction of a serial distribution
system:
         a.   The bottom of each trench and its distribution line shall be
level at a depth not greater than thirty six inches (36") from finished grade.
         b.   There shall be a minimum of six inches (6") to a maximum of
twenty four inches (24") of earth backfill over the bedding material in the
trenches or over the top of a chamber in a chamber system. Machinery which may
crush or disturb the alignment of pipe in the trench shall not be allowed on
any part of the proposed area.
         c.   The trench shall follow the ground surface contours so that
variation in trench depth will be minimized.
         d.   There shall be a minimum of six feet (6') of undisturbed earth
between the septic tank and the nearest trench.
         e.   Drop boxes shall be arranged in series, so that each trench is
completely filled to the full depth of the gravel or to the top of the chamber
in a chamber system before effluent flows to the succeeding trench.
         f.   The drop boxes connecting the trenches shall have watertight
joints and direct connections to the distribution lines in adjacent trenches.
Drop boxes, tight joint "Ts" or forty five degree (45°) ells shall be used to
connect adjacent trenches.
         g.   Where the drop box trench connects with the higher trench, it
shall not be deeper than the top of the gravel in the higher trench or the top
of the higher chamber in a chamber system. Drop boxes shall rest on undisturbed
earth and the backfill shall be carefully tamped.
         h.   The invert of the first drop box line shall be at least six
inches (6") lower than the invert of the septic tank or aerobic treatment plant
outlet. (See section
4-2-7-1, appendix J of this section
4-2-7.)
         i.   All other construction features of the serial distribution field
shall comply with subsections (H)1 through (H)9 of this section.
      7.   Seepage Beds: The total bottom area of the seepage bed shall be one
and one-half (11/2) times the area specified in section
4-2-7-1, appendix G of this section
4-2-7. Construction features shall conform to subsections (H)1 through (H)8 of
this section as illustrated in section
4-2-7-1, appendix K of this section
4-2-7. Distribution lines shall be spaced no farther than six feet (6') center
to center and shall be equally spaced. Lines adjacent to the bed sidewalls
shall be three feet (3') from the bed sidewall.
      8.   Curtain Drain: When required by drainage conditions as identified in
subsection (D) of this section, a curtain drain system shall be installed
upslope from the seepage field to intercept and accept the lateral movement of
surface or ground water and discharge the water below the field in a manner
that shall not cause a nuisance.
      9.   Location And Design: Curtain drains shall not be within fifteen feet
(15') of a seepage field line and the final ten feet (10') must be a single
piece. Curtain drain trenches shall be six inches (6") to twelve inches (12")
wide and thirty six inches (36") to forty eight inches (48") deep or to the top
of the seasonal high water table. The trench may hold a clay or plastic piping
as well as gravel having a minimum particle size of one and one-half inches
(11/2").
   (I)   Buried Sand Filters:
      1.   General: Sand filters shall be only used in a repair situation. The
effluent shall be discharged in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
      2.   Design Requirements:
         a.   Size: Buried sand filters shall be sized as follows:
            (1)   Residential: The sand filter surface area for residential
systems shall be two hundred (200) square feet per bedroom. Where a sand filter
is used in conjunction with an aerobic treatment plant, the size of the sand
filter may be reduced by thirty percent (30%).
            (2)   Nonresidential: The surface area of the sand filter shall be
designed for one square foot per gallon per day for waste with an influent
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) not to exceed three hundred (300) parts per
million (ppm). A sand filter with flows of eight hundred one (801) gallons or
more per day shall have the influent distributed into the sand filter by a
dosing system designed according to subsection (I)2i of this section. The sand
filter shall be dosed four (4) times per day with equal flows not to exceed the
design capacity of the filter.
         b.   Sand Filter Media: The depth of filter media shall be a minimum
of twenty four inches (24"). The sand shall have an effective size of 0.5 to
2.0 millimeters, and a uniformity coefficient of less than 3.5. It shall be
washed and free of clay and silt.
         c.   Alternate Media: Other filter media may be used in a subsurface
filter provided it meets the criteria of subsection (I)2b of this section and
complies with the following requirements:
            (1)   Is chemically and biologically inert.
            (2)   Will support biological growth.
            (3)   Has a hardness equivalent to, or greater than, that of sand.
         d.   Filter Media Cover: The filter media shall be covered, as
illustrated in section
4-2-7-1, appendix L of this section
4-2-7, with a minimum of ten inches (10") of washed gravel or washed stone
having a particle size ranging from three-fourths inch (3/4") minimum to one
and one-half inches (11/2") maximum. The gravel or stone shall be covered by
straw, newspaper, or untreated building paper or other pervious material prior
to backfilling. Tar paper, plastic, or other impervious material prior to
backfilling. Tar paper, plastic, or other impervious material shall not be used
between the filter media and the earth backfill. A minimum of twelve inches
(12") earth cover shall be provided.
         e.   Distribution And Collection Lines: The distribution and
collection lines shall conform to the requirements for distribution lines as
given in subsection (H)7 of this section. The distribution lines shall be
level, shall be located three feet (3') from sidewalls, and shall be spaced on
three foot (3') centers. They shall be solid pipe to the filter media. The
collection lines shall have a slope of six inches (6") per one hundred feet
(100') and one collection line shall be provided for each ten feet (10') of
width or fraction thereof. The upper end of the collection line shall be
capped.
         f.   Bedding Material: The bedding material for the collection lines
shall be placed on the excavation before placement of the collection lines as
shown in section
4-2-7-1, appendix L of this section
4-2-7 and shall consist of a minimum of two inches (2") of washed gravel or
washed stone having a particle size ranging from three-fourths inches (3/4")
minimum to one and one-half inches (11/2") maximum.
         g.   Venting: A vent shall be placed on the downstream end of the
distribution lines as shown in section
4-2-7-1, appendix L of this section
4-2-7. The vent shall extend above the ground surface and be screened with one-
fourth inch (1/4") mesh screen or equivalent.
         h.   Drainage: Surface drainage shall be directed away from the
filter. If conditions prohibit gravity drainage of the filter effluent, a
pumping chamber shall be installed. The chamber shall be constructed of a
watertight, noncorrosive material and shall be provided with a removable lid,
which will serve as an access for inspection, cleaning, and general
maintenance. An access port or extension collar shall extend at least six
inches (6") above the ground surface, and the access shall have a minimum
dimension of twelve inches (12"). The chamber shall have sufficient depth and
the pump controls shall be set in a manner to allow for complete drainage of
the filter to eliminate any ponding of effluent within the filter.
         i.   Distribution Of Effluent: Buried sand filters designed to treat
nonresidential property with flows of eight hundred one (801) gallons or more
per day shall have the effluent distributed into the sand filter by pumping.
The pumps, pumping chamber, and ancillary equipment shall comply with the
following:
            (1)   Dosing Volume: The dosing volume is the amount of liquid
pumped or siphoned during each cycle minus the amount that drains back from the
sand filter after each dose.
            (2)   Pump Selection: The pump shall be submersible pump designed
for corrosive liquids.
            (3)   Siphons: Siphons can be designed where elevation exists
between the sand filter and the siphon chamber. However, the siphon shall be
designed to deliver the same flow rate at the same head at the distribution
system as a pump system. The distribution system consisting of manifold and
laterals shall be designed so that it will drain after each siphon. This shall
be accomplished by placing the manifold above the laterals.
   (J)   Alternative Private Sewage Disposal System:
      1.   Aerobic Treatment Plants:
         a.   Aerobic Treatment Unit: After the effective date of this code,
aerobic treatment plants shall comply with the requirements of the National
Sanitation Foundation (NSF) standard number 40, individual aerobic wastewater
treatment, May 1983, and shall bear the NSF seal. A copy of a list of approved
aerobic treatment plants may be obtained from the Building Officer.
         b.   Class II Effluent: Aerobic treatment systems listed by NSF for
class II effluent (BOD5- sixty (60) milligrams per liter and suspended solids
one hundred (100) milligrams per liter) shall discharge to one of the
following:
            (1)   A subsurface seepage system designed and constructed in
accordance with the requirements of subsection (H) of this section.
            (2)   A sand filter designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of subsection (I) of this section.
         c.   Class I Effluent: Aerobic treatment plants listed by NSF for
class I effluent (BOD5- twenty (20) milligrams per liter and suspended solids
forty (40) milligrams per liter) shall discharge to a subsurface seepage field
designed and constructed to be at least two-thirds (2/3) the size listed in
section
4-2-7-1, appendix G of this section
4-2-7 as obtained from soil investigation.
         d.   Sizing: Aerobic treatment plants which are listed by NSF as class
I and rated at five hundred (500) gallons per day may be allowed for the
treatment of domestic sewage from dwellings having a maximum of three (3)
bedrooms.
         e.   Installation: All components of aerobic treatment plants shall be
installed at the time of the original installation. If there are practical
difficulties, then a solid end cap shall be securely placed over the end of the
discharge line until the system can be completed, to prevent a violation of
subsection (D)7 of this section.
         f.   Access: Access to aerobic treatment plants shall be adequate to
allow maintenance and service of all components within the plant.
         g.   Operation Permit: Upon the installation of an approved aerobic
treatment plant, the property owner shall secure an operation permit from the
Building Officer at a fee to be established by the Village Board as a record
and notice of the installation. The permit shall be in a form containing all
pertinent information as to construction, installation and operation of the
aerobic treatment plant. A copy of the permit shall be filed with the Village
and the Illinois Department of Public Health and the County in which the plant
is situated. This permit shall be annually renewed on the anniversary date of
the installation for as long as an aerobic treatment plant is used in the
private sewage disposal system for the dwelling. Failure to obtain or renew the
permit shall constitute a violation of this title.
   2.   NSF Standard 350 Certified System Utilizing Membrane Technology:
      a.   The designed rate of flow for each system shall be design per
section 905.2 (a) of the Illinois Administrative Code.
      b.   The systems will be required to be maintained and serviced per the
manufacturers' and NSF requirements for the life of the system.
      c.   If the system is designed for reuse of the treated effluent within a
structure it shall be compliant with the Illinois Plumbing Code, the NSF
Standard 350 and any local regulations.
      d.   If the system is to discharge to a subsurface dispersal area it
shall be designed as follows:
         (1)   The loading rate of the soils on each site shall be determined
by using one of the following:
            A.   Double-ring infiltrometer to determine the Ksat value.
Depending on the types of soils present on the site ASTM D3385-09 shall be used
to determine the Ksat value. If the area for the subsurface dispersal area is
in fill, a double-ring infiltrometer must be used to determine the Ksat value.
The Ksat value of greater than five (5) shall use five (5) as the Ksat.
            B.   Ksat value may be provided by the soil classifier for each
soil group. When the soil information is used to size the subsurface dispersal
area the least permeable value for the soil group shall be used.
         (2)   The amount of square feet of filtered water dispersal area shall
be designed utilizing one of the following formulas:
            A.   When utilizing estimated water use figures to determine the
designed flow rate, per section 905.20 (a) of the Illinois Administrative Code:
Square feet of dispersal area =   gallons per/day (designed rate of flow) /
Ksat (in/hour)
                           10
            B.   When actual water usage figures are used to size the system:
Square feet of dispersal area =   gallons per/day (designed rate of flow) /Ksat
(in/hour)
                           4
         (3)   The formula above provides the actual square feet of bottom
surface area. The square footage remains the same for beds as it is for
trenches. No reduction may be used for use of another approved technology that
provides a reduction to a subsurface component.
         (4)   These systems are to be designed with a twelve inch (12")
separation from bottom of trench to limiting layer.
         (5)   The minimum distance allowed shall be one hundred feet (100')
from a private well to a subsurface seepage field receiving effluent from an
NSF Standard 350 certified system utilizing membrane technology.
         (6)   The sizing of NSF 350 membrane filtered water dispersal area is
unique and not subject to any minimum requirements of section 905.60 of the
Private Sewage Disposal Code.
         (7)   A water softener shall not be connected to the system when
utilizing subsurface dispersal.
      e.   The tanks prior to and housing the membrane shall be complaint with
the minimum set back distances established for a septic tank and aerobic
treatment plant as defined in section 905, Appendix A, Illustration D of the
Illinois Administrative Code.
         (1)   The discharge does not require additional disinfection prior to
discharge to the ground surface.
         (2)   A sample port shall be provided prior to discharge.
         (3)   The discharge is not subject to section 905.100 of the Private
Sewage Disposal Code.
         (4)   There shall be no discharge to a roadside ditch as stipulated in
Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-123.
      f.   This system may be used for seasonal use sites.
      g.   There is no minimum number of gallons for use with non-residential
facilities.
      h.   To be compliant with the NSF 350 Standard the size and configuration
of the screening tank, internal dosing tank (if needed) and the BioBarrier tank
shall be determined by the manufacturer.
      i.   When soil information is used to size the subsurface dispersal area
the least permeable value for the soil design groups shall be used to calculate
the required subsurface dispersal area.
         (1)   The following values shall be used for the soil design groups:
Design Group Estimated Ksat inch/hour
I            6
II           6
III          4
IV           3
V            2.6
VI           2.4
VII          2
VIII         1.7
IX           1.5
X            1.2
XI           0.85
XII          0.66
 
   (K)   Maintenance Of Private Sewage Disposal Systems:
      1.   After January 1, 2014, as a condition of receiving a building permit
to install a new private sewage disposal system or repair or renovate an
existing system, the property owner shall sign the permit acknowledging that
they are aware of and accept the responsibility to service and maintain the
private sewage disposal system in accordance with Village requirements.
      2.   For systems installed and permitted after January 1, 2014, the
property owner shall maintain all maintenance records on forms provided or
approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health and make records available
upon request of the Village. These records shall be transferred from owner to
owner. Records shall be kept for the life of the system.
      3.   After January 1, 2014, private sewage disposal systems installed and
permitted under this section are required to be maintained and serviced to
ensure proper operation in accordance with the following:
         a.   Septic tank to a subsurface seepage system or septic tank
followed by a sand filter discharging to a subsurface seepage system.
            (1)   Private sewage disposal system septic tanks serving
residential properties shall be evaluated prior to or within three (3) years
after the date of installation of the system. The system may be evaluated by
the homeowner, a private sewage disposal system installation contractor, a
licensed environmental health practitioner, an Illinois licensed professional
engineer, a representative of the Illinois Department of Public Health, or an
agent of the Illinois Department of Public Health. The evaluation shall
determine whether the tanks and all of the components of the private sewage
disposal system have layers of scum and settled solids greater than thirty
three percent (33%) of the liquid capacity of the tank. If the layers of scum
and settled solids are greater than thirty three percent (33%), the tanks and
compartments shall be pumped out and maintenance shall be performed. After the
first evaluation, the system shall be evaluated a minimum of once every five
(5) years. Depending on the system's use, the tanks and compartments may need
to be evaluated and pumped more frequently.
            (2)   Private sewage disposal system septic tanks serving
nonresidential property shall be evaluated within three (3) years after the
date of installation of the system. The system may be evaluated by a private
sewage disposal system installation contractor, a licensed environmental health
practitioner, an Illinois licensed professional engineer, a representative of
the department, or an agent of the department or local Health Department. The
evaluation shall determine whether the tanks and all of the compartments of the
private sewage disposal system have layers of scum and settled solids greater
than thirty three percent (33%) of the liquid capacity of the tank. If the
layers of scum and settled solids are greater than thirty three percent (33%),
the tanks and compartments shall be pumped out and maintenance shall be
performed. After the first evaluation, the system shall be evaluated at minimum
once every three (3) years. Depending on the system's use, the tanks and
compartments may need to be evaluated and pumped more frequently.
         b.   An aerobic treatment unit (ATU) requires evaluation and
maintenance at least once every six (6) months. The system may be evaluated by
a private sewage disposal system installation contractor, a licensed
environmental health practitioner, an Illinois licensed professional engineer,
a representative of the Illinois Department of Public Health, or an agent of
the Illinois Department of Public Health. The homeowner of an ATU may conduct
the inspection and maintenance as defined within the Act, but the inspection
and maintenance shall be performed per the manufacturer's requirements to
assure proper operation. If the required inspections and maintenance are not
performed, the system is in violation of the Act and this section.
         c.   Buried sand filters require an evaluation to determine whether
the tanks and all of the compartments of the private sewage disposal system
have layers of scum and settled solids greater than thirty three percent (33%)
of the liquid capacity of the tank. If the layers of scum and settled solids
are greater than thirty three percent (33%), the tanks and compartments shall
be pumped out and maintenance shall be performed. The system shall be evaluated
a minimum of once every year. The system may be evaluated by a private sewage
disposal system installation contractor, a licensed environmental health
practitioner, an Illinois licensed professional engineer, a representative of
the Illinois Department of Public Health, or an agent of the Illinois
Department of Public Health. Depending on the system's use, the tanks and
compartments may need to be evaluated and pumped more frequently.
      4.   A failure to properly operate, maintain, and have routine service
conducted on a private sewage disposal system is a violation of this title.
   (L)   Swimming Pool Wastewater:
      1.   General: Wastewater generated from the operation of a swimming pool
includes clear wastes, such as drainage from the pool proper, deck drainage,
and perimeter overflow system drainage; and turbid wastes, such as filter wash
and backwash water.
      2.   Approved Treatment And Disposal: Wastewater from swimming pools may
not be discharged to a private sewage disposal system receiving domestic
sewage. It shall be disposed of in the following manner:
         a.   Clear water wastes may be discharged directly to storm sewers,
surface drainageways or to the ground surface without additional treatment.
Such drainage shall not result in nuisance conditions including, but not
limited to, offensive odor, stagnant wet area or a breeding environment for
insects.
         b.   Wash or backwash water from an approved treatment system of
swimming pool wastewater may be discharged to natural drainage areas, storm
sewers, seepage pits, or to the ground surface. Diatomaceous earth filter wash
or backwash water may be discharged to one of the above after treatment
consisting of one of the following approved systems:
            (1)   Passing the wastewater through a separation tank designed for
removal of the diatomaceous earth and suspended solids.
            (2)   Settling the wastewater in a tank which is capable of holding
the volume of one backwash. "One backwash" is defined as the amount of water
generated from the backwash of the filters for a period of two (2) minutes for
diatomaceous earth filters, at the required backwash flow rate. The tank shall
be dewatered after settling and prior to subsequent backwashes. Settled sludge
shall be periodically removed to prevent flushing of solids during backwashing.
(See section
4-2-7-1, appendix M of this section
4-2-7.)
            (3)   A separate private sewage disposal system designed and
constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section.
   (M)   Servicing, Cleaning, Transporting And Disposing Of Wastes From Private
Sewage Disposal Systems:
      1.   General: The collection, storage, transportation, and disposal of
all septage shall be handled in accordance with this subsection (M).
      2.   Truck Identification: The name under which the business is conducted
and the address of each contractor shall be painted on each side of every
pumper truck operated by him. The letters shall be easily legible and at least
three inches (3") high.
      3.   Equipment Inspection: Equipment shall be subject to inspection and
approval by a representative of the department of the Village at any reasonable
time; and upon request, shall be available for inspection at a designated
location.
      4.   Vehicle Construction And Equipment: Each vehicle used for collection
and transportation of waste shall be equipped with a leak-proof and tightly
sealed tank for septage hauling. The interior and exterior sections of all
portable containers, pumps, hoses, tools, or other implements which have been
contaminated shall be rinsed clean after each use and the rinsings shall be
disposed of such that no health hazard or nuisance results. Trucks and tanks
shall comply with the following:
         a.   The vehicle shall be equipped with either a vacuum pump or other
type of pump which is self-priming and will not allow any seepage from the
diaphragm or other packing glands.
         b.   The discharge nozzle will be located so that there is no flow or
drip onto any portion of the truck.
         c.   The discharge nozzle shall be capped when not in use.
      5.   Seepage Disposal Site: Each licensed contractor engaged in septage
disposal shall file with the department, and each year amend, a statement
describing the location and methods of disposal of septage. Methods of septage
disposal approved by the department are as follows:
         a.   Discharge To A Municipal Sanitary Sewer System: Discharge to a
Municipal sanitary sewer system is approved when the Municipality has approval
from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency to receive septage from
private sewage disposal systems; and the contractor has written approval from
the Municipality to discharge septage into the system.
         b.   Application To Agricultural Land: Septage may be applied to
agricultural land provided the following criteria are met:
            (1)   Depth: The depth to the groundwater table or to fractured
limestone formations is at least four feet (4') below the ground surface.
            (2)   Disposal: The septage is disposed of in the following manner:
               A. It originates from private sewage disposal systems which
treat only domestic sewage;
               B. It is not applied to land which has been saturated by
rainfall during the twenty four (24) hour period preceding the intended
application time;
               C. It is not applied to land with water ponded upon it;
               D. It is not applied to land within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of wells, homes, or other water supplies, ponds, or streams;
               E. It is not applied to land having greater than five percent
(5%) slope;
               F. It is not applied to land that is intended to grow root
vegetables, or other low growing fruits and vegetables which may be eaten raw;
               G. It is applied at a rate which does not exceed five thousand
(5,000) gallons of septage per acre per month;
               H. Where it is determined by the department or the Village that
a nuisance condition exists, then the septage shall be incorporated into the
soil.
            (3)   Discharge To Sludge Lagoons Or Sludge Drying Beds: Discharge
to a sludge lagoon or drying bed must be approved by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, or the owner/operator of the lagoon or drying bed must have
a permit from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency to receive septage
from the contractor. If the contractor is going to construct a sludge lagoon or
drying bed, a permit will be necessary from the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency to construct and operate the proposed facility.
            (4)   Discharge To An Incinerator Device: Discharge of septage to
an incinerator must be approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
or the owner/operator of the incinerator must have a permit from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency to receive septage from the contractor.
            (5)   Discharge To A Sanitary Landfill: Discharge to a sanitary
landfill must be approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or
the owner/operator of the landfill must have a permit from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency to receive the septage from the contractor.
      6.   Other Wastes: Automotive grease, oil, grit, or toxic wastes, or any
waste other than septage shall not be applied to agricultural land.
   (N)   Minimum Performance Standards For Private Sewage Disposal Contractors:
      1.   General: All private sewage disposal contractors working within the
corporate limits of the Village shall be licensed by the Illinois Department of
Public Health pursuant to 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 225/4. All
notification forms, plans and percolation test results, and copies thereof,
shall bear the seal of a registered professional engineer. The affixing of a
registered professional engineer's seal to any work which has not been done by,
or under the professional supervision, of the registered professional engineer
is a violation of the Illinois Professional Engineering Act and the Village
shall cause the Act to be enforced.
         a.   Installers Of Private Sewage Disposal Systems: Licensed
contractors who install or repair private sewage disposal systems within the
corporate limits of the Village shall:
            (1)   Obtain a permit from the Building Officer prior to the
commencement of a new system or repair. The application for the permit shall be
in writing on forms provided for this purpose and shall include at a minimum:
name of the property owner, legal description of the property, existing and
proposed contours, location of any lakes, streams, surface and subsurface
drainageways within one hundred feet (100') of the system, water table
elevation, location of any well and potable water lines, locations and results
of percolation tests, design calculations and location and dimension of the
system (including reserve seepage field).
            (2)   Construct or repair the private sewage disposal system in
accordance with this section.
            (3)   Comply with the inspection requirements in subsection
4-2-8(C) of this chapter.
         b.   Pumpers And Tank Cleaners: Contractors who pump, service and
clean septic tanks and dispose of their contents shall:
            (1)   Notify the department or the Village of the site utilized for
disposal, and of any changes in the site of disposal.
            (2)   Comply with all requirements of subsection (M) of this
section.
            (3)   Provide an annual estimate of the total gallons of septage
disposed of at each site. This estimate shall be given at the time application
is made for license renewal.
      2.   Nonperformance Of Private Sewage Disposal Services: Licensed private
sewage disposal contractors who have not installed, modified, or renovated any
systems or have not serviced or cleaned any private sewage disposal systems
during the preceding year, shall so indicate on the renewal application to the
department at the time application is made for license renewal.
      3.   Enforcement: Failure to comply with the minimum performance
standards of this section, shall constitute sufficient grounds for suspension,
revocation or refusal to renew a license. The department's "Rules and
Regulations of Practice and Procedure in Administrative Hearings" (77 Ill. Adm.
Code 100) will govern such actions.
   (O)   Appendices: The appendices are incorporated in section
4-2-7-1 of this section
4-2-7.
   (P)   Prerequisite To Building Permit: The Building Officer shall be
provided with adequate proof of compliance with this section prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
   (Q)   Enforcement: The Board of Health shall administer and enforce this
section to the extent not preempted by the Illinois Department of Public
Health. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 20-02, 1-27-2020; Ord.
20-08, 4-27-2020)
4-2-7-1: APPENDICES:
   APPENDIX A
   QUANTITY OF SEWAGE FLOWS
Type Of Establishment Gallons Per Person Per Day
                      (Unless Otherwise Noted)
Type Of Establishment                             Gallons Per Person Per Day
                                                  (Unless Otherwise Noted)
Permanent dwellings:                               
 Board houses                                    50
 Boarding schools                                150
 Institutions, other than hospitals (per bed)    125
 Mobile home parks (per space)                   400
 Mobile homes, individual (per bedroom)          200
 Multi-family dwellings (per bedroom)            150
 Rooming houses                                  40
 Single-family dwellings (per bedroom)           200 1
Travel and recreational facilities:                
 Airports, railway stations, bus stations        5
 Campgrounds:                                     
  Comfort station with toilets and showers (per 35
    space)
  Comfort station with toilets, no showers (per 25
    space)
  Day camps, no meals                           25
  Travel trailer parks with water and sewer     50
    hookups (per space)
 Cottages and/or small dwellings with seasonal   150
  company (per bedroom)
 Country clubs (per member)                      25
 Highway rest areas                              5
 Hotels and motels (per bed)                     50
 Picnic parks                                    5
 Places for public assembly                      5
 Swimming pools and bathing beaches              10
 Theaters:                                        
  Drive-in (per car space)                      10
  Movie (per seat)                              5
Commercial, industrial, and miscellaneous:         
 Churches (per seat):                            3
  With kitchens, add (per meal)                 3
 Construction camps or sites, factories:          
  With toilets and showers                      35
  With toilets, no showers                      20
 Hospitals (per bed)                             250
 Laundries (per customer)                        50
 Offices and other day workers                   15
 Restaurants, with toilets (per meal)            10
 Restaurants, without toilets (per meal)         3
  Additional for bars and cocktail lounges      2
 Schools:                                         
  With cafeterias and showers                   25
  With cafeterias or showers                    20
  Without cafeterias or showers                 15
 Service stations (per vehicle served)           10
 Shopping centers (per 1,000 square feet floor   250
  area)
 Stores (per toilet room)                        400
 
Note:
   1.    See appendices F and G of this section.
   APPENDIX B
   APPROVED PLASTIC PIPE MATERIALS
Material Symbol Standard
Material                                    Symbol Standard
Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene             ABS    ASTM DI788-78a
Polyethylene (corrugated and perforated)    PE     ASTM F405-77a
Polyethylene (smooth wall and perforated)   PE     ASTM D3350-80
Polyvinylchloride                           PVC    ASTM DI784-78
Polyvinylchloride (schedule 40, 80 and 120) PVC    ASTM DI784-78, DI785-76
Styrene-rubber                              SR     ASTM D2852-77
Styrene-rubber (perforated)                 SR     ASTM D3298-74
 
   APPENDIX C
   LIST OF APPROVED PLASTIC PIPE FOR SEPTIC USES
X - Indicates approved use
                        Building Sewer 1     Sewer Lines1
                        5 ft. from building  Additional treatment  All
Types Of Pipes ASTM     to septic/aeration   facilities, and sand  Distribution
               Standard tank to 6 ft. beyond filter collection and Lines
                        tank or distribution distribution lines
                        box
                                 Building Sewer 1 Sewer Lines1
                                 5 ft. from       Additional
                                 building to      treatment       All
Types Of Pipes   ASTM            septic/aeration  facilities, and Distribution
                 Standard        tank to 6 ft.    sand filter     Lines
                                 beyond tank or   collection and
                                 distribution box distribution
                                                  lines
ABS (sewer pipe) D2751-05        X2               X2              X2
ABS (DWV         D2661-06; F628- X                X               X
schedule 40)     06
PVC (type PSM)   D3034-06        X2               X2              X2
PVC (DMV         D2665-07; F891- X                X               X
schedule 40)     04
PVC (STD/        D2729-03                        X               X
perforated)
PE (corrugated   F405-053                                       X
or perforated)
 
Notes:
   1.    Commingling of plastic materials shall not be done except through use
of proper adapters (see adopted Illinois State Plumbing Code at section
4-2-9 of this chapter). When building sewer is of a type of material that is
different from building drain, proper transition fittings shall be used.
   2.    Pipe shall not have a standard dimension ratio (SDR) greater than 35.
   3.    Heavy duty only.
   APPENDIX D
   LOCATION OF COMPONENTS OF PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS1
                  Minimum Distance Allowable From 1
Component Part Of Well Or      Water        Lake,               Property Field
System            Suction Line Supply Line3 Stream, Or Dwelling Line Or  Drain
                  From Pump    (Pressure)   Other Body          ROW5     Tile
                  To Well                   Of Water4
                   Minimum Distance Allowable From 1
Component Part Of  Well Or      Water        Lake,               Property Field
System             Suction Line Supply Line3 Stream, Or Dwelling Line Or  Drain
                   From Pump    (Pressure)   Other Body          ROW5     Tile
                   To Well                   Of Water4
Building sewer2    50'          10'          50'        -        -        -
Septic tank/
aerobic            50'          10'          50'        10'      10'      -
treatment plant
Distribution box   75'          10'          50'        10'      10'      -
Subsurface seepage
system (except     75'          25'          50'        20'      10'      10'
chamber systems)
Sand filter        75'          25'          50'        20'      10'      10'
Chamber system     100'         25'          50'        20'      10'      25'
Class V injection  200' 7       25'          25'        10'      5'       10'
wells6
 
Notes:
   1.    These distances have been determined for use in clay, silt, and loam
soils only. The minimum distances required for the use of a private sewage
disposal in sand or other types of soil shall be determined and approved by the
Village when the soil in question can provide equal or greater treatment of the
sewage. See subsection
4-2-7(D) of this chapter for additional requirements.
   2.    The building sewer may be located to within 10 feet of a well or
suction line from the pump to the well when cast iron pipe with mechanical
joints or schedule 40 PVC pipe with watertight joints is used for the building
sewer.
   3.    See subsection
4-2-7(D)4 of this chapter for details on the separation of sewer and water
lines.
   4.    The minimum distance allowable from an in ground swimming pool is 25
feet. See subsection
4-2-7(L) of this chapter for additional requirements.
   5.    Whichever line is most restrictive.
   6.    Class V injection wells are defined in Illinois Pollution Control
Board rules. They are typically a shallow well used to place fluids directly
below the land surface. See e.g., 35 Illinois Administrative Code 704.105,
704.106, and 704.280.
   7.    A lesser separation distance may be obtained with approval or a waiver
from the IEPA.
   APPENDIX E
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1083.jpg]
 
   APPENDIX F
   MINIMUM VOLUMES FOR SEPTIC    TANKS SERVING RESIDENTIAL UNITS
 
Number Of Bedrooms Minimum Liquid Capacity
                   Of Tank In Gallons
   2 or less    1,250
   3            1,500
   4            2,000
   5            2,500
   6            3,000
   7 or more    3,500
 
   MINIMUM VOLUMES FOR SEPTIC TANKS SERVING NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS
 
Sewage Flow In            Minimum Liquid Capacity
Gallons Per Day           Of Tanks In Gallons
Less than 500             750
500 to less than 1,500    1.5 (gallons per day)
1,500 to less than 14,500 1,125 + 0.75 (gallons per day)
14,500 or greater         Consult Village
 
   APPENDIX G
   SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE SYSTEM SIZE DETERMINATION
   Exhibit A - Loading Rates In Square Feet Per Bedroom And Gallons/Square
Feet/Day
NR = Subsurface disposal system not recommended.
Design Soil Group            Minimum                           Size Of System
Group  (Most Limiting Layer) Separation To  Permeability Range
                             Limiting Layer
                                                  Size Of System
        Soil Group  Minimum                       Residential  Institutional/
Design  (Most       Separation To  Permeability   Reg.         Commercial
Group   Limiting    Limiting Layer Range          Absorption   Allowable
        Layer)                                    (Sq. Ft.     Rate (gpd/Sq.
                                                  Per Bedroom) Ft.)
   I 1A          NR             Very rapid     NR           NR
   II2A; 2B; 2K  3 ft.          Rapid          200          1.0
                                   High
   II3B; 3K      3 ft.          moderately     220          0.91
                                   rapid
   IV3A; 3L; 4D; 3 ft.          Low moderately 240          0.84
        4K                         rapid
   V 4A; 4B; 4H; 3 ft.          Very high      265          0.75
        4L; 5D                     moderate
   VI4F; 4M; 5B  3 ft.          High moderate  290          0.69
   VI4N; 5A; 5C; 2 ft.          Moderate       325          0.62
        5H; 5K; 6D
        4O; 5E; 5I;
   VI5L; 6A; 6B; 2 ft.          Low moderate   385          0.52
        6E; 6H; 6K
        5F; 5M; 6C;                High
   IX6L; 7D; 7F  2 ft.          moderately     445          0.45
                                   slow
   X 5G; 6F; 6I; 2 ft.          Low moderately 500          0.40
        7E; 7C; 7H                 slow
   XI5N; 6G; 6J; 2 ft.          Slow           740          0.27
        6M; 7F; 7I
   XI7G; 7J; 7L; 2 ft.          Very slow      1,000        0.20
        8E; 8I
        5O; 6N; 6O;
   XI7M; 7N; 7O; NR             NR             NR           0.00
        8J; 8M; 8O
   XI9I          Subsurface disposal not recommended
 
Note: Limiting layers include fragipans; bedrock; compact glacial tills;
seasonal high water table or other soil profile features that will materially
affect the absorption of liquid from the disposal field.
   Exhibit B - Key For Determining Sewage Loading Rates (Gallons/Square Foot/
Day)1
Structure And   Single Grain: Weak; Granulary, Angular, And Structureless Or
Parent Material Platy 2             Subangular Blocky;      Massive
                                    Prismatic8
            Single Granulary, Angular, And Subangular Blocky; Prismatic8    Structureless Or Massive
Structure   Grain: Loess; Outwash; Alluvium, Lacustrine Till                Loess; Outwash;
And Parent  Weak;             Moderate;                                     Alluvium,        Till3
Material    Platy  Weak       Strong        Strong      Moderate; Strong    Lacustrine
            2
1.
Fragmental;
ext. or     >1.004 n/a5 n/a   n/a   n/a     n/a   n/a   n/a   n/a     n/a   n/a  n/a   n/a   n/a   n/a
very
gravelly
sand
2. Sand;
loamy
coarse
sand; loamy
sand;       1.00   1.00 n/a   n/a   n/a     n/a   n/a   n/a   n/a     n/a   1.00 n/a   n/a   n/a   n/a
gravelly
sand;
gravelly
loamy sand
3. Fine
sand; loamy
fine sand;  0.84   0.91 n/a   n/a   n/a     n/a   n/a   n/a   n/a     n/a   0.91 0.84  n/a   n/a   n/a
coarse
sandy loam
4. Sandy
loam; fine
sandy loam;
gravelly
sandy loam; 0.75   0.75 n/a   0.84  n/a     0.69  n/a   n/a   0.75    n/a   0.84 0.75  0.69  0.62  0.52
gravelly
loam;
gravelly
silt loam
5. Loam;
silt loam;
very fine
sandy loam;
sandy clay
loam; silt; 0.62   0.69 0.62  0.75  0.52    0.456 0.406 0.62  0.52    n/a   0.62 0.52  0.456 0.276 N/R7
very fine
sand; loamy
very fine
sand;
gravelly
clay loam
6. Silty
clay loam
(<35% c);   0.52   0.52 0.456 0.62  0.52    0.40  0.27  0.52  0.406   0.276 0.52 0.456 0.276 N/R   N/R
clay loam
(<35% c)
7. Silty
clay loam
(>35% c);   n/a    n/a  0.406 0.456 0.406   0.276 0.206 0.406 0.276   0.206 n/a  0.206 N/R   N/R   N/R
clay loam
(>35% c)
8. Sandy    n/a    n/a  n/a   n/a   0.206,9 n/a   n/a   n/a   0.206,9 n/a   n/a  n/a   N/R   N/R   N/R
clay; clay
9.
Organics;
fragic;     Soil properties have very severe limitations; subsurface disposal not recommended
lithic;
paralithic
 
Notes:
   1.    Disturbed soils are highly variable and require special on site
investigations.
   2.    Moderate or strong platy structures for the soil textures in groups 4,
5, and 6 have a loading rate of 0.40 g/sq. ft./d. Platy structure having firm
or very firm consistency or caused by mechanical compaction has a loading rate
of 0.0 g/sq. ft./d.
   3.    Basal glacial tills structured by geogenic processes have the same
loading rates as structureless glacial till.
   4.    This soil group is estimated to have very rapid permeability and
exceeds the maximum established rate in appendix G, exhibit A of this section.
   5.    n/a means not applicable.
   6.    These soil groups are estimated to have moderately slow to very slow
permeability and are less than the minimum established rate in appendix G,
exhibit A of this section.
   7.    N/R means not recommended. These soils have loading rates considered
too low for conventional subsurface disposal.
   8.    In some areas, lacustrine material may have physical properties
similar to glacial till and should be placed in the glacial till columns.
   9.    Nonswelling (1:1 lattice) clays formed in bedrock residuum have a
loading rate of 0.27 g/sq. ft./d. Swelling (2:1 lattice) clays are not
recommended for subsurface disposal.
   APPENDIX H
Standards For Seepage Field Construction
Standards For Seepage Field Construction
Trench bottom, minimum width           8"
Trench bottom, maximum width           36"
Trench bottom, minimum depth           18"
Trench bottom, maximum depth           36"
Trench bottom, slope                   Level
Distribution line, minimum diameter    4"
Distribution line, minimum earth cover 6"
Distribution line, maximum earth cover 24"
Distribution line, maximum slope       Level
Distribution line, maximum length      100'
 
Size And Spacing For Seepage Field Construction
                          Minimum Center To Center Effective Absorption Area
Width Of Trench At Bottom Spacing Of Distribution  Per Linear Foot Of Trench
                          Lines
Size And Spacing For Seepage Field Construction
                          Minimum Center To Center Effective Absorption Area
Width Of Trench At Bottom Spacing Of Distribution  Per Linear Foot Of Trench
                          Lines
8"                        6.0'                     0.67 sq. ft.
12"                       6.0'                     1.0 sq. ft.
18"                       6.0'                     1.5 sq. ft.
24"                       6.0'                     2.0 sq. ft.
30"                       7.5'                     2.5 sq. ft.
36"                       9.0'                     3.0 sq. ft.
 
   APPENDIX I
   SEPTIC TANK AND SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE FIELD
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1086.jpg]
   APPENDIX J
   SERIAL DISTRIBUTION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1088.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1090.jpg]
 
   APPENDIX K
   SEEPAGE BED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1092.jpg]
 
   APPENDIX L
   BURIED SAND FILTER
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1094.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1096.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1098.jpg]
 
   APPENDIX M
   SWIMMING POOL BACKWASH WATER HOLDING TANK
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5190a5f8d11dc4086eac0e2098f40e15648c9f8f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1100.jpg]
 
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; amd. Ord. 23-08, 12-19-2023)
4-2-8: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED; ADDITIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, is
hereby adopted for detached one and two family dwellings and townhouses, except
for such exceptions and additions as are hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Exceptions: Chapters 25 - 32 of the International Residential Code are
not adopted as part of the Barrington Hills Building Code.
   (C)   Additions To The International Residential Code:
      1.   Add section 106.1.5: The Building Officer shall require the plans
and specifications for one and two family dwellings and townhouses to be
certified and stamped by a registered architect or professional engineer
licensed by the State of Illinois and may require such certification and stamps
for nonresidential plans and specifications. Soil tests may be required if in
the opinion of the Building Officer such tests are deemed necessary.
      2.   In lieu of Section R-111:
         a.   The following inspections are required:
      1.   FOOTING FORMS
When the forms are set and before the concrete is poured.
      2.   FOUNDATION FORMS
When the forms are set and before the concrete is poured.
      3.   BACKFILL
When the concrete is poured, waterproofed, drain tile is in place and covered
with gravel but before the foundation is backfilled.
      4.   PLUMBING UNDERGROUND
When piping is located between the floors or underground but before the
covering is in place. Flushing of the underground shall be witnessed.
      5.   FRAMING OR STRUCTURAL
Before any drywall, plaster or interior finish is applied. Rough-in of the
electrical, plumbing, ductwork must be in place before the inspection. An
inspection per floor is required.
      6.   HVAC ROUGH
When piping and ductwork is installed.
      7.   ELECTRICAL ROUGH IN
When rough-in work is complete and before drywall, concrete or backfill is in
place.
      8.   AIR LEAKAGE
When all roughs are complete and exterior finish is complete.
      9.   PLUMBING ROUGH IN
When rough-in work is complete.
      10.   SEPTIC FIELD INSPECTIONS
When tanks and field tile are complete, before backfill.
      11.   INSULATION
When insulation is installed prior to drywall.
      12.   CONCRETE FLOOR BASEMENT
When base reinforcing is prepared and in place, and before the concrete is
poured. All utilities and service equipment in the concrete must be in place
before the inspection.
      13.   CONCRETE FLOOR GARAGE
When base reinforcing is prepared and in place, and before the concrete is
poured. All utilities and service equipment in the concrete must be in place
before the inspection.
      14.   ELECTRIC SERVICE
When meter socket and main panel are installed.
      15.   FINAL PLUMBING
When final work is complete and before the system is operational.
      16.   FINAL HVAC
When all HVAC components are complete.
      17.   FINAL ELECTRIC
When all electrical components are complete.
      18.   FINAL ENERGY
When all Building components are complete.
      19.   FINAL BUILDING
When all Building components are complete.
      20.   DRIVEWAY CULVERT
When driveway culvert is installed.
Note: the inspections for all exterior structures and accessory building are
additional.
Swimming Pool Inspection, in order of occurrence:
      1.   When bottom is ready to be poured and all grounding in place.
      2.   When deck is ready to be poured and all grounding in place.
      3.   When all work described in the building permit application is
completed.
Satellite Antenna Inspection: When antenna is anchored to the concrete platform
and effectively grounded and screening is in place as described in the building
permit application.
Final Inspection: When the building, including pole buildings, is completely
finished with those items required by the provisions of this Chapter and rough
grading done.
Inspection for Certificate of Occupancy or Completion: A certificate of
occupancy or completion shall be issued when all final corrections are made and
a spotted survey is received. In addition, for a residence, there is required
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (i) an as-built drawing of
the septic system, a final grading plan and (ii) a water sample report
indicating the water complies with the IEPA (Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency) requirements. Occupancy of any building, including, but not limited to,
storage of furniture, equipment or other personal property, or the use of such
building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or completion,
shall be subject to the fines and penalties of Section
4-1-9 of the village code.
Re-inspections occur when a project fails their scheduled inspection. A re-
inspection fee or additional inspections on a project that are necessary to
ensure compliance that are in excess of the original list of inspections as
determined by the Building Official is $75.00 per inspection.
Other Inspections: In addition to the called inspections above, the Building
Officer may make or require any other inspections to ascertain compliance with
this Code and any other laws enforced by the Building Officer. Work shall not
be done on any part of the building or structure beyond the point indicated in
each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the
Building Officer. Such written approval shall be given only after an inspection
has been made at each successive step in the construction as indicated by each
of the inspections required above.
      3.   Add section 106.3: A building plan for each model must be filed with
the Building Officer incorporating all off-site constructed aspects of the
structure as well as its final site assembly down to the foundation. These
plans must bear the seal and signature of a registered architect or
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Illinois.
      4.   Section 301.2
Ground Snow Load          30
Wind Speed (mph)          3 second 90 normal 75
Topographic Effects       No
Seismic Design Category   C
Special wind region       No
Wind-borne debris zone    No
Seismic Design Category   A
Weathering                Severe
Frost line depth          42 inches
Termite                   Moderate to heavy
Winter Design Temperature -4 degrees
Ice Shield Underlayment   Yes
Flood Hazard              See Village Stormwater Requirements
Air Freezing Index        2000
Mean Annual Temperature   50 degrees
 
      5.   Delete section R304.1 and insert the following: Minimum area: Every
dwelling unit shall have at least one habitable room which shall have not less
than 150 square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms shall have an area of
not less than 100 square feet. Every kitchen shall have not less than 80 square
feet of floor area. Habitable rooms except kitchens shall be not less than
seven feet in any horizontal dimension.
      6.   Add section R309.6 Any door connecting a garage to a residence must
be a minimum of 6" higher than the garage floor.
      7.   Delete section R313 Automatic Sprinklers are not required in Single
Family, Duplexes and Townhomes.
      8.   Add section R401.4.3 Footing design shall be based upon a soil
bearing capacity of 4,000 pounds per square foot, the following minimums shall
be met and where unusual loading conditions or less than 4,000 pounds per
square foot bearing value exists, larger footings may be required.
Additionally, footings of lesser dimensions as well as trenched foundations
will be allowed provided soils information prepared and certified by a
recognized soils testing laboratory is provided in substantiating the use of
same. Trenched foundations will be allowed only in those areas where the
character of the soil is such that the trench walls will, in the opinion of the
Building Officer, remain stable and in place during the pour.
      9.   Add section R401.1.1.1 Minimum footing for residential buildings
shall be a minimum of 8" x 16" with an 8" foundation wall centered on footings.
Column footings for one-story dwellings shall be a minimum of four (4) square
feet in area and twelve (12) inches thick; for dwellings over one story the
minimum shall be six (6) square feet and twelve (12) inches thick.
      10.   Add the following to section R402.1 all references to wood footings
and foundations are deleted. The use of wood footings and foundations are not
allowed.
      11.   Add section R408.8: The underfloor grade shall be a minimum of 18
inches below the bottom of the floor joist or beams, shall be cleaned of all
vegetation and organic material and shall have a sub base of 4" pea gravel with
a vapor barrier.
      12.   Add Section R501.3 Floor framing utilizing Engineered I-Joists,
Trusses and nominal framing less than 2 x 8 shall be protected with 1/2 inch
gypsum wall board to the underside of the joist when an automatic sprinkler is
not installed.
      13.   Add section R503.2.4 Floor sheathing shall be a minimum of 1/
2 inch.
      14.   Add section R602.3.6: Wall sheathing shall be a minimum of 1/2 inch
thickness over studs for an exterior wall.
      15.   Add section R803.2.4 Roof sheathing shall be a minimum of 1/2 inch
in thickness.
      16.   Add section R807.2 Theattic access panel shall not be located over
a shelf or other obstruction.
      17.   Delete Chapter 11 and insert the 2015 International Energy
Conservation Code.
      18.   Delete Chapters 25 - Chapter 32 and insert the Illinois Plumbing
Code.
      19.   Add section E3801.2.1 all electric wiring systems shall be in EMT,
IMC or rigid conduit.
      20.   Chapter 44 delete all references to plumbing shall be deleted and
the Illinois Plumbing Code inserted.
      21.   Adopt the following appendices F, K, O.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-9: ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED; ADDITIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as providing safe
and practical standards and specifications for the installation, alteration and
use of plumbing facilities in the Village, the Illinois State Plumbing Code,
2014 edition, a publication of the State of Illinois Department of Public
Health, Division of Sanitary Engineering (77 Ill. Adm. Code, part 890, ch. I)
as may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Addition To Illinois State Plumbing Code:
      1.   "Administrative authority" as used in this section means the
building officer of this village.
   (C)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 18-09,
8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-10: LAKE COUNTY WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS;
ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Adoption Of Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance By Reference:
The Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance, as most recently amended by
the County of Lake on July 11, 2023, is hereby adopted by reference and is in
full force and effect within the Village of Barrington Hills to be applied to
all properties in the Village, notwithstanding the County in which any
individual property is located in, and is found in its own compilation.
   (B)   Reserved.
   (C)   Additions To The Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance:
      1.   “New” Impervious Surface Area - WDO section IV.A.1.f:
      The definition of the term “new” as it relates to impervious surface area
created after the original effective date of the Lake County watershed
development ordinance (10/18/92) shall apply only to parcels located in Lake
County. “New” impervious surface area shall refer to impervious surfaces
created after January 20, 2004 for parcels located in McHenry County, after
January 1, 2002 for parcels located in Kane County, and after September 26,
2011 for parcels located in Cook County. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019;
amd. Ord. 20-17, 12-17-2020; Ord. 23-04, 9-25-2023)
4-2-11: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Code Council Fuel Gas Code 2015
edition is hereby adopted by reference as the Fuel Gas Code of the Village
subject to such deletions and additions of sections as are hereinafter
provided.
   (B)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Additions To The International Fuel Gas Code:
      1.   Section 101. Insert the Village of Barrington Hills
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-12: INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS;
ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Code Council Wildland Urban Interface
Code 2015 edition is hereby adopted by reference as the Wildland Urban
Interface Code of the Village subject to such deletions and additions of
sections as are hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Additions To The International Wildland Urban Interface Code:
      1.   Section 101. Insert the Village of Barrington Hills
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-13: INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS;
ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Code Council Swimming Pool and Spa
Code, 2015 edition is hereby adopted by reference as the Swimming Pool and Spa
Code of the Village subject to such deletions and additions of sections as are
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 18-09,
8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
   (C)   Additions To The International Swimming Pool And Spa Code:
      1.   Section 101. Insert the Village of Barrington Hills
      2.   Section 801.1. Replace "Permanent inground residential swimming
pools shall include pools that are partially or entirely above grade" with
"Permanent inground residential swimming pools shall be installed completely
underground."
(Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019)
   (D)   Barriers: A four foot (4') barrier/fence or a pool safety cover is not
required to be installed. Should a barrier/fence or pool safety cover be
installed it must comply with the International Code Council Swimming Pool and
Spa Code 2015. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-14: INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Code Council Existing Building Code,
2015 edition is hereby adopted by reference as the Existing Building Code of
the Village subject to such deletions and additions of sections as are
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Additions To The International Existing Building Code:
      1.   Section 101. Insert the Village of Barrington Hills
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-15: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Code Council Property Maintenance
Code, 2015 edition is hereby adopted by reference as the Property Maintenance
Code of the Village subject to such deletions and additions of sections as are
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Additions To The International Property Maintenance Code:
      1.   Section 101. Insert the Village of Barrington Hills
   (D)   Scope: The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 shall only
apply to dangerous buildings, unoccupied buildings and vacant buildings as
defined herein within the Village of Barrington Hills.
      1.   DANGEROUS BUILDING:
         A.    Any building that is dangerous to the public health because of
its construction or condition, or which may cause or aid in the spread of
disease or cause injury to the health of its occupants or to neighboring
structures; or
         B.    Any building which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of
proper repair or any other cause, is especially liable to fire and constitutes
or creates a fire hazard; or
         C.    Any building, which, by reason of faulty construction, age or
lack of repair is likely to collapse or fall.
      2.    UNOCCUPIED BUILDING: A building or portion thereof which lacks the
habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by the Building Official pursuant to
authority granted to him by this code.
In determining whether a building is "unoccupied", the Building Official may
consider these factors, among others:
         A.    A building at which substantially all lawful residential or
business activity has ceased.
         B.    The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to
unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units.
         C.    The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition
and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination.
         D.    The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer,
electric or natural gas.
         E.    The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
         F.    The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual
agreement to sell the building.
         G.    The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
      3.    VACANT BUILDING: A building or portion of a building which is:
         A.    Unoccupied and unsecured; or
         B.    Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means for
more than thirty (30) days; or
         C.    Unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or
         D.    Unoccupied as a result of having been declared unsafe for
occupancy by the Building Official pursuant to applicable provisions of this
code; or
         E.    Unoccupied and having multiple violations of this code; or
         F.    Unoccupied and the building or its premises have been the site
of unlawful activity at any time while unoccupied, or at any time during the
previous six (6) months whether occupied or not; or
         G.    Unoccupied as a result of having been condemned or declared
unsafe for occupancy by the Building Official and unlawfully occupied; or
         H.    Unoccupied for over sixty (60) days and during which time the
building official has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and
the same have not been corrected in a code compliant manner; or any building
deemed to be a dangerous building under this section or a dangerous structure
as defined in this code.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-16: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The International Code Council Energy Conservation Code,
2015 edition is hereby adopted by reference as the Energy Conservation Code of
the Village subject to such deletions and additions of sections as are
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Additions To The International Energy Conservation Code:
      1.   Section 101. Insert the Village of Barrington Hills
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-2-17: ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The Illinois Accessibility Code, 1997 edition is hereby
adopted by reference as the Accessibility Code of the Village subject to such
deletions and additions of sections as are hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Promulgation Of Rules: The President and Board of Trustees may adopt
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Additions To The Illinois Accessibility Code:
      1.   When there are conflicts with this code and other Village Codes, the
stricter of the requirements shall be applied Section 101. Insert the Village
of Barrington Hills
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
CHAPTER 3
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Findings And Purpose
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: General Criteria And Standards
4-3-4: Plans And Permit
4-3-5: Operation Standards And Requirements
4-3-6: Exceptions
4-3-7: Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit
4-3-8: Fees
4-3-9: Nuisances
4-3-10: Violations And Penalties
4-3-11: Separability
4-3-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
   (A)   The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Barrington Hills
hereby find as follows:
      1.   That excessive quantities of soil are eroding from areas that are
undergoing development for certain nonagricultural uses including, but not
limited to, the construction of buildings, the building of roads and highways
and the creation of recreational facilities;
      2.   That the washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon
roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision
and reducing traction of road vehicles;
      3.   That said soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies,
washed out fills and embankments;
      4.   That the sediment from said soil erosion tends to clog sewers and
ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs;
      5.   That said sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most
beneficial purposes, destroying fish and other aquatic life and that said
sediment is costly and difficult to remove; and
      6.   That said sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways,
resulting in greatly increased chances of flooding at grave danger to public
health and safety.
   (B)   The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Barrington Hills
therefor declare that the purpose of these regulations is to provide minimum
standards to safeguard persons, to protect property and prevent the
despoliation of the environment and to promote the public welfare by regulating
and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials and use and
maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the
Village of Barrington Hills, Illinois. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of these regulations contained in this chapter, the
definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense
shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include
the plural number, and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory
and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive; the masculine gender
includes the feminine and neuter. Whenever a word or term defined herein
appears in the text of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set
forth in the definition thereof and any word appearing in parenthesis directly
thereafter shall be construed in the same manner.
AGRICULTURAL: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
animal and poultry husbandry (including the breeding and raising of horses as
an occupation) and the necessary accessory uses for handling or storing the
produce.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village of Barrington Hills, Illinois,
for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building or
redevelopment of a property.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Specific inspections and tests, where required, have
been performed and that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of
this chapter.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the
method of "average end areas".
ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered in the State of Illinois.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GREEN BOOK: The current edition of "Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control" as compiled and published by the
Northeastern Illinois Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering Committee
for the Soil and Water Conservation Districts of Northeastern Illinois.
LAND SURVEYOR: A surveyor registered in the State of Illinois.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership, or land being developed as a
unit.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Village of Barrington Hills Plan Commission.
RELEASE RATE: The flow or rate of flow of stormwater draining from a site,
measured in cubic feet per second.
REMOVAL: As to vegetation, means cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps,
complete extraction or killing by spraying.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and including, but not
limited to, constructing roads, streets or driveways, buildings of any
character, ponds or waterways, or in any way altering the natural condition of
a parcel.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village of Barrington Hills,
Illinois, for site development using approved methods to control erosion and
sedimentation.
VACANT: Land on which there are not structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The Village of Barrington Hills, Illinois.
WATERSHED: All land drained by, or contributing water to the same stream, lake,
stormwater facility, or draining to a point. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-
2019)
4-3-3: GENERAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS:
The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth, any
sedimentation and erosion control plan and the granting of a permit for the
execution of said plan as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time
during development.
   (B)   Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of
time as is practical.
   (C)   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other
nonviable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall
be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land
undergoing development.
   (E)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development.
   (F)   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as
soon as possible.
   (G)   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of
the site so the potential for erosion is minimized.
   (H)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is
consistent with developing the site.
   (I)   The natural course of drainage and seepage of surface water shall not
be altered so as to increase the natural flow of surface water onto adjoining
properties at a rate beyond an increase that is incidental to the development
of any single property. In the case of redevelopment sufficient measures shall
be taken to ensure that the existing release rate does not increase. In all
cases existing watershed boundaries shall not be altered due to development.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-4: PLANS AND PERMIT:
   (A)   When A Permit Is Required:
      1.   Before land is cleared, graded, transported or otherwise disturbed
by the movement of earth for purposes including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings, the mining of minerals, including sand and gravel,
the development of golf courses and the construction of driveways, roads and
streets or any alterations to the topography of proposed or existing
developments by any person within the Village, a site development permit
embodying the proposed earth movement shall be obtained from the Village where
development comes under any one or more of the following provisions unless such
development is exempted therefrom by subsection (A)2 of this section:
         a.   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof, will exceed three
hundred (300) cubic yards. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
         b.   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof, will disturb an area
exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet in size. (Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019)
         c.   Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet on any vacant parcel of land or on any parcel of
land exceeding ten (10) acres in size.
      2.   A site development permit shall not be required in the following
cases:
         a.   Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and
drainfields, tanks, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools,
cellars or footings of buildings or structures for which a building permit
shall have been issued by the Village, unless part of a development which would
otherwise require such a permit.
         b.   Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes.
         c.   Engaging in the following, but only if in connection with farming
or other agricultural activities:
            (1)   The construction of sod waterways, or
            (2)   The construction of terraces, or
            (3)   The construction of surface water diversions, or
            (4)   The construction of grade stabilization structures, or
            (5)   The tilling of the soil for agricultural purposes.
   (B)   Permit Application:
      1.   No site development or building permit shall be issued until the
applicant submits a site development plan prepared by an engineer or landscape
architect, together with other submissions required by these regulations, and
certifies that any land clearing construction or development involving the
movement of earth shall be in accordance with such plan and submissions.
      2.   Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the
owner of the property or his authorized agent to the Village Building Officer
on a form furnished for that purpose. When grading or plant cover removal is
proposed as part of building construction and falls within the limitations of
subsection (B)1 of this section, a combined application may be made for the
site development permit and the building permit. In such instances, a site
development plan and the building permit application shall be submitted to the
Village Building Officer in the number of copies he requires. In the above
instance, a land surveyor shall certify as to the accuracy of the existing and
proposed contours. Each application shall be accompanied by the following
unless the Building Officer finds any item unnecessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of these regulations. To the extent determined appropriate
by the Building Officer, prior or concurrent submittals to the Plan Commission
under the Village subdivision regulations or to the Zoning Board of Appeals
under the Village zoning ordinance may be utilized for applications under this
chapter rather than be substantially duplicated. No exemption from subsection B
(2)a of this section shall be granted to any applicant who intends to move in
excess of five hundred (500) cubic yards of dirt:
         a.   For site developments, provide a vicinity sketch showing acreage
of site, boundary line survey, zoning, type of proposed sewer and water
facilities, location of existing utilities, buildings and drains on and within
one hundred feet (100') of the site, together with a legend and scale. There
shall be included on or with such a vicinity sketch:
            (1)   A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant
soil types on the site.
            (2)   Enough information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the
site to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may affect
or be affected by the development of the site.
            (3)   The name and address of the developer and/or owner.
            (4)   The name and address of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name of applicant's principal contact at such
firm.
            (5)   Limits of natural flood plain(s), if any.
            (6)   Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved.
            (7)   Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any.
            (8)   Areas to be left undisturbed.
         b.   For proposed site grading, provide a topographic map of the site
and the adjacent one hundred foot (100') wide peripheral strip showing existing
and proposed contours, final structure and street elevations, street profiles,
if any, and what measures will be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from
surface erosion.
         c.   Proposed stormwater drainage plans shall be submitted together
with a tributary area drainage map and hydraulic analysis of the existing and
proposed site drainage. In addition, the following data will be submitted to
show what the existing conditions are at the proposed and natural outlets for
the site.
            (1)   Whether the drainage course is bare earth or vegetated.
            (2)   Whether the proposed outlet will be in open sun, open shade
or dense shade.
            (3)   Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to
intermittent, long term or continuous flow.
            (4)   Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding.
            (5)   Whether there is evidence of a high water table (permanent or
seasonal).
            (6)   Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow.
            (7)   The elevation of normal water level in all proposed and
natural outlets.
            (8)   A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate
the natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel (200
foot minimum).
            (9)   A cross-section and profile of existing stream channels where
applicable.
            (10)   A ditch design and computations for all seeded, sodded or
bare earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities.
         d.   Estimate schedule and phasing of development of the site:
 
Phase I   Stripping and/or clearing
Phase II  Rough grading and construction
Phase III Final grading and vegetative establishment
Phase IV  Maintenance
 
All erosion and sediment control plans submitted to the Village Building
Officer for approval shall show all the erosion and sediment control measures
needed to provide protection throughout all the phases of construction listed
above. These plans shall also include any off-site borrow and spoil areas,
sewer lines, utility lines and haul and access roads and shall further
indicate:
            (1)   The date when site clearing will commence.
            (2)   Duration of exposure of disturbed areas.
            (3)   Installation of temporary sediment control measures
(vegetative and structural) by phase and date.
            (4)   Installation of storm drainage by phase and date.
            (5)   Paving of driveways, streets and parking areas, if any, by
phase and date.
            (6)   Establishment of permanent vegetative cover (plans will show
what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas as
soon after grading as possible), including seeding mixes and rates, type of
sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, lime and fertilizer application,
temporary seedings, if needed, mulching or similar stabilization procedures.
            (7)   Details of all structural sediment control measures.
            (8)   Computations for sediment basins, if any.
         e.   The most recent edition of the "Illinois Procedures and Standards
for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control", excluding pages 5 - 36 of
the appendix, as compiled by the Soil and Water Conservation District of
Northeastern Illinois through the Northeastern Illinois Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Steering Committee, is hereby incorporated into this
section and made part hereof by this reference in order to provide direction as
to the consideration of factors which should enter into the preparation of a
site development plan.
   (C)   Review: To further the specific purposes of these regulations, the
following review procedures are established:
      1.   Processing Of Site Development Application: The Village Building
Officer shall review all site development applications. In so doing, the
Building Officer when necessary or appropriate may obtain assistance from and
rely on advice or determinations of the Village Engineer. Following such
review, the Building Officer, in writing, shall: a) approve the site
development application if he finds it to be in conformance with the provisions
of these regulations and issue a permit; b) approve the site development
application subject to such reasonable conditions as he may deem necessary to
secure substantially the objectives of these regulations, and issue a permit
subject to those conditions; or c) disapprove the site development application.
      2.   Prohibition Of Earth Removal: No site development permit shall be
issued for an intended building site unless:
         a.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the Village, or
         b.   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall plan
previously approved by the Village for the area in which the site is situated.
   (D)   Appeals:
      1.   The applicant or any adjoining property owner (disregarding
intervening streets and roads) may appeal the decision of the Village Building
Officer to the Barrington Hills Plan Commission within fifteen (15) days after
the date of said decision. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Plan Commission shall
schedule and hold a public hearing after giving fifteen (15) days' published
notice thereof. Within thirty (30) days following said hearing, the Plan
Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations in writing to the
Village President and Board of Trustees for final disposition. Factors to be
considered on review shall include, but not be limited to, possible saturation
of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; run-off
surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainage ways; excessive or
unnatural run-off; nature and type of soil or rock that, when disturbed by the
proposed grading, may create each movement and produce slopes that cannot be
landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape
through grading or removal of vegetation.
      2.   The person or persons appealing the decision of the Building Officer
shall be responsible for notifying adjoining and contiguous property owners a
minimum of fifteen (15) days in advance of the public hearing. Streets and
roads shall be disregarded in determining adjoining and contiguous properties.
If applicant directly or indirectly owns or controls the adjoining and
contiguous property, notice shall be given to the owner of the next adjoining
and contiguous property. Proof of notification shall be presented to the Plan
Commission at the time of hearing in the form of a written receipt from each
adjacent owner or proof of mailing to the last known address in the case of an
absent owner, such mailing to have been accomplished with sufficient time to
give at least fifteen (15) days' notice to the owner prior to the hearing date.
Lack of proper notification to adjacent property owners will be reason for
refusal of a hearing on the subdivision by the Plan Commission.
   (E)   Responsibility: Failure of the Village officials to observe or
recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of the site
development permit or of the Village Building Officer or Plan Commission to
deny said permit, shall not relieve the permittee from responsibility for the
condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall not result in the Village,
its officers or agents being responsible for any condition or damage resulting
therefrom.
   (F)   Retention Of Plans: Plans, specifications and reports for all site
developments shall be retained in original form by the Village Building Officer
in the Village offices.
   (G)   Inspections: The Village Building Officer shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the same fails to comply with
the site development plan. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are
not substantially as stated or shown in the said plan, the Village Building
Officer may stop further work until approval is obtained for a revised site
plan conforming to the existing conditions. Plans for all work contemplated by
the site plan, bearing the stamp of approval of the Village Building Officer
shall be maintained at the site during progress of the work. Until the final
inspection is made, a sign issued by the Village indicating permission to work
has been granted by the Village shall be prominently displayed on the front
property line of the property involved so as to be visible from the street on
which the property fronts. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with
the following schedule, the permittee shall notify the Village Building Officer
at least two (2) full working days before the said inspection is to be made:
      1.   Preliminary Control Work: When all erosion and sediment control
devices for each phase of site development has been completed.
      2.   Rough Grading: When all rough grading for each phase of site
development has been completed; and
      3.   Final Inspection: When all work, including installation of all
drainage and other structures and required planting, has been completed. (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-5: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability: All earth moving and grading operations not
specifically exempted by provisions of these regulations shall comply with the
applicable standards and requirements of this section in addition to other
requirements of these regulations.
   (B)   Green Book Adopted By Reference: The "Illinois Procedures and
Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control", excluding pages 5
- 36 of the appendix, as compiled by the Soil and Water Conservation District
of Northeastern Illinois through the Northeastern Illinois Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Steering Committee is hereby incorporated into this
section and made a part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating
procedures and methods of operation pursuant to a site development plan
approved under section
4-3-4 of this chapter. In the event of a conflict between provisions of these
regulations or other Village ordinances, the said provisions of these
regulations or other Village ordinances shall govern. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018,
eff. 1-1-2019)
   (C)   Grading Requirements:
      1.   The highest proposed ground elevation at a building corner shall be
no higher than thirty six inches (36") greater than the existing
(predevelopment) ground elevation at that location except where approved by the
Village Engineer. The fill depths are not to exceed thirty six inches (36") in
accordance with section R-603.2, site preparation, from the International
Residential Code as adopted by the Village of Barrington Hills. For building
teardowns, the highest proposed ground elevation at the new building corner
shall be set at the existing ground elevation of the teardown building unless
otherwise approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019)
      2.   The proposed ground elevation at a building corner may exceed the
limit of thirty six inches (36") above existing (predevelopment) ground
elevations under the following conditions:
         a.   The allowable increase in ground elevation may be further
increased by twenty four inches (24") where habitable space and/or sleeping
room/bedroom are proposed below finished elevation.
         b.   Where an increase in ground elevation of thirty six inches (36")
(or 60 inches when applying the criteria of subsection (C)2a of this section)
results in a finished elevation that is twelve inches (12") or more below the
finished floor elevations of two (2) or more adjoining properties, an
additional increase in proposed ground elevation of up to twelve inches (12")
may be approved by the Village Engineer.
         c.   Where an increase in ground elevation of thirty six inches (36")
(or the highest allowable increase in ground elevation when applying the
criteria of subsections (C)2a and (C)2b of this section) results in a finished
floor elevation that is below the elevation of the adjacent roadway to which
drainage is directed, an additional twelve inch (12") increase in proposed
ground elevation may be approved by the Village Engineer.
         d.   The requirements above do not relieve the applicant from meeting
the requirements of horizontal setback from the watercourses per subsection
5-3-9(E) of this Code or the vertical separation requirements of chapter 5 of
this title.
      3.   Where the proposed increase in ground elevations exceed the increase
allowable under subsections (C)1 and (C)2 of this section, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer that the proposed
release rate is equal to or less than the release rate that would result from
meeting the requirements of the aforementioned subsections; otherwise the
provisions of section
4-3-6 of this chapter shall apply.
   (D)   Special Precautions:
      1.   If, at any stage of the work, the Village Building Officer
determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further
work, as authorized by an existing permit, is likely to imperil any property,
public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the Village Building Officer may
require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable
precautions be taken as he considers advisable to avoid the likelihood of such
peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to,
specifying a flatter exposed slope, construction of additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of plant
materials for erosion control and reports of an engineer whose recommendations
may be made requirements for further work.
      2.   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the work is
not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install
temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect
adjoining property or the public safety. On large operations or where unusual
site conditions prevail, the Village Building Officer may specify the time to
start grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be
conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures
or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
   (E)   Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has
not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days or is not completed within
one year from date of issue; except that the Building Officer may, if the
permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have
prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits,
grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the
expiration date of the permit. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-6: EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   Authorization: The Village President and Board of Trustees, after
recommendation by the Barrington Hills Plan Commission, may authorize
exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth herein.
   (B)   Application For Exception: Application for any exception shall be made
by a verified petition of applicant stating fully the grounds of the
application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be
filed with the Building Officer together with the site development permit
application. Notice of filing of an exception application shall be given to
contiguous owners as required under subsection
4-3-4(D) of this chapter. In order for the land referred to in the petition to
come within the provisions of this section, it shall be necessary that the
Barrington Hills Plan Commission find all of the following facts with respect
thereto:
      1.   That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it
is impossible or impractical for the subdivider to comply with all of the
regulations of this chapter.
      2.   That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the petitioner.
      3.   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
   (C)   Referral Of Proposed Exception: Each proposed exception shall be
referred to the Village Engineer, Village Planner, Village Attorney and any
others involved, and such officers or departments shall transmit to the
Barrington Hills Plan Commission their recommendations, which recommendations
shall be reviewed prior to the granting of any exception.
   (D)   Barrington Hills Plan Commission: After a public meeting thereon, the
Barrington Hills Plan Commission, by resolution, may recommend approval of the
site development permit application with the exceptions and conditions it deems
necessary or it may recommend disapproval of such site development permit
application and exception application or it may take such other action as is
appropriate. Recommendations of the Barrington Hills Plan Commission shall be
submitted in writing to the Village President and Board of Trustees for final
action. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority: In the event any person holding a site development permit
pursuant to these regulations violates the terms of the permit or conducts or
carries on said site development in such a manner as to adversely affect the
health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of
the property of the said permittee or conducts or carries on said site
development so that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Building Officer
shall recommend revocation or suspension of the site development permit and,
upon such recommendation, all work provided for in such permit shall stop until
such recommendation shall have been acted upon.
   (B)   Procedure For Revoking Or Suspending A Site Development Permit: No
site development permit shall be permanently revoked or suspended until a
hearing is held by the Barrington Hills Plan Commission. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served upon the permittee, either personally or by registered
mail and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for the proposed revocation or
suspension in clear and concise language.
      2.   The time when, and the place where, such hearing is to be held. Such
notice shall be served by registered mail or personal service on the permittee
at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. At any such
hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and he may
call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. Upon conclusion of such
hearing, the Barrington Hills Plan Commission shall transmit its findings and
recommendations to the Village President and Board of Trustees for final
action.
      3.   The hearing provided for in subsection (B)2 of this section shall be
held by the Barrington Hills Plan Commission not less than fifteen (15) days
after receipt by the Plan Commission of the Village Building Officer's
recommendation for revocation or suspension and the giving of notice to the
permittee as herein provided. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-8: FEES:
The filing fee for a site development permit application is five hundred
dollars ($500.00). If a public hearing is required, the applicable will be
assessed an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) for purposes of public
hearing notice and meeting costs. In the event that the filing fee would
substantially exceed the cost of processing the application hereunder, the
Building Officer shall be authorized to certify in writing that the filing fee
under this section should be reduced; the filing fee hereunder, upon such
certification, shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018,
eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-9: NUISANCES:
These regulations shall not be construed as authorizing any person to maintain
a private or public nuisance upon their property and compliance with these
regulations shall not be a defense in any action to abate such nuisance. (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of
any provisions of the regulations of this chapter. Any person violating any of
these regulations shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during which any violation thereof is committed, continued or
permitted and, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be
punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any
person convicted of violating any of the regulations of this chapter shall be
required to restore the property to the condition existing prior to commission
of the violation or to bear the expense of such restoration. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-
2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-3-11: SEPARABILITY:
It is the intent of the Village that each separate provision of this chapter
shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein and it is further
the intention of the Village that if any provision of this chapter be declared
invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable. (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
CHAPTER 4
SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Unlawful Acts
4-4-2: Notice Of Violation
4-4-3: Appeal
4-4-4: Violations And Penalties
4-4-1: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be a violation of this section for:
   (A)   Any owner of any property located within the Village to alter the
natural course of drainage and seepage of surface waters from his property so
as to increase the flow of surface waters onto adjoining properties at a rate
beyond an increase which is incidental to the reasonable development of his
property.
   (B)   Any person to injure or obstruct a public highway right- of-way by
plowing or excavating any ditch or other opening thereon; or by turning a
current of water so as to saturate, wash or damage the same; or by plowing in
or across or on the slopes of the side gutters or ditches; or by placing any
material in such ditches; or leaving the cuttings of any landscape waste
thereon or in any way interfering with the free flow of water therein. The
placing of culverts or the change of drainage flow within the public highway
right-of-way shall be unlawful without first obtaining a permit from the
Village Engineer in accordance with the provisions of title 10 of this Code.
   (C)   Any owner of property to allow the erosion(s) or transfer of sediment
or material from the owner's property onto Village maintained roadway(s). (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-4-2: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Whenever the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine, in the
course of his duties, the existence of a violation of section
4-4-1 of this chapter, the Building Officer shall provide notice of the
violation in accordance with the provisions of subsection
4-1-7(B) of this title, or, where appropriate, shall issue a stop work order in
accordance with the provisions of subsection
4-1-7(C) of this title. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-4-3: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by any action taken or determination made pursuant to this
chapter, other than the issuance of a stop work order pursuant to subsection
4-1-7(C) of this title, may appeal to the Barrington Hills Plan Commission in
accordance with the provisions of subsection
4-3-4(D) of this title, upon payment of a filing fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00). Within thirty (30) days following the Plan Commission hearing, the
Plan Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations in writing to
the Village President and the Board of Trustees for final disposition. (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-4-4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
No person shall unreasonably alter the natural course of drainage and seepage
of surface waters or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of
any provisions of this chapter. Any person found to be in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day during which any violation thereof is committed, continued
or permitted and, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be
punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any
person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
required to restore the property to the condition existing prior to commission
of the violation and to bear the expense of such restoration. (Ord. 18-09, 8-
27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
CHAPTER 5
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: How To Use This Chapter
4-5-4: Duties Of The Village Engineer
4-5-5: Base Flood Elevation
4-5-6: Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas
4-5-7: Occupation And Use Of Designated Floodways
4-5-8: Occupation And Use Of SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not Identified
4-5-9: Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
4-5-10: Other Development Requirements
4-5-11: Variances
4-5-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-5-13: Penalty
4-5-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Village's home rule authority and the
police powers granted to it by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-
12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is to
maintain this Village's eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to
minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss
of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is adopted in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   (A)   To meet the requirements of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act 1 ;
   (B)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   (C)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (D)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   (E)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
   (F)   To make Federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the Village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program;
   (G)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59 - 79, as amended;
   (H)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources; and
   (I)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 615 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A nonhabitable structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: The Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act 1 .
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in subsection
4-5-7(B) of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in section
4-5-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA
will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood
insurance rate map, once the as built plans are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on
the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year
frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to
the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%)
increase in velocities.
   (A)   The floodways are designated for on the Countywide flood insurance
rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in effect from
time to time as listed in appendix A on file in the Village, as maintained by
the Village Clerk. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more
restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
   (B)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook, Kane, Lake, and
McHenry Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Village that may be annexed into the Village are designated for the Fox River,
Flint Creek, and Spring Creek on the Countywide flood insurance rate map
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in effect from time to
time as listed in appendix A on file in the Village, as maintained by the
Village Clerk.
   (C)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated
floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located
on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation
is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   (A)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or
any addition to a building.
   (B)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, it
must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   (C)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects.
   (D)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
   (E)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
   (F)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts;
channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials;
deposit of solid or liquid waste.
   (G)   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
   (H)   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase
in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter
including State, Federal or local units of government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59 -
79, as amended.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year
frequency floods plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
   (A)   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village
that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.
The SFHAs of the Village are generally identified as such on the panel number
(s) indicated in appendix A on file in the Village for the Countywide flood
insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in
effect from time to time as listed in appendix A on file in the Village, as
maintained by the Village Clerk.
   (B)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook, Kane, Lake, and
McHenry Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Village or that may be annexed into the Village are generally identified as
such on the panel number(s) indicated in appendix A on file in the Village for
the Countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, in effect from time to time as listed in appendix A on file
in the Village, as maintained by the Village Clerk.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY: See definition of designated floodway.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the Historic District or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered Historic District;
   (C)   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; or
   (D)   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific
structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective
FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement)
of a building. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety
and welfare. Examples of mitigation include: excavation of compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's
susceptibility to flooding.
NAVD 88: North American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and
proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude
the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a
flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   (D)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Offered for preapproved projects which are considered minor
projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR part 3708 rules for Northeastern
Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and conditions
for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois,
under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act 2 .
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act 3 .
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damaged
occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term
does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of
sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See definition of floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Offered for preapproved projects that are considered minor
projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR part 3700 rules. A complete
listing of the Statewide permits and permit requirements can be obtained from
the IDNR/OWR website.
STRUCTURE: See definition of building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive
loss buildings. See definition of repetitive loss.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the building which
the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is
started.
   (A)   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
   (B)   The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or
local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 615 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
2 1. 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
3 2. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
4-5-3: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
   (A)   The Village Engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the
duties listed in section
4-5-4 of this chapter.
   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the Village Engineer should first use the
criteria listed in section
4-5-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether the
development site is located within a floodplain.
   (C)   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, the Village Engineer must determine whether the development site is
within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain
for which no floodway has been identified.
      1.   If the site is within a flood fringe, the Village Engineer shall
require that the minimum requirements of section
4-5-6 of this chapter be met.
      2.   If the site is within a floodway, the Village Engineer shall require
that the minimum requirements of section
4-5-7 of this chapter be met.
      3.   If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the Village Engineer shall
require that the minimum requirements of section
4-5-8 of this chapter be met.
   (D)   In addition, the general requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of section
4-5-6,
4-5-7, or
4-5-8 of this chapter.
   (E)   The Village Engineer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall
meet the requirements of section
4-5-10 of this chapter.
   (F)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Village Engineer
shall review the requirements of section
4-5-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the Village
Engineer shall complete all notification requirements.
   (G)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the Village Engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in
section
4-5-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-4: DUTIES OF THE VILLAGE ENGINEER:
   (A)   Determining The Floodplain Designation:
      1.   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
      2.   If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been
conducted and which drains more than one square mile.
      3.   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA
(with a drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the development
would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which
would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain
and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections of this chapter.
   (B)   Professional Engineer Review:
      1.   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer
under the employ or contract of the Village for review to ensure that the
development meets section
4-5-7 or
4-5-8 of this chapter.
      2.   In the case of an appropriate use, the professional engineer shall
state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section
4-5-7 of this chapter.
   (C)   Dam Safety Requirements:
      1.   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage
potential in the event of failure.
      2.   The construction or major modification of all Class I (high hazard)
and Class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
      3.   Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and
the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off channel detention basins that
have an embankment are nonjurisdictional Class III dams. It is not required
that IDNR/OWR "sign off" on all nonjurisdictional Class III dams.
      4.   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a
hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is
required.
      5.   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
      6.   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures.
   (D)   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure any and all required Federal, State
and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
   (E)   Plan Review And Permit Issuance:
      1.   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the Village meet the requirements of this chapter; and
      2.   Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
   (F)   Inspection Review:
      1.   Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      2.   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and
document the results of the inspection.
   (G)   Damage Determinations: Make damage determinations of all damaged
buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with subsection
4-5-9(C) of this chapter.
   (H)   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain permit files
including:
      1.   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject
to section
4-5-9 of this chapter; and/or
      2.   The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to
section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
   (I)   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies
of Federal or State permit documents, variance documentation, conditional
letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as
built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
   (J)   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections
4-5-7 and
4-5-8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to
the Village. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the
Village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      1.   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      2.   Dams and all other State, Federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the Village and County, except for those
projects meeting the requirements of subsection
4-5-7(B)1 of this chapter;
      3.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection
4-5-7(B)3e of this chapter;
      4.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection
4-5-7(B)3d of this chapter;
      5.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in subsection
4-5-7(B)3 of this chapter;
      6.   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
      7.   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
   (K)   Cooperation With Other Agencies:
      1.   Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter;
      2.   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain
may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain
map;
      3.   Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program;
and
      4.   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   (L)   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord. 18-
09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for
the Village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from Federal, State or other
sources. When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall submit
a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any
development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
the Fox River, Flint Creek, and Spring Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the flood insurance rate map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, in effect from time to time as listed in appendix
A on file in the Village, as maintained by the Village Clerk, and such
amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook, Kane, Lake, and McHenry Counties that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed
into the Village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
flood insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
in effect from time to time as listed in appendix A on file in the Village, as
maintained by the Village Clerk, and such amendments or revisions to such study
and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the Countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook, Kane, Lake, and
McHenry Counties.
   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the Countywide flood insurance
rate map of Cook, Lake, Kane, and McHenry Counties shall be according to the
best existing data available from Federal, State or other sources. Should no
other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to
determine base flood elevations.
      1.   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be
determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model
such as HIP.
      2.   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from
a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological
Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
      3.   For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the
historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed
engineering study.
      4.   For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1
square mile) which has been identified by the Village Engineer pursuant to
subsection
4-5-4(A)3 of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the
applicant utilizing a method as approved in this subsection (D). (Ord. 18-09,
8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe
shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
   (A)   Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the Village.
      2.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Village.
         a.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.
         b.   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
      3.   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Village shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation.
         a.   Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher
than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which
has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
         b.   The Village shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
      4.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall
be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
      5.   The applicant shall submit copies of all other Federal, State, and
local permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of
activity to the Village. The Village shall not issue a permit unless all other
Federal, State, and local permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
      1.   Fill: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient
data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of
removing the site from the floodplain.
      2.   Compensatory Storage:
         a.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         b.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
         c.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         d.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
         e.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.
   (C)   Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE):
A person who has obtained an LOMR based on fill that removes a site in the
flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site
above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the Village to construct the lowest
floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The Village
Engineer shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant has complied with
all the criteria set forth in the following subsections:
      1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided per subsection (B) of this
section.
      2.   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, accessways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
      3.   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the
FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet (10') beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the Village may waive the ten foot (10') minimum setback if an Illinois
registered professional engineer certifies that an alternative method to
protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met. The
certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design
analysis, which shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for review. The
Village may require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that
the proposed shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe.
In no case shall the setback distance be less than four feet (4').
      4.   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above the BFE.
However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained,
the Village may waive the twenty foot (20') minimum setback distance if an
Illinois registered professional engineer certifies that an alternative method
to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures have been
met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter
setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding, shall
be submitted to the Village for review. In no case shall the setback distance
be less than four feet (4').
      5.   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet (5') thick under
the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of an LOMR-
F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification
and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according
to ASTM standard D-2487, classification of soils for engineering purposes.
      6.   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the
soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the
same direction.
      7.   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by an Illinois registered professional engineer, as warranted by the
site conditions.
      8.   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five (5) below the BFE.
      9.   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and
minimum of one-fourth (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4)
times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away
from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the
floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      10.   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      11.   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
      12.   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, the Village may allow the
construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates
that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set
forth in FEMA technical bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding.
In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is reasonably safe from
flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the
proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall be
completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA technical bulletin 10-
01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an Illinois registered
professional engineer.
      13.   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously existing natural
grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation,
if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to
drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-
2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification
or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway
for the Fox River, Flint Creek, and Spring Creek shall be as delineated on the
Countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook, Lake, Kane, and McHenry Counties.
Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in
this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to
accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the
requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
   (A)   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by State law shall commence any development in a floodway without
first obtaining a development permit from the Village and IDNR/OWR.
      1.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Village. The application shall include the following
information:
         a.   Name and address of applicant;
         b.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         c.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
         d.   Description of proposed activity;
         e.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
         f.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         g.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
         h.   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
         i.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
         j.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
         k.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign
the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust
by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
         l.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
            (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow,
and a graphic or numerical scale;
            (3)   Cross section views of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            (4)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance;
            (5)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
         m.   Any and all other Federal, State, and local permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development.
         n.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of this section.
         o.   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
         p.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
         q.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
            (1)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed
work;
            (2)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative
locations or methods (see 802.3.9) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed
work;
            (3)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in subsection (B)3i of this section would have
on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
            (4)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected.
      2.   The Village Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other Federal, State, and local permits and approvals
that may be required for this type of activity.
         a.   The Village shall not issue the development permit unless all
required Federal and State permits have been obtained.
         b.   The Village Engineer shall review and approve applications
reviewed under this section.
   (B)   Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses:
      1.   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and
which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or
impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or
channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Illinois
Administrative Code part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses
are as follows:
         a.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
         b.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities,
and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
         c.   Storm and sanitary sewer relief curtails;
         d.   Underground and overhead utilities;
         e.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage;
         f.   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory
structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
         g.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
         h.   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
            (1)   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event
will not exceed 1.0 foot; or
            (2)   The applicant of a short term recreational use facility
parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events
and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all
overbank flooding events;
         i.   Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
         j.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure;
         k.   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building,
provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage
occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection
elevation;
         l.   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before
the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will
be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
      2.   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use.
      3.   Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate
use will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the
following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with
supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer
and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter:
         a.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood
Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
            (1)   Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where
"n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross
section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te
Chow, "Open Channel Hydraulics" (McGraw-Hill, New York 1959).)
            (2)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing
and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a Federal,
State, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover.
            (3)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer
can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
               A.    When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
               B.    When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length.
               C.    When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet
(10') of stream length shall be used.
               D.    Transition sections shall be provided between cross
sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
               E.    All cross sections used in the calculations shall be
located perpendicular to flood flows.
         b.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream
Flooding:
            (1)   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
            (2)   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to
at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
            (3)   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head
loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
            (4)   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
            (5)   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the
location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall
demonstrate through a determination of flood discharges and water surface
elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
            (6)   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a
result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to
reduce flooding at existing structure.
         c.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream
Erosion Or Flood Heights:
            (1)   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
            (2)   In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures
built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood
flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
         d.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches:
            (1)   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or
within recorded flood easements.
            (2)   If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood
stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a dam or waiver.
               A.    The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section
4-5-5 of this chapter. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly
accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.
               B.    Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per
subsection (B)3b of this section.
               C.    Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection (B)3c
of this section.
               D.    If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is
used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be
received.
               E.    The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the
bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this
subsection (B).
               F.    All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall
be designed per subsection (B)3h of this section.
         e.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And
Approach Roads:
            (1)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
            (2)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
            (3)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing
is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Illinois Administrative Code part 3708 (floodway
construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and
concurrence before a permit is issued.
         f.   On Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water:
            (1)   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot
when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel
banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as
within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within
recorded flood easements.
            (2)   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must
be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
            (3)   All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section
300.16 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois Administrative
Code part 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the proposed activity
involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
               A.    The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest
by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater
detention;
               B.    The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;
               C.    The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation
basin;
               D.    A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
               E.    The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
this section.
         g.   Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures:
            (1)   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of
the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building.
            (2)   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be
required for floodproofing activities.
         h.   Excavation In The Floodway:
            (1)   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and
culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing
bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other
appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.
            (2)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used
unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the
same efficiency:
               A.    When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
and
               B.    When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length; and
               C.    When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet
(10') of stream length shall be used; and
               D.    Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
         i.   Activity Involving A Channel Modification: If the proposed
activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
            (1)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from
the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment
of a stream side buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable
if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and
fish and wildlife habitat;
            (2)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
            (3)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
               A.    The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
               B.    Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at
both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they
will prevent erosion.
               C.    One sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
               D.    Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to
that which is essential for construction of the channel.
               E.    Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete,
gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
               F.    All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall
be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
               G.    If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and
flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate.
               H.    A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end
of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
               I.    New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and
all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
               J.    There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
               K.    Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
            (4)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
         j.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
         k.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in
the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
            (1)   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days
prior to the initiation of improvements.
            (2)   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be
applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization
shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any
portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may
not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60)
days.
            (3)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
            (4)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25')
in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along
existing channels (see 802.3.16). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be
minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to
minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be
restabilized immediately.
            (5)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the
"Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
         l.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
         m.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
            (1)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in section
4-5-5 of this chapter, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the
study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be
contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data
to use.
            (2)   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet:
               A.    The requirements of this section for the 100-year
frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
               B.    Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
               C.    If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments,
or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled
to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
         n.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision:
            (1)   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision
and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued.
            (2)   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging,
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
            (3)   In the case of nongovernment projects, the Municipality in
incorporated areas and the County in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given.
            (4)   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
            (5)   After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
         o.   Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
         p.   Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of Channel: For all
activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25')
of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
            (1)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within
at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
            (2)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during
the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
         q.   After Conditional Approval And Issuance Of Permit: After receipt
of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance of a
permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to
change the floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or
other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area
until the designated floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision
is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and
concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as built" plans.
   (C)   Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State
Review: For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated State permitting authority in the floodway.
      1.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge
pursuant to subsection (B)3d of this section.
      2.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection (B)3e of this section.
      3.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage
pursuant to subsection (B)3 of this section.
      4.   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams and all other
Federal, State, or local units of government projects, including projects of
the Municipality or County.
      5.   An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
      6.   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.
      7.   Projects in public bodies of water.
   (D)   Other Permit:
      1.   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development
permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
5 et seq.
      2.   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project
meets the requirements of regional permit 3.
      3.   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
this responsibility to the Village.
   (E)   Permits For Dams:
      1.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam as defined in section 300.16 per 17 Illinois Administrative Code part 3702
(rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the
start of construction of a dam.
      2.   If the Village finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit,
the Village shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office.
      3.   If the Village finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the Village shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/
OWR Bartlett Office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
   (F)   Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's
Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
      1.   Regional permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground and
overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios,
athletic fields, playground equipment and streambank protection activities.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA or floodplains (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A Zones), where no
floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile,
no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the
proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of
the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
   (A)   Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by
State law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without
first obtaining a development permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Village.
         a.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of
section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
         b.   The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
            (1)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose,
and intended use;
            (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
            (3)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
            (4)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:
               A.    A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of
the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;
               B.    A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical
or numerical scale;
               C.    Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the
flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
               D.    A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
               E.    Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection
(B) of this section.
               F.    Any and all other Federal, State, and local permits or
approvals that may be required for this type of development.
      3.   Based on the best available existing data according to Federal,
State or other sources, the Village Engineer shall compare the elevation of the
site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         a.   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection
4-5-5(D) of this chapter.
         b.   Any development located on land that can be shown to have been
higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
         c.   The Village Engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.
         d.   The Village Engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other Federal, State, and local permits, approvals or
waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The Village Engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required
Federal, State, and local permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Preventing Increased Damages:
      1.   Floodway Not Determined: No development in the SFHA where a floodway
has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and
welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the
floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter.
      2.   Riverine SFHAs: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not
been determined, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   Engineering Requirements: The developer shall have a registered
professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans,
calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of
subsection
4-5-7(B)3a(1) of this chapter for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of subsection
4-5-5(D) of this chapter.
            (1)   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering
study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to
IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
            (2)   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of
section
4-5-8 of this chapter for the designated floodway.
         b.   IDNR/OWR Permit: A development permit shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made
that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required.
         c.   Permits For Dams:
            (1)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal
of a dam shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of
a dam.
            (2)   If the Village finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR
permit, the Village shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office.
            (3)   If the Village finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam,
the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
(IEMA).
      3.   Activities Permitted: The following activities may be permitted
without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of base
flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the
other requirements of this chapter.
         a.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 2;
         b.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 3;
         c.   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
permit 4;
         d.   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit
5;
         e.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade)
are covered by this permit;
         f.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 7;
         g.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 8;
         h.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 9;
         i.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 10;
         j.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide permit 11;
         k.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit 12;
         l.   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 13;
         m.   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit 14; and
         n.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
      4.   Flood Carrying Capacity: The flood carrying capacity of any altered
or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
      5.   Compensatory Storage:
         a.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         b.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
         c.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         d.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 18-09, 8-
27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections
4-5-6,
4-5-7 and
4-5-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways,
and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following
requirements shall be met.
   (A)   Public Health Standards:
      1.   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or
floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of subsection
(C) of this section.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
      5.   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so
as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
   (B)   Carrying Capacity And Notification:
      1.   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
      2.   In addition, the Village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse.
   (C)   Protecting Buildings:
      1.   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an
SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:
         a.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet;
         b.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood
protection standards of this section;
         c.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section;
         d.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do
not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage);
         e.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year; and
         f.   Repetitive loss to an existing building.
      2.   A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
         a.   Lowest Floor: The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at
or above the flood protection elevation; and
         b.   Fill Requirements:
            (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond
the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection
elevation;
            (2)   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures;
            (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure;
            (4)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporate debris or refuse materials; and
            (5)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      3.   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
         a.   The building shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles,
walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and not
subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on each wall, shall be no
more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and consists of a minimum of two
(2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation;
         b.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris;
         c.   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; and
            (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
         d.   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used
for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; and
         e.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by registered professional engineer or
architect.
         f.   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois Administrative Code part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes
shall meet the following elevation requirements:
            (1)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved: a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation.
            (2)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty six inches (36") in
height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of
equivalent strength, whichever is less.
         g.   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to
meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection (C)3f of this
section unless:
            (1)   They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; and
            (2)   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only
for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
      4.   Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed
(in lieu of elevation) provided that:
         a.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood
protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood.
         b.   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.
         c.   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose
of this subsection).
      5.   A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade;
         c.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade;
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point;
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event;
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
      6.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
      7.   Toolsheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory structures on
an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor
below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
         a.   The building is not used for human habitation;
         b.   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in
a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the appropriate use
criteria of section
4-5-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections
4-5-6 and
4-5-7 of this chapter must be met;
         c.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation;
         d.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation;
         e.   The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size;
         f.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses
and cannot be modified later into another use;
         g.   The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of
subsection (C)3a of this section;
         h.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
         i.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
      8.   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also
meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section
4-5-7 of this chapter. Nonconforming structures located in a designated
floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with subsection
4-5-7(B) of this chapter. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire,
wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which
case it shall conform to this chapter. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The Village Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the
extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management,
use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the
proposed developments are consistent with sections
4-5-6,
4-5-7,
4-5-8 and
4-5-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats for new
subdivisions shall include a signed statement by a registered professional
engineer that the plat accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters
in accordance with the Plat Act 1 .
   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions and additions to subdivisions shall
include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway
delineations. Where this information is not available from an existing adopted
study, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection
4-5-5(D) of this chapter and the floodway delineation.
   (C)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   (D)   The Village Board of Trustees shall not approve any plat of
subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat
is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 18-09, 8-
27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
4-5-11: VARIANCES:
   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
designated floodway.
      1.   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for a variance.
      2.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant's request for
a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The
Village may attach such conditions to granting of a variance, as it deems
necessary to further the flood protection intent of this chapter.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The provisions of subsections
4-5-6(B) and
4-5-8(B) of this chapter shall still be met;
      7.   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      8.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;
      9.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses; and
      10.   All other required State and Federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   (C)   The Village shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from
the requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (D)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic
structure as may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of subsection (B) of this section, subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the historic structure; and
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the historic
structure being removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-
2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes.
   (C)   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside
of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
   (D)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the Village or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully hereunder. (Ord.
18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
4-5-13: PENALTY:
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct any
violation of any provision of this chapter:
      1.   The Village may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The Village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (B)   The Village shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      1.   The Village Engineer is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if
necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop
work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      2.   Any person aggrieved by any action taken or determination made
pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the Barrington Hills Plan Commission in
accordance with the provisions of subsection
4-3-4(D) of this title upon payment of a filing fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00). Within thirty (30) days following the Plan Commission hearing, the
Plan Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations in writing to
the Village President and the Board of Trustees for final disposition.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 18-09, 8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-
2019)
4-5-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the Village
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 18-09,
8-27-2018, eff. 1-1-2019)
CHAPTER 6
TREE PRESERVATION
SECTION:
4-6-1: Intent And Purpose
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Administration
4-6-4: General Requirements
4-6-5: Construction Standards
4-6-6: Replacement
4-6-7: Appeals
4-6-8: Tables
4-6-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The intent of this chapter is to ensure the presence, conservation and
perpetuation of heritage trees within the Village, and to educate residents
about their existence and the importance of protecting them. Heritage trees are
a unique natural resource found throughout the Village of Barrington Hills that
have a positive impact on animal habitat, air and soil quality, as well as
watershed and invasive species management. By preventing situations that may
substantially alter the natural environment, the Village aims to protect the
health, safety and welfare of residents, while also ensuring that they may
continue to enjoy all the benefits of living in the unique environment of
Barrington Hills. This may be accomplished by regulating how heritage trees may
be removed and replaced, as a result of building construction and/or landscape
activity. (Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of the regulations contained in this chapter, the definitions
contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the
context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future, and words used in the singular shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and not
discretionary; the word "may" is permissive; the masculine gender includes the
feminine and neuter. Whenever a word or term defined herein appears in the text
of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof and any word appearing in parenthesis directly thereafter shall be
construed in the same manner.
BUILDING OFFICER: The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer as defined in
section
1-6-9 of this Code.
CERTIFIED ARBORIST: A person, who based on training and experience, diagnoses
the condition of shade or ornamental trees, evergreens and shrubs and
recommends or supervises the treatment of any such trees, or in any manner
treats any such trees, by feeding or fertilizing, or by pruning, trimming,
bracing, treating cavities or other methods, has passed the ISA certified
arborist exam and maintains his or her certification in good standing with the
International Society of Arboriculture (ISA).
CERTIFIED FORESTER: A person who practices the art and science of forest
stewardship and natural resource management, and who has met the requirements
to be a certified forester and maintains his or her certification in good
standing with the Society of American Foresters.
CONDITION RATING: The condition of a heritage tree based on a 6-point scale set
forth in subsection
4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter with 1 being the best and 6 being the worst,
for purposes of determining the health of a heritage tree and whether the tree
is subject to regulations contained in this chapter.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured in
inches at a point of four and one-half feet (41/2') above grade.
GOOD CONDITION: A tree having a condition rating of 1, 2, or 3 as set forth in
subsection
4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter. Only trees of those ratings in a woodland
will be considered heritage trees.
GROWING SEASON: The optimum planting time for the care and nurture of woody
plant stock during any one calendar year is when there is less than about five
percent (5%) chance for a frost until there is about ninety five percent (95%)
chance for frost.
HERITAGE TREES: Trees of a size, genus and species indigenous to this region,
as set forth in subsection
4-6-8(A), table A of this chapter, are determined to be of significant
historical and ecological value to the Village of Barrington Hills to be
protected trees. Such trees shall be above the minimum good conditions standard
as listed of 1, 2 or 3 as set forth in subsection
4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter.
MINIMUM ROOT ZONE: The area beneath a tree having as its center point the
center of the trunk of the tree and a radius equal to one foot (1') for every
inch of dbh.
SITE: A lot, or contiguous lots, under the control of a common owner, for which
a tree removal permit was sought and obtained.
SITE PLAN: A general illustration of the proposed work, its location, the use
of the building or structure, and all portions of the site, including but not
limited to details of grading, and structural, mechanical, sanitary and
electrical work.
SURROUNDING AREA: Shall not include any area which is not on the same site as
that for which the tree removal permit was sought and obtained.
TREE: Any self-supporting, woody plant together with its root system, growing
upon the earth usually with one trunk, or a multi-stemmed trunk system,
supporting definitely formed crown.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN (TPP): A plan directly overlaid on the site plan
indicating the location, species, condition rating and dbh of all heritage
trees, and includes a maintenance plan for three (3) growing seasons for all
heritage trees, consistent with the sound forestry practices, as found in
subsections
4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT (TRP): The permit required by this chapter in order to
remove any heritage tree within a protected woodland.
VILLAGE: The Village of Barrington Hills, in the Counties of Cook, Kane, Lake
and McHenry, in the State of Illinois.
WOODLAND: Eight (8) or more heritage trees on a site within circular area
having a radius not to exceed 117.8 feet and shall include all such trees
within the woodland regardless of the number of such trees. A site may
encompass one or more woodlands. (Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019)
4-6-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   Tree Removal Permit Required: A tree removal permit ("TRP") shall be
required for the destruction or removal of any heritage tree in any woodland.
No person shall, directly or indirectly remove, damage or destroy a woodland
without having secured a TRP.
   (B)   Exemption:
      1.   This chapter shall not apply to the removal of woodlands pursuant to
a forestry management plan or nursery stock plan that is approved and
administered by a governmental agency with jurisdiction over such matters.
      2.   This chapter shall not apply to the removal of woodlands on property
owned by a common owner, either singularly, collectively or institutionally,
which exceeds one hundred (100) acres of contiguous land in the Village so long
as the property is subject to a tree preservation plan acceptable to the
Village. Such a plan, which shall have been prepared by or endorsed by a
certified arborist or certified forester, may be accepted by the Village's Plan
Commission and shall, at a minimum, include the forestry management practices
found in subsections
4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter to preserve and protect
heritage trees.
   (C)   Application And Fee: A TRP application on the prescribed form shall be
submitted to the Village Building Officer with the permit fee established by
the Village.
   (D)   Application Procedure:
      1.   Construction Permit: The applicant shall submit a tree preservation
plan ("TPP") to the Village Building Officer with his application for a TRP in
conjunction with construction when a building permit is required by the
provisions of this title.
         a.   The TPP shall consist of two (2) legible reproducible site plans,
drawn to scale, of a tree survey of all heritage trees in a woodland overlaid
directly upon the site plan including the location, species, dbh, and condition
as rated in accordance with the standards in subsection
4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter.
The survey shall distinguish among the heritage trees to be preserved,
transplanted, or destroyed. Groups of trees which are less than three feet (3')
apart may be designed by clumps, provided that all heritage trees and all other
trees with a dbh of twelve inches (12") or greater shall be individually
depicted on the TPP.
         b.   The Building Officer in consultation with the Village Arborist
may permit the TPP to exclude areas of the site from the tree survey if he
determines that the proposed construction or other activity will not impact
those areas.
         c.   The TPP shall include a maintenance plan for all heritage trees,
consistent with the forestry practices found in subsections
4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter, to ensure the protection of
the trees for a period of at least three (3) growing seasons from the issuance
of an occupancy permit, if one is required.
      2.   Non-Construction Permit: When no building permit is required, the
applicant shall submit the following with his application for a tree removal
permit ("TRP"):
         a.   Site plan that depicts the area of the tree removal, the heritage
trees to be removed, and all other heritage trees whose minimum root zone is
within the tree removal area. All heritage trees shall be identified by
location, species, dbh, and condition as rated in accordance with the standards
in subsection
4-6-8(B), table B of this chapter.
         b.   Reasons for removing the heritage trees, including reports or
studies, if any, indicating that the trees should be removed.
      3.   Application Review: Upon receipt of a completed application
including the TPP and the required fee, the Building Officer shall review the
application, which, if deemed necessary, may include a site inspection by the
Village Arborist.
   (E)   Escrow:
      1.   If tree replacement is required by this chapter, then as a condition
of the TRP, the applicant shall place into escrow with the Village an amount of
money in cash equal to the tree replacement value, as determined by the Village
Arborist. In the event the tree replacement value is greater than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) a bond in a form acceptable to the Village, may
be utilized in lieu of a cash escrow. The money shall be returned, or the bond
released, once the new tree(s) are planted. Failure to plant the tree(s) in
compliance with the TRP within one growing season shall result in forfeiture of
the escrow or bond, which shall then be used by the Village to plant as
required by the TRP. Access to the applicant's property shall be granted for
such work to be completed in accordance with the TRP. The Village Arborist
shall maintain a current schedule of cost including planting expenses for
replacement of trees.
      2.   If it is determined that practices which violate any portion of the
village code have resulted in tree damage, then the village may require an
escrow payment or tender of a bond (if the amount at issue exceeds one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00)) in a form acceptable to the Village by made to
the village, equal to the replacement value of the damaged tree(s) as
determined by the Village Arborist. The cash escrow or bond shall be held by
the village for the purpose of assuring that all remedial actions required by
the village to restore the health of the tree(s) are taken, and/or for the
purpose of assuring the appropriate tree replacement should any damaged trees
die or show noticeable signs of decline as determined by the Village Arborist.
(Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019; amd. Ord. 23-03, 4-24-2023)
4-6-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The Building Officer shall grant a TRP only if:
      1.   All reasonable efforts have been undertaken in the architectural
layout and design of the proposed construction or other activity to preserve
woodlands; or
      2.   The removal of the heritage trees is consistent with sound forestry
practice found in subsection
4-6-8(C), table C of this chapter or will result in the enhancement of the
woodland; and
      3.   The transplanting of the woodlands is not feasible.
   (B)   As a condition to granting a TRP, the applicant shall be required to
replace the heritage trees that will be destroyed in accordance with section
4-6-6 of this chapter with those tree species identified in subsection
4-6-8(A), table A of this chapter. Replacement trees shall be acquired and
planted in conformance with subsections
4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter.
   (C)   A TRP shall expire and become null and void if work authorized by the
TRP is not commenced within one growing season from the date of issuance of the
TRP or if such work, when commenced, is suspended or abandoned at any time for
a period of ninety (90) days.
   (D)   Except as set forth herein no certificate of compliance as required by
section
5-10-3 of this Code shall be issued until any required replacement of heritage
trees, as required by the TRP, has been completed and after three (3) growing
seasons, the final tree inspection approval has been given by the Building
Officer in consultation with the Village Arborist.
      1.   Exception: Upon good cause shown as to why the required replacement
of heritage trees has not been completed, the Building Officer may issue a
temporary certificate of compliance for a period of six (6) months until the
TRP has been completed, and final tree inspection conducted. In addition to the
loss of the cash escrow required by subsection
4-6-3(E) of this chapter, the failure to complete the TRP within the six (6)
month extension period shall result in a violation of this chapter, and shall
be subject to the general penalty procedures provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   (E)   In the event the completion of the required TPP is prevented by
seasonal weather conditions, or availability of plant stock, the Building
Officer in consultation with the Village Arborist may extend the date of
completion by six (6) months into the next growing season.
   (F)   The TRP shall be in a written form and shall be prominently posted on
the site so as to provide notice to the owner, owner's agent, and to all
persons working or seeking to work on the site. The TRP shall state the
conditions under which forestry activities are occurring on the site and any
other information that may assist in the identification of the TRP. (Ord. 19-
14, 7-22-2019)
4-6-5: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   During construction, the TPP shall be followed to prevent the
destruction or damaging of heritage trees including unless otherwise authorized
by the TPP, a fence erected and maintained so that no excess soil, additional
fill, equipment, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed within the
minimum root zone of any heritage tree, unless the addition of excess soil or
fill is required in order to comply with the Lake County Watershed Development
Ordinance found in section
4-2-10 of this title.
   (B)   Until the issuance of the certificate of compliance, the area of the
site included within a TPP shall not have other plantings or landscape
additions that prevent as determined by the Building Officer the planting of
the required replacement heritage trees.
   (C)   Heritage trees in a TPP that are removed or receive major damage as
determined by the Building Officer in consultation with the Village Arborist
shall be required to be replaced by heritage trees of equal dbh in the
aggregate, in accordance with section
4-6-6 of this chapter, with those tree species identified in subsection
4-6-8(A), table A of this chapter. Replacement trees shall be acquired and
planted in conformance with subsections
4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter. (Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019)
4-6-6: REPLACEMENT:
   (A)   Replacement In Kind:
      1.   In the event that a person shall remove, or damage a heritage tree
in a woodland without having secured a TRP, in addition to the general penalty
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, he shall plant, within the growing season, a replacement
tree or trees on the site within ninety (90) days of written notice from the
Village. The failure to plant the replacement trees shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and each day that the replacement tree is not planted
shall constitute a separate offense.
      2.   The replacement tree or trees required by this section shall be a
species listed in subsection
4-6-8(A), table A of this chapter and the replacement trees shall equal the
aggregate dbh of the damaged or removed heritage tree. Replacement trees shall
be acquired and planted in conformance with subsections
4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter.
      3.   Replacement trees required by this section shall be maintained alive
and healthy on the site for three (3) growing seasons. Methods should be used
as found in subsection
4-6-8(D), table D of this chapter to provide for protection of the replacement
trees from deer. Any replacement tree(s) which die or become severely damaged
before the end of the third growing season of planting upon written notice from
the Building Officer shall be replaced by the applicant in conformance with
subsections
4-6-8(C), table C and (D), table D of this chapter at the next growing season.
   (B)   Contribution In-Lieu Of Replacement: In order to fulfill some of the
replacement heritage trees required by the TRP, after providing a TRP for the
planting of a woodland on the site, a fee in lieu of the equal value of the
remaining replacement tree(s) may be paid to a governmental or non-profit
natural resources management entity for a program involving the restoration,
establishment, enhancement, or preservation of heritage trees in the Village.
(Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019)
4-6-7: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by a plan review, action taken, or order issued, other
than a stop work order issued pursuant to subsection
4-1-7(C) of this title, may appeal to the Barrington Hills Plan Commission in
accordance with the notice and appeal provisions of subsection
4-3-4(D) of this title, upon payment of a filing fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 19-14, 7-22-2019)
4-6-8: TABLES:
   (A)   Table A:
   TABLE A
   HERITAGE TREES
Species                     Diameter At
Common Name Scientific Name Breast Height (dbh)
Species                                   Diameter At
Common Name           Scientific Name     Breast Height (dbh)

Basswood/linden       Tilia americana     10 inches or greater
Black walnut          Juglans nigra       8 inches or greater
Hackberry             Celtis occidentalis 8 inches or greater
Hickory (all species) Carya spp.          8 inches or greater
Ironwood              Ostrya virginiana   6 inches or greater
Oak (all species)     Quercus spp.        10 inches or greater
Sugar maple           Acer saccharum      10 inches or greater
Wild black cherry     Prunus serotina     8 inches or greater
 
   FOR SPECIES VARIETY FOR SAVING AND PLANTING
Additional upland species to consider:
Blue Beech
Butternut
Catalpa
Ohio Buckeye
Pawpaw
Additional low land species to consider:
American sycamore
Red Maple
River birch
   (B)   Table B:
      TABLE B
      CONDITION RATING
 
Rating Description  General Criteria
                    The tree is typical of the species, has less than 10
1      Excellent    percent deadwood in the crown that is attributable to
                    normal causes, has no other observed problems, and requires
                    no remedial action.
                    The tree is typical of the species and/or has less than 20
2      Good         percent deadwood in the crown, only 1 or 2 minor problems
                    that are easily corrected with normal care.
                    The tree is typical of the species and/or has less than 30
                    percent deadwood in the crown, 1 or 2 minor problems that
3      Fair         are not imminently lethal to the tree and no significant
                    decay or structural problems, but the tree must have
                    remedial care above normal care in order to minimize the
                    impact of future stress and to ensure continued health.
                    The tree is not typical of the species and/or has
                    significant problems such as 30 to 50 percent deadwood in
                    the crown, serious decay or structural defect, insects,
4      Fair to poor disease or other problems that can be imminently lethal to
                    the tree or create a hazardous tree if not corrected in a
                    short period of time or if the tree is subjected to
                    additional stress.
                    The tree is not typical of the species and/or has over 50
                    percent deadwood in the crown, major decay or structural
5      Poor         problems, is hazardous or is severely involved with
                    insects, disease, or other problems that even if
                    aggressively corrected would not result in the long term
                    survival of the tree.
6      Dead         Less than 10 percent of the tree shows signs of life.
 
   (C)   Table C: This table lists the standards and organizations that are
referenced in various sections of this chapter. The standards are listed herein
by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard title and the
effective date. The section or sections of this chapter that references the
standard shall be specified as found in table C of this subsection.
   TABLE C
   STANDARDS
ANSI ASC A300 (tree care)
ANSI Z133 (safety, arboricultural operations)
ANSI Z60.1 (nursery stock)
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) www.ansi.org
American Standard for Nursery Stock www.americanhort.org
IDNR, Division of Forest Research, "Urban and Community Forestry Program Tree
Planting Standards" 1999 Springfield, Illinois
Illinois Landscape Contractors Association www.ilca.net
International Society of Arboriculture www.isa-arbor.com
NRCS, "Illinois Urban Manual Tree and Shrub Planting" August, 1994
NRCS, "Tree Protection" April, 2000
Society of American Foresters www.safnet.org
University of Illinois Extension, Plant Clinic web.extension.illinois.edu/
plantclinic
   (D)   Table D: On file in the Village's Building Department. (Ord. 19-14, 7-
22-2019)
CHAPTER 7
NEW CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION
SECTION:
4-7-1: Authorization
4-7-2: Permit
4-7-1: AUTHORIZATION:
When specific circumstances exist which can allow for same, the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to allow the continued occupancy
of an existing residential structure during construction of a new residential
structure on the same property. (Ord. 19-02, 1-28-2019)
4-7-2: PERMIT:
   (A)   Application: In addition to any permit required by section
4-1-2 of this title, the owner shall be required to apply for a new
construction/demolition permit when the owner seeks to continue to reside in an
existing residential structure during construction of a new residential
structure on the same property. In making such application, the owner shall
provide such plans as are required to establish the ability to retain an
existing residential structure without impeding the construction of a new
residential structure on the lot or impacting the safety of those living and/or
working on the lot.
      1.   Existing Occupancy: Occupancy of an existing residential structure
during construction of a new residential structure shall only be allowed to
occur for a period of nineteen (19) months, unless application is made to the
Building Department for an extension of time, and good cause is shown therefor.
For purposes of such extension, application must be made in writing to the
Building Department no later than thirty (30) days prior to last date allowed
for occupancy. The Building and Enforcement Officer may issue such extension
only in compliance with this chapter for the period deemed necessary to
accommodate the circumstance claimed, and upon payment of a fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for purposes of the extension. No more than two (2) such
extensions can be granted.
      2.   Escrow:
         a.   As a condition of the grant of the new construction/demolition
permit, the applicant shall place into escrow with the Village an amount of
money in cash equal to the cost of demolition of the existing residential
structure, plus ten percent (10%). The Village shall place said sum into a non-
interest-bearing escrow account held by the Village for such purpose. Said
escrow sum shall be determined by the Building Department, based on the
applicant's tender to the Building Department of no less than two (2) estimates
for demolition of the structure. The escrowed funds shall be returned to the
applicant upon completion of the demolition to the requirements of the Village.
The escrow requirement may also be met by tender of a Letter of Credit of
Performance Bond for the same purposes and in the same amounts with the Village
in a form acceptable to the Village. Such escrow shall be available for use by
the Village to compel demolition of the existing structure, which shall include
but not limited to, payment of the Village's legal fees and court costs.
         b.   At the time of completion of the new residential structure, the
applicant may apply for a temporary occupancy permit to inhabit the new
structure, in accordance with the provisions of section
4-1-6 of this title. Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the temporary
occupancy permit, the initial residential structure shall be demolished in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter, and in compliance
with all other applicable Code requirements.
   (B)   Issuance Of Permit: No permit shall be issued unless the application
and supporting documentation are in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and all other provisions of this Code and unless the applicable fee in
section
4-1-6 of this title has been paid. Cost of said permit shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
   (C)   Form Of Application: Application for such permit shall be made to the
Building Department with the number of copies from time to time required, upon
the form prepared by the Village.
   (D)   Decision On Application: The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall render his decision on the application within sixty (60) days of the date
it was submitted, unless the time becomes extended due to negotiations with the
applicant for changes to the application to bring it into compliance with this
chapter. In granting approval of the application, the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer may add any condition to the permit deemed necessary to
protect the owner and the Village during construction of the new residential
structure, and which is believed proper to ensure compliance with all other
sections of this Code. In the event the Building and Enforcement Officer
determines to deny the application, the applicant may appeal said decision in
compliance with the provisions of section
4-1-8 of this title.
   (E)   Compliance With Code: In all respects except as varied herein, the
applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the Building Code, which
terms and conditions are otherwise incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 19-
02, 1-28-2019)
TITLE 5
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, INTENT AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
5-1-1: Title
5-1-2: Intent and Purpose
5-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as "The Village of Barrington
Hills Zoning Ordinance".
5-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This Title is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, convenience
and the general welfare of the people.
   (B)   To zone all properties in such a manner as to reflect their best use
and to conserve and enhance their value.
   (C)   To prevent congestion by limiting the development of land to a degree
consistent with the capacity of the Village to furnish adequate public
services.
   (D)   To prevent overcrowding of land with buildings and thereby insure
maximum living and working conditions and thus prevent blight and slums.
   (E)   To prevent residential, business and industrial areas alike from
harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to insure that land allocated to
a class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate uses.
   (F)   To fix reasonable zoning standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform.
   (G)   To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of,
existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereinafter. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
   (H)   To preserve and to improve the ecological balance in the area subject
to this Title; to maintain and create high standards for air quality and water
quality including ground water; to avoid disturbance of the terrain which may
cause flooding; to avoid contamination of the ground water sources; to preserve
the character of the community by preserving the area as a green belt area not
subject to high density uses; to preserve the natural vegetation; and to avoid
the ecological evils of urbanization. (Ord. 72-16, 12-18-72)
   (I)   To prevent street congestion through adequate requirements for off-
street parking and loading facilities.
   (J)   To foster a more rational pattern of relationships between
residential, business and industrial uses for the mutual benefit of all.
   (K)   To isolate or control the location of nuisance-producing uses.
   (L)   To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other
hazards, in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and the general
welfare.
   (M)   To define the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies, as provided hereinafter in this Title.
   (N)   To prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
Title, or of any amendment thereto. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
   (O)   To classify, to regulate and restrict the use of property on the basis
of family relationship. (Ord. 72-16, 12-18-72)
   (P)   To insure high standards of light, air and open space in areas where
people live and work. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this title, the words and definitions contained in this
chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense shall include the future,
and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the
plural the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" is permissive; the word "building" includes all other structures of
every kind regardless of similarity to buildings, and the phrase "used for"
shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for",
"maintained for" and "occupied for".
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: One which:
   (A)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
and
   (B)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or
principal use served; and
   (C)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of
the principal building or principal use served; and
   (D)   Is located on the same zoning lot or lots under the same ownership as
the principal building or principal use served, with the single exception of
such accessory off street parking facilities as are permitted to locate
elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served.
ACRE: One "acre" is forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square
feet and any multiple thereof shall mean to be in square feet.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Shall imply any building or structure
existing or erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with
the exception of dwelling units.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry including the breeding and raising of horses as an
occupation and the necessary accessory uses for handling or storing the
produce; provided, however that the operation of any such accessory uses shall
be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
ALLEY: A public right of way which normally affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property.
ALTERATION: Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a
building or structure.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY: The breeding and raising of livestock, such as horses, cows
and sheep, but specifically excluding dogs and cats.
AUTO LAUNDRY: A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
more than two (2) automobiles, using production line methods with a chain
conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of
a building.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest
of the base flood.
BERM: A mound or wall of earth, sand or similar material.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways, or boundary lines of the village.
BOATHOUSE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building without sanitary facilities
on or near the water for the exclusive purpose of storing a boat or boats to be
used on the water adjacent to the boathouse and primarily intended for the use
of the residents of the property on which the boathouse is located.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently
affixed to the land.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: Reserved.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A "principal building" is a nonaccessory building in which
a principal use of the lot, on which it is located, is conducted.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: A "residential building" is a building which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy by
one or more families or lodgers and which includes, but is not limited to, the
following types:
   (A)   Single-family detached dwellings.
   (B)   Two-family dwellings.
   (C)   Multiple-family dwellings.
BULK: The size and setbacks of buildings or structures and the location of same
with respect to one another, and includes the following:
   (A)   Size and height of buildings.
   (B)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets or to other buildings.
   (C)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio).
   (D)   All open spaces allocated to buildings.
   (E)   Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
CAPACITY IN PERSONS: The "capacity in persons" of an establishment or use is
the maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of the services (or
goods) of such establishment, at any one time, with reasonable comfort and
safety.
CARPORT: An open sided roofed automobile shelter, usually formed by extension
of the roof from the side of a building.
CLOSED CUP FLASH POINT: The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid,
under prescribed conditions, will give off a flammable vapor which will burn
momentarily.
CLUB, PRIVATE (NONPROFIT): A "private club" is a nonprofit association of
persons, who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or
leases a building or portion thereof; the use of such premises being restricted
to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such "private club"
are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body
chosen by the members at their annual meeting. It may be permissible to serve
food and meals on such premises, providing adequate dining room space and
kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members
and their guests may be allowed, provided it is secondary and incidental to the
promotion of some other common objective of the organization, and further
provided, that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the
applicable federal, state and village laws.
COLUMBARIUM: A vault with niches for cinerary urns.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which:
   (A)   Complies with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment
thereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or
structure is located; or
   (B)   Is designed or intended for a conforming use.
   (C)   Example:
       1.    A single-family detached dwelling in a residence district; or
        2.    An office building in a business district; or
        3.    A factory in a light industrial district.
CURB LEVEL: The "curb level" for any building is the level of the established
curb in front of such building measured at the center of such front. Where no
curb elevation has been established, the mean elevation of the finished lot
grade immediately adjacent to a building shall be considered the "curb level".
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound
level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in "decibels".
DISTRICT: A portion of the territory of the village within which certain
uniform regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply
under the provisions of this title.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment of the "drive-in" type is one which
accommodates the patrons' automobiles, from which the occupants may deposit,
purchase, etc.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings
and multiple-family dwellings, but not including short-term rental lodging
houses for transient overnight occupancy use for less than ninety (90)
consecutive days; automobile house trailers; or hotels.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: An "attached dwelling" is one which is joined to another
dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A "detached dwelling" is one which is entirely surrounded
by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A "multiple-family dwelling" is a building, or
portion thereof, containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A "single-family dwelling" is a building containing
one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A "two-family dwelling" is a building containing two (2)
dwelling units only.
DWELLING UNIT: A "dwelling unit" consists of one or more rooms which are
arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual
bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall be
included for each "dwelling unit".
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room exclusive of
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal
room, providing such dining alcove does not exceed one hundred twenty five
(125) square feet in area.
ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTION: A building or group of buildings devoted to and
supported by charity.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A "business establishment" is a place of business
carrying on operations, the ownership and management of which are separate and
distinct from those of any other place of business located on the same zoning
lot. Direct access to each "business establishment" shall be separate and
distinct from direct access to any other business establishment, and in no case
shall there be access to one such establishment from within another such
establishment.
FAMILY: A "family" consists of one or more persons each related to the other by
blood, marriage or adoption, or civil union together with such blood relatives'
respective spouses or civil union partners, who are living together in a single
dwelling and maintaining a common household or three (3) or less unrelated
persons, provided that a designee of a parent or other person having custody of
an unrelated minor (under the age of eighteen (18)) has been provided written
permission to domicile with the unrelated minor. A family includes live-in
caretakers and/or domestic employees.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): For the purpose of determining
the floor area ratio, the "floor area" of a building is the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating
two (2) buildings. The "floor area" of a building shall include basement floor
area when more than one-half (1/2) of the basement height is above the
established curb level or above the finished lot grade level where no curb
level has been established, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor
space used for mechanical equipment, except equipment, open or enclosed,
located on the roof; penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet six
inches (7'6") or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches and
floor area devoted to accessory uses. The "floor area" of structures devoted to
bulk storage of materials including, but not limited to, grain elevators, shall
be determined on the basis of height in feet; i.e., ten feet (10') in height
shall equal one floor.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements): When
prescribed as the basis of measurement for off street parking spaces and
loading berths for any use shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of the building or portion thereof, devoted to such use,
including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space such
as counters, racks or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing
activities, to the production or processing of goods or to business or
professional offices.
However, "floor area", for the purpose of measurement for off street parking
spaces shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes
(except as otherwise noted herein); floor area devoted to off street parking or
loading facilities, including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space; or basement
floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, to the production
or processing of goods or to business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The "floor area ratio" of the building or buildings on
any zoning lot is the floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning
lot divided by the area of such zoning lot. The "floor area ratio"
requirements, as set forth under each zoning district, shall determine the
maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area of
both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of
the zoning lot.
FREE BURNING: A rate of combustion described by a material which burns
actively, and easily supports combustion.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and is an
index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of a street or road between the
two (2) nearest intersecting streets or roads measured along the line thereof,
or if dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an
intersecting street or road and the dead end thereof.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT: The "frontage of a zoning lot" is all the property of
such zoning lot fronting on a street or road and measured between the side lot
lines, or in the case of an interior lot not fronting on a street or road, all
of the property abutting the front lot or yard line.
GRADE: The average of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building or structure.
GUESTHOUSE: A detached accessory building located on the same zoning lot as the
principal building and containing living quarters for temporary guests; such
quarters shall not be rented.
GUESTS, PERMANENT: A "permanent guest" is a person who occupies or has the
right to occupy a hotel or apartment hotel accommodation as his domicile and
place of permanent residence.
HOTEL: An establishment which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction
to a boarding house or lodging house, and is commonly known as a hotel in the
community in which it is located and which provides customary hotel services.
INCOMPATIBLE USE: A use or service which is incapable of direct association
with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous or discordant.
INTEGRATED CENTER: A grouping of compatible uses on a single zoning lot, such
uses being in single ownership or under unified control.
INTENSE BURNING: A rate of combustion described by a material that burns with a
high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY: A street or road, including expressways and toll roads
for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from
the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by
the public authority having jurisdiction over such street or road.
LOT: A zoning lot, except as the context shall indicate a lot of record, in
which case a "lot" is a lot of record.
LOT AREA, GROSS: The "gross lot area" is the area of a horizontal plane bounded
by the front, side and rear lot lines.
   (A)   Only for purposes of determining "gross lot area" in an R1 district:
        1.    The front lot line shall be deemed to be the centerline of a
street or road if the lot abuts a street or road, provided however that for
purposes of determining gross lot area, the front lot line shall extend no more
than thirty three feet (33') from the actual front lot line; and
        2.    For a corner lot, the side lot line abutting a street or road
shall be deemed to be the centerline of such street or road, provided for
purposes of determining gross lot area, such side lot line shall extend no more
than thirty three feet (33') from the actual side lot line; and
        3.    No more than two and one-half (21/2) acres of the lot lying below
the base flood elevation shall be included in computing gross lot area.
   (B)   For purposes of determining "gross lot area" in all other districts,
no part of the lot lying below the base flood elevation shall be included in
computing gross lot area.
   (C)   In all cases, that portion of the lot lying above the base flood
elevation used in computing gross lot area must be a contiguous parcel of land.
LOT, AVERAGE WIDTH: The average lot width shall be determined in the following
manner for every lot line of a lot:
   (A)   Beginning at each lot line, lines shall be drawn at ten foot (10')
intervals;
   (B)   The sum of the lengths of each parallel line so drawn, measured within
the lot lines, shall be divided by the total number of parallel lines;
   (C)   The quotient is the average width of the lot for that lot line.
If the lot line is not straight, the center point of the lot line shall be
determined and a tangent drawn on the center point; lines shall be drawn at ten
foot (10') intervals parallel to the tangent and the calculation shall proceed
as set forth in subsections (A) through (C) of this definition.
The minimum average width requirements set forth in this title shall be met for
every lot line of the lot.
LOT, CORNER: A "corner lot" is a lot situated at the intersection of two (2)
streets or roads, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The "front lot line" shall be that boundary of a lot which is
along the centerline or parallel to the centerline of an abutting street or
road, provided that the right of way of such street or road shall be deemed to
be no more than sixty six feet (66') in width for the purpose of determining
such front lot line in an R1 district.
The owner of a corner lot shall select one of such streets or roads as the
"front lot line".
In the case of a lot that does not abut upon a street or road, the "front lot
line" shall be the lot line intersected by the primary access to the lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The "rear lot line" shall be that boundary of a lot which is
more distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to, the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: The "side lot line" shall be any boundary of a lot which is not
a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds or registrar of titles of the
county or counties in which said lot is situated, or a parcel of land, the deed
to which was recorded in the office of such recorder or registrar, prior to the
later to occur of: a) April 1, 1963, and b) the effective date of an ordinance
annexing such lot or the territory in which such lot is a part, in accordance
with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-1-1 et seq., as
amended.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A "reversed corner lot" is a corner lot the street or
roadside lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot
line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A "through lot" is a lot having a pair of opposite lot lines
along two (2) more or less parallel streets or roads, and which is not a corner
lot. On a "through lot", each of the lot lines abutting such streets or roads
shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT, ZONING: A "zoning lot or lots" is a single tract of land located within a
single block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated
by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit, under single ownership or control. In the event any building or structure
is to be constructed on a lot other than the principal structure, or that it
relies on another lot to meet code requirements, it shall be required that
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy that the properties be
consolidated into one zoning lot. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may
not coincide with a lot of record.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects
from the wall of a building.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and ceiling of
a main story, used for a purpose accessory to the principal use. A mezzanine is
usually just above the ground or main floor and extending over only part of the
main floor.
MICRON: A unit of length, equal to one-thousandth part of one millimeter (0.001
mm).
MODERATE BURNING: Implies a rate of combustion described by a material which
supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or
sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a single
zoning lot and designed for use by transients. A "motel" furnishes customary
hotel services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone and
secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture. In a "motel",
the rentable living and sleeping accommodations must be designed for occupancy
and occupied only by transients.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building; or the name of
an occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which does not
comply with all of the regulations of this title or of any amendment hereto
governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is
located.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use of land, buildings or structures which use is not
permitted in the zoning district in which such use is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS: "Noxious matter" is material which is capable of
causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of
causing detrimental effects upon the physical or economic well being of
individuals.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in
order to classify sound according to pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to
standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave
intervals.
ODOROUS MATTER: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive
in any way.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material, other than water, which is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion established to control noise, odor, smoke,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards or glare or heat
generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings.
POLO FIELD: An area of land which is used to play or learn the game of polo,
but not including loud speakers or lighting.
PROPERTY LINES: The lines bounding a zoning lot, as defined herein.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for
track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops or car yards.
RECREATIONAL CLUB: A nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide
members paying fees, which owns, hires or leases land or buildings or portions
thereof; the use of such premises being restricted primarily to the principal
use, which is a generally recognized sport or recreational activity, including,
without limitation, golf, tennis and polo but not including gun clubs and skeet
and trap shooting ranges or their buildings and structures. The premises shall
be restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such
"recreational club" are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee,
or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting. It may be
permissible to serve food and meals on such premises, providing adequate dining
room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic
beverages to members and their guests may be allowed, provided it is secondary
and incidental to the promotion of some recognized sport or recreational
activity, and further provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in
compliance with the applicable federal, state, county and village laws.
RESERVOIR PARKING: "Reservoir parking" facilities are those off street parking
spaces allocated to automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
REST HOME OR NURSING HOME: A private home for the care of children or the aged
or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such home
does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease or
injury.
RINGELMANN CHART: One which is described in the "U.S. Bureau Of Mines
Information Circular 6888", and on which are illustrated graduated shades of
gray for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke, and smoke
density.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number appearing on the Ringelmann chart ascribed by the
observer to the density of the smoke emission. Where the density or light
obstructing capacity of the smoke as observed falls between two (2) consecutive
Ringelmann numbers, the lower Ringelmann number shall be considered the density
of the smoke observed.
ROADSIDE STANDS: A "roadside stand" is a structure for the display and sale of
agricultural products produced on the premises where such stand is located,
with no space for customers within the structure itself.
SATELLITE ANTENNA, PRIVATE: Any accessory structure capable of receiving, for
the sole benefit of the principal use, radio or television signals from a
transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. This definition
includes, but is not limited to, satellite receivers, satellite dish antennas,
satellite disks, direct broadcast systems (DBSs), and television reception only
systems (TVROs).
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and a building,
sign or other improvement, as the context may require.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon, a building, structure
or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business. However, a "sign"
shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor
shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit,
school or religious group. A "sign" shall not include a sign located completely
within an enclosed building unless the context shall so indicate.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: An "advertising sign" is a sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment exclusively related to the
premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A "business sign" is a sign which directs attention to a
business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment
sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is
affixed.
SIGN, FLASHING: A "flashing sign" is any illuminated sign on which the
artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and
color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this title any
revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a "flashing sign".
SIGN, GROSS AREA OF: The "gross area" of a sign shall be the entire area within
a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in
no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such
perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of
such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, NO SOLICITATION: A "No Solicitation" sign is a sign which serves as
notice that no peddling or soliciting, as defined in title 3, chapter 3 of this
code shall occur on the posted premises.
SIGN, NO TRESPASS: A "No Trespass" sign is a sign which serves as notice that
no person shall enter upon the land posted without permission or invitation
from the owner or occupant and may include the prohibition of hunting, fishing,
dumping or any other activity the owner may choose to expressly prohibit on his
land.
SLOW BURNING OR INCOMBUSTIBLE: Implies materials which do not in themselves
constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material which will
not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an exposure for five (5)
minutes at a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,200°F) shall be designated "incombustible".
SMOKE: Any visible discharge into the air caused by the release of particulate
matter.
SMOKE UNIT: The number obtained when the smoke density in the Ringelmann number
is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this
calculation, a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a minute
during the period of observation; each reading is then multiplied by the time
in minutes during which it was observed. The various products are then added
together to give the total number of smoke units observed during the entire
observation period.
SOUND LEVEL: The "sound level" of an operation or use is the intensity of
sound, measured in decibels, produced by such operation or use.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards
Association For Measurement Of Intensity Of Sound.
STABLE: A detached accessory building the primary use of which is the keeping
of horses.
STREET OR ROAD: A public or private right of way which affords a primary means
of access to and abuts multiple lots, excepting driveways which serve a single
lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the addition,
removal or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
TENT: Any structure or enclosure, the roof of which, and/or one- half (1/2) or
more of the sides, are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, fabric or a similar
light material.
THREE COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM: Instrumentation which can measure earthborne
vibrations in three (3) directions, that is, vibration occurring in a
horizontal as well as a vertical plane.
TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIALS: "Toxic materials" are those materials which are
capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in
relatively small amounts.
TRAILER: Any vehicle, house car, camp car or any portable or mobile vehicle on
wheels, skids, rollers or blocks, either self- propelled or propelled by any
other means, which is used or designed to be used for residential, living,
sleeping or commercial purposes and herein referred to as a trailer.
USE: The "use" of property is the purpose or activity for which the land or
building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied
or maintained, and shall include any manner of performing such activity with
respect to the performance standards of this title.
USE, PERMITTED: A "permitted use" is a use which may be lawfully established in
a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations and performance standards (if any) of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: A "principal use" is the main use of land or buildings as
distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A "principal use" may be
either "permitted" or "special". A lot may have only one principal use.
USE, SPECIAL: A "special use" is a use, either public or private, which because
of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use
in any particular district or districts. After due consideration, in each case,
of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public or private
need for the particular use at the particular location, such "special use" may
or may not be granted in accordance with section
5-10-7 of this title.
VIBRATION: The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment engaged in selling to
retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
YARD: An open space, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in
subsection
5-3-9(F) of this title. A "yard" extends along a lot line, except that in the
case of a front yard it shall extend along the front yard line, and to a depth
or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which
such lot is located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A "corner side yard" is a side yard which faces a street or
road.
YARD, FRONT: A "front yard" is a yard extending along the full length of the
front yard line between the side lot lines.
YARD, FRONT, LINE: The "front yard line" is the line parallel to the front lot
line and coincident with the boundary of the street or road within the area of
the lot. In the case of interior lots not fronting or coincident with the
boundary of a street or road within the area of the lot, the front yard line is
the same as the front lot line.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: An "interior side yard" is a side yard which is located
immediately adjacent to another zoning lot or to an alley separating such side
yard from another zoning lot.
YARD, REAR: A "rear yard" is a yard extending along the full length of the rear
lot line between the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE: A "side yard" is a yard extending along a side lot line from the
front yard to the rear yard.
YARD, TRANSITIONAL: A "transitional yard" is that yard which must be provided
on a zoning lot, in a business district, which adjoins a zoning lot in a
residence district, or that yard which must be provided in a zoning lot, in the
light industrial district, which adjoins a zoning lot in either a residence or
business district.
ZONING DISTRICT: A section or sections of the incorporated territory of the
village for which the regulations and requirements, exclusive of special uses
granted therein, governing use, lot and bulk of buildings and premises are
uniform. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord. 65-4, 9-29-1965; Ord. 72-16, 12-18-
1972; 1977 Code; Ord. 79-19, 9-24-1979; Ord. 81-7, 1-26-1981; Ord. 83-8, 8-22-
1983; Ord. 84-17, 7-23-1984; Ord. 84-33, 10-22-1984; Ord. 88-1, 1-25-1988; Ord.
88-16, 9-26-1988; Ord. 89-7, 6-26-1989; Ord. 89-8, 7-24-1989; Ord. 90-18, 8-27-
1990; Ord. 90-24, 11-19-1990; Ord. 99-2, 3-22-1999; Ord. 99-7, 8-23-1999; Ord.
05-05, 6-27-2005; Ord. 06-03, 2-27-2006; Ord. 09-05, 5-18-2009; Ord. 14-19, 12-
15-2014; Ord. 16-22, 12-7-2016; Ord. 21-21, 12-16-2021)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Interpretation
5-3-2: Separability
5-3-3: Scope Of Regulations
5-3-4: Regulations For Specific Uses
5-3-5: Sewage Disposal And Water Supply
5-3-6: Zoning Of Additions And Omissions Of Land
5-3-7: Number Of Buildings On Zoning Lot
5-3-8: Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses
5-3-9: Bulk Regulations
5-3-10: Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities
5-3-11: Regulations For Special Uses
5-3-12: Regulations For Communication Towers
5-3-13: Exterior Lighting Regulations
5-3-1: INTERPRETATION:
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this zoning
title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this zoning title
upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provision of this title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive (or which
impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern.
   (C)   This zoning title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant
or any other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this
title are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than
such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
title shall govern.
   (D)   No building, structure or use which was not lawfully existing at the
time of the effective date hereof shall become or be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of these zoning regulations; and to the extent that, and
in any manner that, said lawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with
the requirements of this title, said building, structure or use remains
unlawful hereunder.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this zoning title shall be deemed to be a
consent, license or permit to use any property or to locate, construct or
maintain any building, structure or facility or to carry on any trade,
industry, occupation or activity.
   (F)   The provisions in this zoning title are cumulative and additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinances, heretofore passed or which may
be passed hereafter, governing any subject matter in this zoning title. (Ord.
63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord. 84-34, 10-22-1984)
   (G)   Authorization of a structure or use under or pursuant to this title
shall not relieve an owner or permittee from responsibility, or result in
imposition of responsibility on the village, its officers or agents, for any
condition or damage resulting from reliance on this title or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 75-1, 1-27-1975)
5-3-2: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the president and board of
trustees of the village that the several provisions of this title are
separable, in accordance with the following:
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this title not specifically included in said judgment.
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application or any provision of this title to a particular property, building
or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in said judgment. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
5-3-3: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
   (A)   All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of existing
buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing
uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this zoning
title which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings,
uses or land shall be located.
   (B)   However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been
issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date hereof, and provided
that construction is begun within six (6) months of such effective date and
diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the
building permit has been issued, and further, may upon completion be occupied
under a certificate of compliance by the use for which originally designated,
subject thereafter to the provisions of chapter 9, "Nonconforming Buildings,
Structures, Uses", of this title.
   (C)   Where the enforcing officer has issued a permissive use permit, a
special use permit or a permit for a variation pursuant to the provisions of
this zoning title, such permit shall become null and void unless work thereon
is substantially under way within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of
such permit by the enforcing officer.
   (D)   A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular
special use and shall expire if the special use shall cease for more than six
(6) months for any reason.
   (E)   No land which is located in a residence district shall be used for
driveway, walkway or access purposes to any land which is located in a business
or the light industrial district, or used for any purpose not permitted in a
residence district. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (F)   No building permit, as required by the ordinance codified herein,
shall be issued for any building to be constructed on any tract, parcel, or lot
that is not in compliance with 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes and village
subdivision regulations and other applicable ordinances except on a lot of
record, as defined herein. Parcels exempt from the requirements of 765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes and village subdivision regulations 1  shall not be deemed to
be in compliance with other requirements of this code.
   (G)   Non-commercial Event Facility: The intent of this subsection is to
protect the public health and safety of citizens of the village and to promote
the general welfare of the citizens residing in the village by encouraging the
use of properties within the village for use as defined in section
5-5-3(A), provided that such use does not violate the peace, quiet and domestic
tranquility within all residential neighborhoods within the village including,
but not limited to, guaranteeing to all citizens residing in the village
freedom from nuisances, fire hazards, excessive noise, light and traffic, and
other possible adverse effects of operating a non-commercial event facility in
residential districts.
      1.   Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this subsection, any
non-commercial event facility shall be permitted as a special use in the R-
1 zoning district under subsection
5-5-3(A) of this title and in accordance with the requirements of
5-10-7 of this title. Any special use permit issued for a non-commercial event
facility shall be issued to the owner of the property at the time an
application is approved and shall not run with the land. Any change in
ownership, including the change of a majority of members of any trust, LLC or
other corporate ownership (as defined at the time of approval), shall require
the new owners to apply for a new special use.
      2.   Definition: Non-commercial event facility as accessory only to
single-family detached dwellings, which are owner occupied. In no event shall
any stand-alone structure housing a non-commercial event facility be larger in
floor area than the existing single-family dwelling on site. Such use allows
the use of permanent structures or facilities to accommodate events, parties,
art or cultural exhibitions, lectures, conferences, theatrical productions, or
other scheduled and periodically held private non-commercial events. Non-
commercial event facility does not limit the use of property for events held
strictly for the benefit of the owner of the property (e.g., family wedding,
birthday, etc.).
      3.   Standards:
         a.   Minimum lot area of 20 acres (may be one or more parcels under
single ownership). If ownership of any parcel included in the special use is
transferred, the special use shall cease to be valid. Ownership information and
contact information for the property shall be submitted annually with the site
security and traffic management plan (
5-3-4(G)3.d.(1))
         b.   Road Frontage: At least one of the lots used for a non-commercial
event facility (in the event more than one lot is used) shall front and have
direct access to a public roadway.
         c.   Setbacks:
            (1)   Minimum three hundred foot (300') setback from public right-
of-way to any buildings or structures used as a non-commercial event facility.
            (2)   Minimum three hundred foot (300') setback from front, side or
rear lot line to buildings or structures used as a non-commercial event
facility.
         d.   Number Of Attendees:
            (1)   No events exceeding fifty (50) participants may be conducted
at a non-commercial event facility unless conducted in accordance with a site
security and a traffic management plan previously filed and approved by the
Chief of Police of the Village of Barrington Hills. One plan for all events to
exceed fifty (50) participants may be submitted on an annual basis, which plan
shall govern all such events held in the year of plan approval. Any change to
an approved site security and traffic management plan must be submitted for
approval by the Chief of Police of the Village of Barrington Hills and the
Director of Fire Prevention or Fire Marshal. Cost of the village's annual
review and approval or for the review of a prior approved plan shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00), in addition to any annual fee to be set by the
Director of Fire Prevention or Fire Marshal. The plan shall be submitted
annually for approval prior to January 1 to stay in good standing.
            (2)   No activities in a non-commercial event facility exceeding
sixty (60) attendees may be conducted:
               A.   More than twenty (20) times in any one calendar year,
limited to two (2) events on alternating weeks each month; nor
               B.   Sunday through Thursday except between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., and in such instance, all
non-residents of the property must vacate the premises no later than eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M.; nor
               C.   Friday and Saturday except between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., and in such instance, all
non-residents of the property must vacate the premises no later than twelve
o'clock (12:00) A.M.
         e.   Occupancy Limits: The Director of Fire Prevention or Fire Marshal
with jurisdiction shall recommend a maximum occupancy based on the specific
buildings and property to be used as a non-commercial event facility, but in no
case shall the occupancy of the property with a non-commercial event facility
exceed three hundred fifty (350) persons.
         f.   Kitchen Facilities: No kitchen for cooking of food for events
held at a non-commercial event facility is permitted, with the exception of
equipment for warming or holding of prepared food brought to the site to be
consumed at that event.
         g.   Parking:
            (1)   No stacking or parking for any event at a non-commercial
event facility shall be permitted on any public roadway.
            (2)    On-site parking or remote parking with a shuttle bus shall
be provided to accommodate the maximum number of individuals attending any one
event. Parking on the property is allowed on an unimproved surface.
            (3)   All parking shall be at the direction and supervision of the
owner of the property or his/her designee and shall be conducted so as to
prohibit the disruption of traffic on the adjacent roadway.
   (H)   Signage:
      1.   No permanent signs, other than those permitted within the R-1 zoning
district shall be allowed.
      2.   Temporary on-site directional signage to direct traffic shall be
permitted during the event.
   (I)   Refuse: All refuse generated by each use of the non-commercial event
facility must be contained on-site and must be properly disposed of so as not
to create a nuisance.
   (J)   Alcohol: No alcohol shall be permitted to be served during events at a
non-commercial event facility unless it is served in accordance with State and
local laws and ordinances.
   (K)   Gaming: No gaming or raffles shall be permitted to take place at a
non-commercial event facility unless in accordance with State and local laws
and ordinances and Title 3, Chapter 7 of this code.
   (L)   Fireworks: Any use of fireworks in conjunction with planned activities
on the property shall comply with the village code.
   (M)   Additional Performance Standards:
      1.   Property to be used for a non-commercial event facility shall adhere
to the zoning code lighting standards set forth in section
5-3-13. (Ord. 84-5, 3-26-1984; amd. Ord. 21-04, 4-26-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6 of this code.
5-3-4: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
   (A)   Agriculture: The provisions of this title shall not be exercised so as
to impose regulations or require permits with respect to land used or to be
used for agricultural purposes, or with respect to the erection, maintenance,
repair, alteration, remodeling or extension of buildings or structures to be
used for agricultural purposes upon such land, except that such buildings or
structures for agricultural purposes may be required to conform to building or
setback lines. In the event that the land ceases to be used solely for
agricultural purposes, then, and only then, shall the provisions of this title
apply. (Ord. 16-22, 12-7-2016)
   (B)   Public Utility: The following uses are permitted in any district:
      Cables.
      Conduits.
      Laterals.
      Pipelines.
      Poles.
      Towers.
      Vaults.
      Wires.
Any other similar distributing equipment of a public utility.
   (C)   Tents:
      1.   No tent shall be erected, used or maintained for living quarters.
      2.   The requirements for tents used for purposes other than residential
shall be as specified in subsection
1-6-9(D)6 of this code. (Ord. 93-10, 9-27-1993)
   (D)   Home Occupation: The intent of this subsection is to provide peace,
quiet and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods within the
village and in order to guarantee to all residents freedom from nuisances, fire
hazards, excessive noise, light and traffic, and other possible effects of
business or commercial uses being conducted in residential districts. It is
further the intent of this subsection to regulate the operation of a home
occupation so that the general public will be unaware of its existence. A home
occupation shall be conducted in a manner which does not give an outward
appearance nor manifest characteristics of a business which would infringe upon
the right of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their
dwelling units or infringe upon or change the intent or character of the
residential district.
      1.   Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this subsection, any
home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a
building as a dwelling shall be permitted in any residential zoning district.
      2.   Definition: A "home occupation" is any lawful business, profession,
occupation or trade conducted from a principal building or an accessory
building in a residential district that:
         a.   Is conducted for gain or support by a full time occupant of a
dwelling unit; and
         b.   Is incidental and secondary to the principal use of such dwelling
unit for residential occupancy purposes; and
         c.   Does not change the essential residential character of such
dwelling unit or the surrounding neighborhood.
      3.   Use Limitations:
         a.   Employee Limitations:
            (1)   The owner of every home occupation shall be a person that is
a full time occupant of the dwelling unit where such occupation is conducted.
            (2)   No more than two (2) employees or subcontractors, other than
the full time occupants of a dwelling unit shall be engaged or employed in
connection with, or otherwise participate in the operation of, a home
occupation at any one time. This limitation on the number of employees or
subcontractors shall not apply to employees or subcontractors who are not
present and do not work at the dwelling unit devoted to such home occupation.
         b.   Structural Limitations:
            (1)   No alteration of any kind shall be made to the dwelling unit
where a home occupation is conducted that would change its residential
character as a dwelling unit, including the enlargement of public utility
services beyond that customarily required for residential use.
            (2)   No separate entrance from the outside of the building where
the home occupation is located shall be added to such building for the sole use
of the home occupation.
         c.   Operational Limitations:
            (1)   Every home occupation shall be conducted wholly within
either: a) a principal building or b) an accessory building, but not both.
            (2)   The floor area ratio (FAR) of the area of the building used
for any such home occupation shall not exceed 0.01 (exclusive of garage floor
area devoted to permissible parking of vehicles used in connection with the
home occupation).
            (3)   There shall be no direct retail sales of merchandise, other
than by personal invitation or appointment, nor any permanent display shelves
or racks for the display of merchandise to be sold in connection with the home
occupation, with the exception of any barn, stable, or arena.
            (4)   No routine attendance of patients, clients, customers,
subcontractors, or employees (except employees and subcontractors as provided
in subsection (D)3a(2) of this section) associated with any home occupation
shall be permitted at the premises of the home occupation, provided, however,
that the attendance of up to four (4) persons at any one time may be allowed
for the purpose of receiving private instruction in any subject of skill.
"Routine attendance" means that the conduct of the home occupation requires
persons, other than the owner or permitted employees and subcontractors, to
visit the premises of the home occupation as part of the regular conduct of the
occupation, without regard to the number, frequency, or duration of such
visits.
            (5)   No vehicle or mechanical, electrical, or other equipment,
that produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat,
glare, emissions, odor, or radiation outside the principal building or
accessory building containing the home occupation that is greater or more
frequent than that typical of vehicles or equipment used in connection with
residential occupancy shall be used in connection with any home occupation.
            (6)   All storage of goods, materials, products or merchandise used
or sold in conjunction with a home occupation shall be wholly within the
principal building or accessory building containing the home occupation.
            (7)   No refuse in excess of the amount permitted under section
5-3-9 of this chapter shall be generated by any home occupation.
         d.   Signage And Visibility:
            (1)   No exterior business signs on a principal building, accessory
building or vehicle used in connection with the home occupation, shall be
permitted in connection with any home occupation unless otherwise permitted
under section
5-5-11 of this title.
            (2)   There shall be no exterior indications of the home occupation
or exterior variations from the residential character of the principal building
or accessory building containing the home occupation.
         e.   Traffic Limitations: No home occupation shall generate
significantly greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic than is typical of
residences in the surrounding neighborhood of the home occupation.
         f.   Nuisance Causing Activities: In addition to the foregoing
specific limitations, no home occupation shall cause or create any act, which
endangers public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public,
said act being defined as a nuisance under title 7, chapter 1 of this code.
         g.   Boarding And Training Of Horses: Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in this subsection (D), the boarding of horses in a stable
and the training of horses and their riders shall be a permitted home
occupation; provided, that no persons engaged to facilitate such boarding,
other than the immediate family residing on the premises, shall be permitted to
carry out their functions except between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. or sunset, whichever is later, and further
provided that no vehicles or machinery, other than that belonging to the
immediate family residing on the premises shall be permitted to be operated on
the premises except during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. or sunset, whichever is later. (Ord. 16-22, 12-7-2016)
   (E)   Animal Rescue Shelters: The intent of this subsection is to protect
the public health and safety of citizens of the village and to promote the
general welfare of the citizens and animals residing in the village by
encouraging the compassionate housing and care of domestic animals, including,
but not limited to, such domestic animals as dogs, cats and horses, that
otherwise would not have adequate shelter, provided that such housing and care
does not violate the peace, quiet and domestic tranquility within all
residential neighborhoods within the village including, but not limited to,
guaranteeing to all citizens residing in the village freedom from nuisances,
fire hazards, excessive noise, light and traffic, and other possible effects of
operating an animal rescue shelter in residential districts.
      1.   Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this subsection, any
animal rescue shelter shall be permitted as a special use in the R1 zoning
district under subsection
5-5-3(A) of this title.
      2.   Definition: An "animal rescue shelter" is a facility operated and
maintained from a principal building or accessory building that is incidental
and secondary to the principal use of a dwelling unit used for residential
occupancy purposes and that does not change the essential residential character
of such dwelling unit or the surrounding neighborhood, for the purpose of
providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of
domestic animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats and horses, that
otherwise would not have adequate shelter.
      3.   Standards: Any animal rescue shelter shall adhere to the following
standards and shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county and
municipal laws, ordinances, rules and regulations:
         a.   Construction And Maintenance: All facilities shall be constructed
and maintained so as to provide comfort and safety for animals and all areas of
the property shall be maintained in a clean and orderly condition, free of
objectionable odors.
         b.   Ventilation: Adequate heating and cooling shall be provided for
the comfort of the animals and the facility shall have sufficient ventilation
in all areas such that the air is completely circulated at least three (3)
times per hour.
         c.   Lighting: Proper lighting shall be provided in all rooms utilized
for the care and confinement of animals. Outside lighting shall be adequate to
assist animal caregivers and clients but shall not be obtrusive to neighboring
properties.
         d.   Water: Potable water shall be available within the facility and
each animal shall at all times have reasonable access to an adequate supply of
clean, fresh, potable water.
         e.   Basic Sanitation: Any equipment, instruments or facilities used
in the confinement and treatment of animals shall be clean and sanitary at all
times to protect against the spread of diseases, parasites and infection.
         f.   Waste Disposal: Covered waste containers, impermeable by water,
shall be used for the removal and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding,
animal tissues, debris and other waste. Disposal facilities shall be operated
so as to minimize insect or other vermin infestation and to prevent odor and
disease hazards or other nuisance conditions.
         g.   Animal Housing Areas: Any facility confining animals shall have
individual cages, pens, exercise areas or stalls to confine said animals in a
comfortable, sanitary and safe manner.
         h.   Medical Care: All animals housed within an animal rescue shelter
shall receive adequate veterinary care by a veterinarian licensed under the
veterinary medicine and surgery practice act of 2004, as amended, in order to
promote the health and welfare of such animal.
         i.   Runs And Exercise Areas: Other than transport to and from the
animal rescue shelter, at all times that animals are not confined within the
sheltered portion of the facility, such animals shall be confined to runs and
exercise areas. All runs and exercise areas shall be set back not less than one
hundred feet (100') from all front, side and rear lot lines and shall be of
adequate size to allow comfort and exercise. Runs and exercise areas shall
provide and allow for effective separation in such a manner as to protect
against escape or injury. Each animal shall at suitable intervals, but not less
frequently than once every twenty four (24) hours, receive adequate exercise
suitable for the species' physical condition and age, sufficient to maintain an
adequate level of physical conditioning for the animal.
         j.   Disposal Of Deceased Animals: The facility shall use
refrigeration and employ a procedure for the prompt, sanitary and safe disposal
of deceased animals that complies with all applicable state and municipal laws,
ordinances and regulations.
         k.   Vehicles And Equipment: No vehicle or mechanical, electrical, or
other equipment, that produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference,
vibration, heat, glare, emissions, odor, or radiation outside the principal
building or accessory building containing the animal rescue shelter that is
greater or more frequent than that typical of vehicles or equipment used in
connection with residential occupancy shall be used in connection with any
animal rescue shelter.
         l.   Storage: All storage of goods, materials, products or merchandise
incidental to the care and adoption of animals that is used or sold in
conjunction with an animal rescue shelter shall be wholly within the principal
building or accessory building containing the animal rescue shelter.
         m.   Nutrition: Each animal shall at suitable intervals, but not less
frequently than once every twenty four (24) hours, receive a quantity of
wholesome foodstuff suitable for the species' physical condition and age,
sufficient to maintain an adequate level of nutrition for the animal.
         n.   Number Of Animals: There shall be no more animals housed within
an animal rescue shelter at any one time than is reasonable for the adequate
and proper care of all animals within said shelter.
      4.   Employee Limitations: The owner of an animal rescue facility shall
be a person or an entity controlled by a person that is a full time occupant of
the dwelling unit where such facility is operated. No more than four (4)
employees or volunteers, other than the full time occupants of a dwelling unit
shall be present at the facility or otherwise participate in the operation of
an animal rescue shelter at any one time.
      5.   Signage And Visibility: No exterior business signs on a principal
building, accessory building or vehicle used in connection with the animal
rescue shelter, shall be permitted in connection with any animal rescue shelter
unless otherwise permitted under section
5-5-11 of this title.
      6.   Traffic Limitations: No animal rescue shelter shall generate
significantly greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic than is typical of
residences in the surrounding neighborhood of the animal rescue shelter.
      7.   Nuisance Causing Activities: It is unlawful for any person operating
an animal rescue shelter to allow or permit any animal to cause serious or
habitual disturbance or annoyance by frequent or habitual howling, yelping,
barking or otherwise noisy conduct, which shall annoy, injure or endanger
safety, health, comfort or repose of others. An animal is harbored in violation
of this subsection if, without provocation, it makes noise that can be heard
continuously within an enclosed structure off the property of the animal rescue
shelter for more than fifteen (15) minutes and which annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of others. In addition to the
foregoing specific limitations, no animal rescue shelter shall cause or create
any act, which endangers public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to
the public, said act being defined as a nuisance under title 7, chapter 1 of
this code.
      8.   Inspections: In addition to any required inspections by applicable
federal, state or county governmental agencies, all animal rescue shelters
shall be subject to annual inspections conducted by the village, at the sole
cost and expense of the owner and/or operator of such animal rescue shelter.
      9.   Licenses: No person shall engage in the operation of an animal
rescue shelter without a valid license issued by: a) the Illinois department of
agriculture and b) the village pursuant to the issuance of a special use permit
in accordance with the provisions of section
5-10-7 of this title.
   (F)   Cannabis Business Establishments: Cannabis business establishments as
defined in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (House Bill 1438) ("Cannabis
Act") as of the date of the adoption of this section, which currently includes
cultivation centers, craft growers, processing organizations, dispensing
organizations, and transporting organizations, and any future amendments to the
definition of cannabis business establishments pursuant to the Cannabis Act,
are hereby prohibited uses in all zoning districts within the corporate
boundaries of the village. (Ord. 09-07, 7-27-2009; amd. Ord. 19-19, 10-28-2019)
5-3-5: SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND WATER SUPPLY:
Regardless of other provisions of this title, in all classifications and in all
districts there shall always be sufficient ground area left unoccupied by a
structure or paving for a proper system of sewage disposal and water supply
conforming with the standards and requirements of the village building code 1
and other applicable requirements of the county in which the land in question
is situated or of the state of Illinois. Plot plans accompanying building
permit applications shall show clearly the proposed sewage disposal system and
well locations, if any. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
5-3-6: ZONING OF ADDITIONS AND OMISSIONS OF LAND:
Any additions to the incorporated area of the village shall be automatically
classified as R1 single-family residence district until otherwise reclassified
by amendment. Any land, when classification is not shown thereon, shall be
classified as in the R1 single-family residence district, until otherwise
reclassified by amendment. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
5-3-7: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON ZONING LOT:
Not more than one principal detached residential building shall be located on a
zoning lot, nor shall a principal detached residential building be located on
the same zoning lot with any other principal building. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
5-3-8: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
   (A)   Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (B)   Reserved. (Ord. 09-05, 5-18-2009)
   (C)   Reserved. (Ord. 88-16, 9-26-1988)
   (D)   Satellite Antenna, Private: The size and location of any such antenna
shall comply with all of the following requirements in order to be a conforming
accessory structure:
      1.   Size: No antenna shall exceed an overall diameter of twelve feet
(12') or an overall height of fifteen feet (15') above existing grade.
      2.   Ground Mounted: The antenna shall be permanently ground mounted. No
antenna shall be installed on a portable or movable structure, such as a
trailer.
      3.   Screening: The antenna shall be totally screened, for its entire
height, from view at ground level from any adjacent lot or street, public or
private. Screening shall be provided by any one or more of the following: the
dwelling on the lot where such antenna is located; garages, storage buildings,
or other accessory buildings which meet all provisions of this title; or
landscaping and plantings which provide year round screening.
      4.   Construction: All provisions of the building code, title 4 of this
code, as may pertain to satellite antennas, shall be met. (Ord. 84-17, 7-23-
1984)
5-3-9: BULK REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Continued Conformity With Bulk Regulations: The maintenance of yards
and other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall
be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on
which it is located, as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no
legally required yards, other open space, or minimum lot area allocated to any
building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be
used to satisfy yard, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any
other zoning lot.
   (B)   Division Of Zoning Lots: No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be
divided into two (2) or more lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting
from each such division shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations
of the zoning district in which such zoning lot is located. (Ord. 09-05, 5-18-
2009)
   (C)   Location Of Required Open Space: All yards and other open spaces
allocated to a building shall be located on the same zoning lot as such
building.
   (D)   Required Yards, Existing Buildings: No yards, now or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date hereof, shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the
minimum yard requirements of this title for equivalent new construction. (Ord.
63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (E)   Setback From Watercourses: If the base flood elevation, as defined in
section
4-5-2 of this code, is interior to one or more lot lines, the base flood
elevation shall serve as the beginning point for measurement of the minimum
yard requirements as provided in accordance with the regulations of this title.
Upon an application made by the owner of the subject property as further
provided herein, the setback from a watercourse may be less than the applicable
yard requirement if unobstructed open space is guaranteed in a conservation
easement, restrictive covenant, or other perpetual agreement recommended by the
plan commission and after a public hearing, approved by the board of trustees
based on an affirmative finding that the guarantee of open space: 1) provides
equal or greater protection for the natural resources of the area, and 2)
preserves the quality of light, air, and views of the subject property and
other property in the locality, and 3) the reduction in the setback will not
otherwise have an adverse impact on the watercourse or the drainage from the
subject property or onto other properties in the locality. An application for
relief from the setback requirements shall be made by the owner of the subject
property, or if by another person having interest therein, with the written
concurrence of the owner of the subject property. An application for relief
shall be filed in writing with the enforcing officer. The application shall
contain such information as the plan commission may, from time to time, by
rule, require. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall contain
such information as the plan commission may, from time to time, by rule,
require. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published
at least once, not less than fifteen (15) days’ prior written notice of the
time and place of the public hearing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to all owners of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') (not
including street rights of way) of the boundary of the subject property. (Ord.
03-04, 2-24-2003)
   (F)   Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards: The following shall not be
considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
      1.   In All Yards: Open terraces but not including a permanently roofed
over terrace or porch; awnings and canopies; steps which are necessary for
access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street or
alley; chimneys projecting eighteen inches (18") or less into the yard;
recreational and laundry drying equipment; arbors and trellises; flagpoles;
fences, walls and manmade berms not exceeding six feet (6') in height above
natural grade level; and open type fence exceeding six feet (6') in height, but
not more than eight feet (8') in height, provided that visibility at right
angles to any surface of such fence not be reduced by more than fifty percent
(50%); and containers of one cubic yard or larger in which refuse, manure or
similar substances are placed but only on the day preceding, the day of, and
the day after scheduled pick up or collection of the contents of the container,
provided that if the container is three (3) cubic yards or larger, then the
container may remain in the required yard at all times if the container is
screened, for its entire height, from the view of any adjacent lot and any
public or private street and right of way.
      2.   In Front Yards: One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or
less into the yard; overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or
less into the yard.
      3.   In Rear Yards: Open off street parking spaces; balconies; breezeways
and open porches; one-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into
the yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or less
into the yard.
      4.   In Side Yards: Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting eighteen
inches (18") or less into the yard. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord. 77-17, 9-
26-1977; Ord. 83-11, 10-24-1983; Ord. 98-1, 3-30-1998; Ord. 21-21, 12-16-2021;
Ord.24-10, 9-23-2024)
5-3-10: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
   (A)   Scope Of Regulations: The off street parking and loading provisions of
this zoning title shall apply as follows:
      1.   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date hereof, accessory parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the districts in
which such buildings or uses are located. However, where a building permit has
been issued prior to the effective date hereof, and provided that construction
is begun within six (6) months of such effective date and diligently prosecuted
to completion, parking and loading facilities in the amount required for
issuance of said building permit may be provided in lieu of any different
amounts required by this zoning title.
      2.   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises
shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required
parking or loading facilities, parking or loading facilities as required herein
shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. However, no building
or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully established prior to the
effective date hereof shall be required to provide such additional parking or
loading facilities unless and until the aggregate increase in units of
measurement shall equal not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the units of
measurement existing upon the effective date hereof, in which event, parking or
loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for the total increase;
provided, however, that in the case of the expansion or alteration of
residential buildings, required parking or loading facilities shall be provided
on the basis of the total required units of measurement for the entire capacity
of the building.
      3.   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter
be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was
erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional parking or loading
facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the
new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to
the parking and loading provisions of this title.
   (B)   Existing Parking Facilities: Accessory off street parking facilities
in existence on the effective date hereof and located on the same lot as the
building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less
than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new
building or use under the provisions of this title.
   (C)   Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities: Nothing in this title shall
be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking or
loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings; provided,
that all regulations herein governing the location, design and operation of
such facilities are adhered to.
   (D)   Damage Or Destruction: For any conforming or legally nonconforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date hereof, which
subsequently thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or
other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off street
parking or loading facilities need not be provided, except that parking or
loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in no case
shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in
excess of those required by this zoning title for equivalent new uses or
construction.
   (E)   Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: In cases where parking
facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served is located, such facilities shall be in the same
possession as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the
parking facilities are accessory. Such possession may be either deed or long
term lease, the term of such lease to be determined by the zoning board of
appeals. The owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be
located shall be bound by covenant filed on the record in the office of the
recorder of deeds or the registrar of titles of that county or counties in
which said land is situated, requiring such owner, his heirs and assigns, to
maintain the required number of parking facilities for the duration of the use
served or of the said lease, whichever shall terminate sooner.
   (F)   Submission Of Plot Plan: Any application for a building permit, or for
a certificate of compliance where no building permit is required, shall include
therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any
parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this zoning
title. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
5-3-11: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   Where a use is classified as a special use in the district in which it
is zoned under this zoning title, and exists as a special or permitted use
under the terms of any zoning ordinance effective immediately prior to the
effective date hereof, it shall be considered to be a legal special use.
   (B)   Where a special use is not allowed as a special or permitted use in
the district in which it is zoned under this zoning title, and exists as a
special use under the terms of any zoning ordinance in effect immediately prior
to the effective date hereof, it shall be considered to be a nonconforming use
and shall be subject to the applicable nonconforming use provisions set forth
in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (C)   No special use permit shall be granted for a private boathouse unless
the size of the private boathouse complies with all of the following
requirements: (Ord. 93-10, 9-27-1993)
      1.   Floor Area: No private boathouse shall exceed an overall floor area
of three hundred (300) square feet, excluding the area of in-water boat slips.
(Ord. 99-2, 3-22-1999)
      2.   Height: No private boathouse shall exceed an overall height of
twenty feet (20') as measured by the vertical distance from the base flood
elevation of the watercourse on which the boathouse is located or adjoins
opposite the center of the front of the boathouse to the highest point on the
boathouse. (Ord. 93-10, 9-27-1993)
      3.   Covered Area: No private boathouse shall have a permanent covered
area exceeding six hundred (600) square feet. When calculating the covered area
of a private boathouse, the covered area of the in water boat slips shall be
included in the calculations. (Ord. 99-2, 3-22-1999)
5-3-12: REGULATIONS FOR COMMUNICATION TOWERS:
   (A)   Special Use: Personal wireless service facilities are permitted
special uses in any zoning district within the village, provided, however, no
special use permit for personal wireless service facilities shall be granted
unless such personal wireless service facilities comply with the provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Purpose And Interpretation: The purpose of this section is to provide
specific regulations for the placement, construction, maintenance, repair and
modification of personal wireless service facilities. The provisions of this
section are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have
the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless services, nor shall the
provisions of this section be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably
discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless
services. To the extent that any provision or provisions of this section are
inconsistent with or conflict with any other provision of the zoning code, the
provisions of this section shall be deemed to control.
   (C)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, defined terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in section
5-2-1 of this title and subsection (G) of this section.
   (D)   Facility Requirements And Preferences:
      1.   Existing Facilities Permitted: Any personal wireless service
facility installed, operating or approved prior to the enactment of this
section, which would be prohibited under this section, shall be considered a
legal nonconforming use and/or a legal nonconforming structure, as the case may
be, and shall be subject to the rules on nonconforming uses or structures
provided in chapter 9 of this title.
Routine maintenance, including painting of and repairs to the facility, upkeep
of the site, replacement of individual components of the facility with like
kind components of substantially similar size and installation of previously
approved antennas shall be permitted on existing personal wireless facilities.
All new construction other than routine maintenance of existing personal
wireless facilities, shall comply with the provisions set forth in this
section.
      2.   Site Selection Criteria: The site proposed by an applicant will be
evaluated using the following criteria, which are not listed in order of
priority:
         a.   Topography,
         b.   Availability of road access and parking for service vehicles and
emergency response vehicles,
         c.   Provisions for and location of applicable utilities,
         d.   Existing screening and landscaping and potential opportunities
for additional screening and landscaping,
         e.   Compatibility with adjacent land uses,
         f.   Estimated coverage area of facility from proposed site,
         g.   Availability of suitable existing structures on which the
facility could be located, and
         h.   Location of facility on the proposed site.
      3.   Site Selection Preferences: The site proposed by an applicant will
be evaluated in the light of the following preferences of the village for
locating new personal wireless service facilities, which are listed in order of
priority with the most preferred location first and the least preferred
location last:
         a.   Place new antennas on existing antenna support structures,
         b.   Place new personal wireless service facilities on publicly owned
property,
         c.   Place new personal wireless service facilities in business or
industrial zoning districts,
         d.   Place new personal wireless service facilities in residential
zoning districts, provided, however, no new facility shall be located in a
residential zoning district unless the applicant shows that: 1) the new
facility cannot be located on sites specified in subsections (D)3a through
(D)3c of this section and 2) the proposed site has minimal visual impact.
      4.   Facility Design Criteria: All new proposed personal wireless service
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the following design
criteria:
         a.   Constructed in accordance with the standards then in effect as
promulgated by the Electronics Industry Association and all applicable building
codes,
         b.   Constructed to permit collocation capability for multiple
carriers/antennas,
         c.   No lights, signals or signs shall be permitted on the antenna or
antenna support structure, unless required by applicable law, provided,
however, this shall not be construed to prevent security lighting on the ground
level equipment buildings,
         d.   All new personal wireless service facilities shall be fitted with
anticlimbing devices,
         e.   The color of the antenna and antenna support structure shall
match and shall blend into the surrounding environment to the greatest extent
feasible, and
         f.   Ground level equipment buildings shall comply with the village
building code and shall be adequately screened from view from adjacent
properties, streets and roads.
      5.   Facility Design Preferences: All new proposed personal wireless
service facilities will be evaluated in light of the following preferences of
the village, which are listed in order of priority with the most preferred
design first and the least preferred design last:
         a.   New antennas mounted on existing structures or existing personal
wireless service facilities,
         b.   Multicarrier capable unipole style antenna support structures
with antennas installed inside the support structures with direct mounted
antennas,
         c.   Multicarrier capable monopole style antenna support structures
with platform mounted antennas,
         d.   Multicarrier antenna support structure with the unipole style
being most preferable.
   (E)   Special Use Application Requirements: In the course of reviewing any
request for a special use permit required under this section, the zoning board
of appeals or the village board of trustees, as the case may be, shall act
within a reasonable period of time after the application is duly filed with the
village, taking into account the nature and scope of the special use. Any
decision to deny such an application shall be in writing and supported by
substantial evidence contained in a written record.
      1.   Required Information: An applicant for a special use permit for
personal wireless service facilities shall submit the following documentation
and information:
         a.   A site plan clearly indicating the location of any ground
structures, and the type (unipole, monopole, lattice, other) and height
(measured from grade to highest point, excluding ground rods up to 10 feet
long) of the proposed facility, number of proposed carriers that can be located
on the antenna support structure, current on site land uses and zoning, current
adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, location of existing
utilities, and proposed means of access, fencing, landscaping/screening and
elevation drawings of the proposed facility.
         b.   A survey prepared by an Illinois licensed land surveyor within
ninety (90) days of the application showing the location of the proposed
facility and setbacks from property lines, provided, however, that a survey up
to one year old is acceptable if accompanied by an affidavit of the site's fee
title owner stating that there has been no change to the site since the date of
the survey and the site plan provided pursuant to this subsection (E)1 clearly
indicates the location of the proposed personal wireless service facility.
         c.   A copy of the last deed of record and legal description of the
site and any restrictive covenants controlling use and/or development of the
site.
         d.   Distance between the proposed facility (measured from the base
pad of the facility) and: 1) the nearest property and 2) the nearest single-
family detached dwelling that is not located on the proposed site.
         e.   Aerial photo of the proposed site and photo simulations of the
proposed facility as viewed from: 1) the nearest property and 2) the nearest
single-family detached dwelling that is not located on the proposed site.
         f.   A statement under oath signed by the applicant stating the
facility will comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations
(including specifically FAA and FCC regulations) and this section.
         g.   Identity of any known carriers intending to install antennas on
the antenna support structure and proof of agreements between the applicant and
the identified carrier(s).
         h.   Written justification of compliance with site selection criteria
and facility design criteria.
         i.   Statement of need for the facility, including coverage/
propagation maps as appropriate.
         j.   Proof of service of notice of the time and place of the public
hearing of the special use application: 1) served upon property owners within
the village within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the proposed
site, 2) as published at least once, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more
than thirty (30) days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
in the village, and 3) such other means or methods as prescribed by the zoning
board of appeals.
         k.   Information reasonably requested by the ZBA to permit the ZBA to
determine whether the application satisfies the additional requirements set
forth in subsection (E)2 of this section.
      2.   Optional Information: An applicant for a special use permit for
personal wireless service facilities may submit the following documentation and
information:
         a.   Comments from adjacent property owners.
         b.   Any other information that is reasonably requested by the zoning
board of appeals.
   (F)   Application Evaluation Criteria: The applicant or its agent shall
demonstrate compliance with subsection
5-10-7(E) of this title and this section.
      1.   Special Use Permit; General Requirements: No special use permit for
a personal wireless service facility shall be recommended by the zoning board
of appeals unless the zoning board of appeals shall find the application
satisfies the following additional requirements:
         a.   That no existing, sufficient and readily available antenna
support structures are located within the geographic area that meets
applicant's coverage requirements.
         b.   That the applicant's proposed facility would not cause
electromagnetic interference with other antennas on existing antenna support
structures.
         c.   That an alternative technology that does not require the use of
an antenna support structure, such as microcell and/or distributed antenna
systems network using multiple low powered transmitters/receivers attached to a
wireline system, is unsuitable.
         d.   Adherence to any additional requirements and preferences set
forth in this section.
   (G)   Technical Definitions:
   ANTENNA: Any apparatus at the facility that directly sends and/or receives
radio signals for the purpose of providing personal wireless services.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or
other structure that supports an antenna.
   BASE PAD: The foundation upon which the antenna support structure is erected
(typically steel reinforced concrete).
   CABLE MICROCELL NETWORK: A wireless communications network that utilizes a
series of interconnected low power transmitters and receives geographically
disbursed signals throughout the area.
   CARRIER/PROVIDER: An entity duly authorized by the FCC to engage in the
provision of wireless service(s) to end users.
   COVERAGE AREA: The geographic area in which wireless service is to be
provided by the facility.
   COVERAGE/PROPAGATION MAPS: Topographical maps that depict the geographic
area to be covered by the wireless facility, including various levels of
service as appropriate.
   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM: A wireless communications network with multiple
antennas mounted on existing infrastructure (typically power/telephone poles)
to enhance coverage within the geographic area.
   FAA: The federal aviation administration.
   FCC: The federal communications commission.
   MONOPOLE: A single freestanding pole type of antenna support structure upon
which antennas are mounted.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES, PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES: Shall be
defined in the same manner as in title 47, United States Code, section 332(c)
(7)(C), as amended; personal wireless facilities may also be referred to as a
"facility" or "facility".
   SITE: A lot or parcel of land that contains personal wireless service
facilities, including any antenna, antenna support structure and accessory
buildings, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to personal
wireless services.
   SITE PLAN: A graphic depiction of the site drawn to scale showing the
information required under subsection (E)1 of this section.
   STRUCTURE HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the base of the
antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure even
if said highest point is an antenna (exclusive of ground rods up to 10 feet in
height). Measurement of such height shall include antenna, base pad, and other
appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade of the site. If the
support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest
and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
   UNIPOLE: A type of monopole in which all antennas and associated cabling are
internally mounted and thus not visible on the external surface of the
monopole.
   WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER: An entity engaged in the operation and management
of a personal wireless service facility. (Ord. 08-02, 1-28-2008)
5-3-13: EXTERIOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide lighting standards
and practices which will minimize light pollution and will conserve energy and
resources while maintaining nighttime health, safety, utility and security. It
is also intended for this section to provide regulations which will protect the
health and welfare of the general public and protect the ecological and natural
resources of the village, while preserving the ability to view the celestial
features of the night sky for present and future generations.
Village authorities recognize:
      1.   The need to safeguard the rural character, aesthetic value and the
unique quality of life that village residents enjoy by preserving and enhancing
the ability to view the night sky.
      2.   The night sky as a natural resource.
      3.   The need to define limits and protect residents from the trespass of
excessive and misdirected light from adjacent properties.
      4.   That proper direction and use of light minimizes the use of energy.
      5.   That excessive illumination may have a detrimental effect on
wildlife that depends on the natural cycle of the day and night for survival.
      6.   The importance to all of astronomical observations and the enjoyment
of the night sky.
   (B)   Definitions: Terms used in this section shall be defined as follows:
   BACK SIDE SHIELD: A device which is added or attached to a light fixture
made from an opaque material which prevents light from being emitted in certain
directions. Commonly applied to prevent light from entering an adjacent
property.
   DOORWAY: Any means of ingress or egress to any structure, limited to doors
and garage doors.
   DOORWAY LIGHTING: Light fixtures located within ten feet (10') of a doorway.
   ESSENTIAL LIGHTING: Light that is used for a specified period of time which
is necessary for a specific task or purpose while said task or purpose is
actively being performed.
   EXCESSIVE LIGHTING: Illuminance which exceeds the amount of light which is
needed to perform a visual task or purpose at night.
   EXTERIOR LIGHTING: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed,
located or used in such a manner to cause light rays to shine outdoors.
Fixtures which are located indoors, but which are intended to illuminate
something outside are considered exterior lighting for the purposes of this
section.
   FIXTURE, LIGHT FIXTURE (Also Called LUMINAIRE): The complete lighting
assembly (including the lamp(s), housing, ballasts, photocells, reflectors or
refractors, lenses, sensors and shields) less the support assembly or pole,
mounting bracket and base, consisting of one or more lamps together with the
parts designed to distribute light, position and protect the lamp, and connect
the lamp to a source of power. Light fixtures are evaluated for safety by
Underwriters Laboratories and are "rated" to certain wattage limits, as affixed
by a UL issued label.
   FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of measurement used to determine the amount of light
incident on a surface, also known as "illuminance". One foot-candle (1 fc) is
equivalent to one lumen evenly distributed over one square foot of surface area
at a distance of one foot (1'). Foot-candle measurements can be taken with a
handheld light meter.
   FULLY SHIELDED: A light fixture or luminaire designed, constructed and
installed in such a manner that all light emitted from the fixture, either
directly from the lamp(s) or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection
or refraction from any part of the fixture, is projected below the horizontal
plane through the fixture's lowest light emitting part.
   GLARE: A visual disturbance produced by a distinct light source within the
visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are
adapted.
   HOLIDAY LIGHTING: Temporary lighting installed in connection with a holiday
or religious observance and removed thereafter.
   ILLUMINANCE: The amount of luminous flux falling onto a unit of surface
area, correlating to the perception of brightness by the human eye. Illuminance
is typically measured in lumens per square foot (foot-candles) or lumens per
square meter (flux).
   LAMP: The source of light being emitted from a luminaire, such as a bulb.
   LANDSCAPE LIGHTING: Exterior lighting for the purpose of illuminating trees,
shrubbery, plants, flowerbeds, waterways, gardens and nonstructural, manmade
features, including, but not limited to, sculptures, fountains, trellises,
statuaries, tree houses and other features.
   LIGHT LEVEL: The illuminance as measured by a light meter as reported in
photometry.
   LIGHT OUTPUT: The amount of light which is emitted by a lamp or fixture.
   LIGHT POLLUTION: Any unnecessary or adverse effect of artificial light
including, but not limited to, glare, light trespass, excessive lighting,
uplighting and skyglow, and any artificial light that unnecessarily diminishes
the ability to view the night sky or is disruptive to the natural environment.
   LIGHT SOURCE OR SOURCE: The light emitting part or parts of a light fixture,
consisting of the lamp or lamps and any transparent or translucent covering
over the lamp, as well as any refractors, reflectors, prismatic lenses,
mirrors, or diffusers which emit or transmit light.
   LIGHT TRESPASS: Light that falls on neighboring properties or produces glare
or distraction for observers away from the area for which the light is
intended.
   LIGHTING: Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to produce light or
light produced by a manmade source, including, but not limited to, electric
lamps, gas lamps and solar lamps.
   LUMEN: The unit of measurement used to quantify the amount of light produced
by a lamp or emitted from a fixture (as distinct from "watt" which is a
measurement of the electrical power).
   LUMINAIRE: See definition of Fixture, Light Fixture (Also Called Luminaire).
   LUMINOUS FLUX: The power emitted from a source of electromagnetic radiation,
such as a light bulb or light transmitting elements, in the form of visible
light. Luminous flux is measured in lumens (flux) and is typically specified by
the manufacturer for a given lamp or fixture. Typical luminous flux values for
incandescent bulbs are one hundred (100) watts: one thousand five hundred fifty
(1,550) lumens; seventy five (75) watts: one thousand eighty (1,080) lumens;
sixty (60) watts: seven hundred eighty (780) lumens; and forty (40) watts: four
hundred fifty (450) lumens.
   MOTION SENSOR: A sensor which causes a luminaire to become illuminated
automatically upon the presence of motion or infrared radiation or a
combination thereof within its field of view.
   MOUNTING HEIGHT: The height above normal grade to the lowest light emitting
part of an installed fixture.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: The construction of a new principal building on a "lot"
(as such terms are defined in section
5-2-1 of this title) or the expansion of an existing principal building on a
lot such that the resulting "floor area" (as defined in section
5-2-1 of this title) of such principal building is increased by more than fifty
percent (50%).
   NONCONFORMING: Lighting which does not meet the requirements and
specifications contained herein.
   NONESSENTIAL LIGHTING: Lighting which is unnecessary for pedestrian passage
and not generally useful. This includes lighting intended for a specific task
or purpose when said task or purpose is not being actively performed (e.g.,
parking lot illumination and wall mounted perimeter lights after business
hours).
   PHOTOMETRY: A technical test report that indicates light distribution and
performance of a fixture. A photometric plan may include candlepower
distribution data, cutoff classification, foot-candle chart, etc., some of
which are generally available directly from the manufacturer, and which may
have been produced by an independent laboratory.
   SEARCHLIGHT: Lighting installation, either ground or vehicle mounted,
designed to project a high intensity beam of light that is typically used to
sweep the sky for promotional purposes.
   SECURITY LIGHTING: Exterior lighting installed primarily for personal safety
or emergency purposes that is attached to a structure or used to illuminate a
walk or driveway and is fully shielded. Any lighting identified by the
Barrington Hills police department as serving a security function will also be
classified as security lighting.
   SHIELD OR SHIELDED: When applied to lighting, an opaque barrier which does
not allow light to be transmitted in certain directions.
   SKYGLOW: The brightening of the night sky or the overhead glow from
artificial light that is directed upward or reflected off moisture and dust
particles in the atmosphere, reducing the ability to view the natural night
sky.
   SPECIAL EVENT LIGHTING: Lighting approved by the village for use at a
temporary special event.
   SPORTS LIGHTING: Light fixtures used to illuminate courts, arenas, riding
arenas, fields, tracks and other recreational areas generally utilizing high
light output fixtures, higher light levels and are mounted on higher than
average freestanding poles.
   UL RATING: A reference to "Underwriters Laboratories" (or other recognized
testing laboratory), a commercial agency that certifies the maximum safe
wattage for fixtures and other electrical devices. A UL label indicating the
maximum safe wattage is affixed or imprinted on all light fixtures which are
offered for sale.
   UNIFORMITY RATIO: A ratio that describes uniformity of illuminance across an
area.
   UNSHIELDED: The luminaire only incorporates clear glass, which permits all
light to escape.
   VILLAGE: The village of Barrington Hills.
   (C)   Applicability:
      1.   Applicability To Zoning Districts:
         a.   In all residential zoning districts R1 to R4, inclusive, exterior
lighting installed or relocated with regard to any new construction commenced
after the effective date of this section shall conform to the provisions
established by this section, unless otherwise exempted herein.
         b.   In all other zoning districts, exterior lighting installed or
relocated after the effective date of this section shall conform to the
provisions established by this section, unless otherwise exempted herein.
      2.   Conflict With Other Laws: Nothing in this section is intended to
affect the continued applicability of the provisions of section
5-2-1 of this title (definition of "polo field"); section
5-3-12 of this chapter; subsections
5-5-12(G)4 and
5-6-10(E)4 of this title; sections
5-6-12 and
5-7-18 of this title; and subsection
6-4-3(G) and section 7-1- 5 of this code. Such sections and subsections of this
code shall continue to apply in those instances that this section does not
apply. In the event of any conflict between this section and any other
provision of this code, to the extent this section applies, it shall control.
      3.   Exempt Lighting: The following are exempt from the provisions of
this section:
         a.   Security lighting.
         b.   Doorway lighting within residential zoning districts R1 through
R4.
         c.   All temporary emergency lighting necessary to ensure public
safety as specified by the chief of police, chief fire marshal or other
firefighting or emergency service providers.
         d.   Lighting used in the undertaking of municipal road construction,
emergency repair or maintenance of utility lines, sewer, water mains or similar
public infrastructure.
         e.   Holiday lighting between October 20 and January 31 of the
following year.
         f.   Upward lighting of flags in the form of a single ground mounted,
narrow cone spotlight located at the base of the flagpole which confines the
illumination to the flag itself.
         g.   Underwater lighting used for swimming pools, provided such
lighting meets all relevant electrical codes.
         h.   Temporary lighting used in conjunction with occasional special
events.
         i.   Lighting for radio, communication and navigation towers, provided
that the owner or occupant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the village that
the federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations can only be met through
the use of lighting that does not comply with this section, and that the
provisions of this section are otherwise met to the fullest extent possible.
Lighting for any wireless communications facility shall not be permitted unless
required by the FAA; in which case, required lighting shall be of the lowest
allowed intensity, unless specifically forbidden by the FAA.
         j.   Temporary exterior lighting reviewed and approved in connection
with a permit issued by the village provided that the lighting is extinguished
and removed according to the permit.
         k.   Lighting for outdoor activities, including: pool areas, tennis
courts, paddle courts, hockey and/or skating rinks, horse arenas; provided such
lighting shall be extinguished by eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
         l.   All essential lighting.
      4.   Prohibited Lighting: The following lighting shall not be permitted
within the village, except if exempt under subsection (C)3 of this section:
         a.   Mobile or ground mounted searchlights, except those used for
governmental or emergency purposes.
         b.   Strobe lights and laser lights, including laser light shows and
aerial laser lights.
         c.   Neon lights, except as legally permitted.
         d.   Blinking, flickering, scrolling, rotating, pulsating, tracing
lights or revolving lighting, including on signs.
         e.   Flashing lights unless temporarily triggered by a security system
and extinguished within thirty (30) minutes after the time of security
response.
         f.   Lighting which is used to outline a building, structure, or
window, including neon, fiber optic, light emitting diode (LED), or fluorescent
tube lighting which is used for this purpose.
         g.   Any light fixture that may be construed as or confused with a
traffic signal, traffic control device or maritime navigational markers.
         h.   Lighting that is determined by the village police department to
contribute to a condition of disabling or distracting glare into a public
roadway.
         i.   Illuminated indoor signs visible from outdoors.
         j.   Lighting used to illuminate property other than that on which the
fixture is located and which constitutes light trespass.
   (D)   Residential Lighting Standards: The following residential lighting
standards are established for residential zoning districts R1 through R4,
pursuant to this code, provided, however, that such zoning districts for which
a special use has been issued or is required shall be regulated pursuant to
subsection (E) of this section:
      1.   Protection From Light Trespass And Excessive Lighting: All exterior
lighting shall not cause glare and shall protect adjacent properties, roadways
and waterways from light trespass and excessive lighting.
      2.   Maximum Light Output: For all nonexempt exterior lighting, the
maximum light output shall not exceed a total on any given property under
single ownership and control equal to ten thousand (10,000) lumens multiplied
by the total number of acres of such property.
      3.   Installation Restrictions:
         a.   Fully Shielded; Exceptions: All exterior lighting fixtures shall
be fully shielded or aimed at such an angle so as to eliminate glare from such
lighting fixture, except as follows:
            (1)   Landscape Lighting: Unshielded landscape lighting is
permitted and is not required to be angled downward provided that the light
source is not visible from adjoining properties (defined as seeing the heated
element across property lines) and that each UL rated fixture has a light
output not in excess of one thousand six hundred (1,600) lumens.
            (2)   Driveway/Walkway/Identity Sign/Decorative Lighting:
Unshielded lighting at entryways, including driveways and walkways and lighting
for property identity signs, gates, fences, and post top entrances is permitted
and the fixture is not required to be angled downward provided that each UL
rated fixture has a light output not in excess of one thousand six hundred
(1,600) lumens.
            (3)   House Wash Lighting: Unshielded house wash lighting shall be
permitted in an upward angle so that each UL fixture has a light output not to
exceed one thousand six hundred (1,600) lumens. House wash lighting shall be
extinguished by eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
         b.   Height:
            (1)   The maximum mounting height of a fixture on a structure shall
not exceed the height of the eave of such structure.
            (2)   Except for sports lighting permitted under subsection (D)6 of
this section, all freestanding lighting, including, but not limited to,
landscape lighting affixed, attached, installed, mounted or placed on exterior
vegetation such as trees, shrubs and other flora, shall be angled downward so
as to eliminate glare and shall not exceed a mounting height of eighteen feet
(18'). The setback for freestanding light fixtures from the property line shall
be at least three (3) times the mounting height, except there shall be no
setback requirements for lighting mounted on gates and fences, provided such
lighting does not exceed 0.1 foot-candle of illuminance.
      4.   Hours Of Operation: Landscape lighting shall not be operated between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to dawn, provided, however, solar
powered landscape lighting that lacks an on/off switch may be operated between
the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to dawn, further provided that such
solar powered landscape lighting does not exceed 0.1 foot-candle of
illuminance, subject to subsections (D)2 and (D)3 of this section.
      5.   Prohibited Light Fixtures: Mercury vapor light fixtures which are
not fully shielded are not permitted.
      6.   Sports Lighting: For sports lighting the following shall apply:
         a.   Light fixtures shall be shielded as designed and installed.
         b.   Light levels shall not exceed the appropriate Illuminating
Engineering Society Of North America (IESNA) recommended level of spectator/
play for the activity.
         c.   Sports lighting shall be set to automatically shut off when there
is no scheduled play and shall be extinguished no later than eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. Lower light levels for off the field lighting may be provided for
an additional thirty (30) minutes for safe egress.
         d.   The mounting height for sports lighting shall be no greater than
one-fourth (1/4) the distance to the property line from where the sports
lighting is located and shall not exceed eighteen feet (18').
         e.   Sports lighting trespass shall not exceed at any point on the
property line: 0.1 foot-candle of illuminance.
         f.   Designs for all sports lighting shall be submitted to the village
prior to installation to assure that the requirements of this subsection (D)6
are satisfied.
   (E)   Nonresidential Lighting Standards: The following nonresidential
lighting standards are restricted to business zoning districts B1 through B4,
BP and LID, pursuant to this code and for any properties within residential
zoning districts R1 through R4 for which a special use permit has been issued
or is required:
      1.   Protection From Light Trespass And Excessive Lighting: All
nonresidential exterior lighting shall not cause glare and shall protect
adjacent properties, roadways and waterways from light trespass and excessive
lighting.
      2.   Maximum Lumen Output: As determined by photometric plans or as
certified by the manufacturer, the maximum lumen output shall not exceed fifty
thousand (50,000) lumens per acre, with no more than five thousand (5,000) of
those lumens being unshielded.
      3.   Installation Restrictions:
         a.   Fully Shielded; Exceptions: All exterior lighting fixtures shall
be fully shielded and aimed straight downward with the following exceptions:
            (1)   Doorways: Unshielded nonresidential light fixtures located
within ten feet (10') of a doorway are permitted on the primary structure
provided that the fixture(s) is UL listed and lamped at no greater than one
thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens per doorway, regardless of the number of
lamps.
            (2)   Landscape Lighting: Unshielded landscape lighting is
permitted provided that the light source is not visible (defined as seeing the
heated element across property lines) and that the UL rated fixture has a light
output not in excess of one thousand six hundred (1,600) lumens.
         b.   Signs: Lamps used for illumination of such signs shall be
included in the total lumens per acre and shall be turned off at eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. or when the business closes, whichever is earlier.
         c.   Height: The maximum mounting height of a fixture, except for
fixtures in subsection (E)9 of this section, shall not exceed eighteen feet
(18').
      4.   Fixture Setback: The setback distance for freestanding light
fixtures to the property line shall be no less than three (3) times the
mounting height unless it can be demonstrated on a lighting plan that with the
use of a back side shield, all light trespass limits are met, provided,
however, there shall be no setback requirements for lighting mounted on gates
and fences, provided such lighting does not exceed 0.1 foot-candle of
illuminance.
      5.   Hours Of Operation: All conforming and nonconforming exterior
lighting shall be turned off within one-half (1/2) hour after the close of
business and no later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Lights needed for safety
or emergency purposes shall be controlled by timers or motion sensors.
      6.   Lamp Types: In an effort to foster sustainability, the village
encourages energy efficient light sources. High pressure sodium, fluorescent,
low pressure sodium lamps or metal halide shall be used for all light fixtures
UL rated to be lamped greater than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens.
Mercury vapor shall not be permitted.
      7.   Light Trespass Limits: Lighting plans submitted for approval shall
comply with the following:
         a.   The maximum illuminance at or beyond the property line that
adjoins a residential parcel, nature preserve or waterway may not exceed 0.1
foot-candle of illuminance horizontal on the ground or 0.1 foot-candle of
illuminance vertical measured at a five foot (5') height above the ground,
unless otherwise permitted by applicable law.
         b.   Maximum horizontal or vertical illuminance allowed between
adjacent commercial properties or public right of way shall be 0.1 foot-candle.
      8.   Parking Lot Illumination: All parking lot fixtures shall be fully
shielded and aimed straight downward.
      9.   Sports Lighting: For sports lighting where the nighttime activity is
authorized by a permit, the following shall apply:
         a.   Light fixtures shall be shielded as designed and installed.
         b.   Light levels shall not exceed the appropriate Illuminating
Engineering Society Of North America (IESNA) recommended level of spectator/
play for the activity.
         c.   Sports lighting shall be set to automatically shut off when there
is no scheduled play and shall be extinguished no later than eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. Lower light levels for off the field lighting may be provided for
an additional thirty (30) minutes for safe egress.
         d.   The mounting height for sports lighting shall be no greater than
one-fourth (1/4) the distance to the property line from where the sports
lighting is located and shall not exceed eighteen feet (18').
         e.   Sports lighting trespass shall not exceed at any point on the
property line: 0.1 foot-candle of illuminance.
         f.   Sports lighting shall not be installed on properties which are
less than five (5) acres.
         g.   Designs for all sports lighting shall be submitted to the village
prior to installation to assure that the requirements of this subsection (E)9
are satisfied.
      10.   Special Use: The village in granting a special use permit may
establish additional regulations or waive the regulations set forth herein.
      11.   Approval: All nonresidential lighting shall be reviewed by the plan
commission in accordance with subsection (G) of this section and approved by
the village board.
   (F)   Amortization: In order to provide consistency throughout the village
and carry out the requirements of this section, the following sunset provisions
shall be implemented with respect to phasing out preexisting, nonconforming
lighting within business zoning districts B1 through B4, BP and LID.
      1.   All lighting plans approved prior to the effective date of this
section and installed in connection with a site plan, but not in compliance
with this section, shall be brought into compliance within ten (10) years from
the date of the lighting plan approval, or in connection with a new development
proposal, whichever comes first.
      2.   On or before January 1, 2012, all preexisting exterior lighting,
exclusive of permitted sign lighting, shall be extinguished one-half (1/2) hour
after close of business exclusive of operational motion sensor activated light
fixtures, provided such lighting is not activated by activity off the property.
      3.   Mercury vapor light fixtures shall be removed on or before January
1, 2012.
      4.   All other preexisting, nonresidential lighting shall conform to the
provisions of this section by January 1, 2017.
   (G)   Procedures:
      1.   Any applications for proposed or required nonresidential lighting
plans submitted to the plan commission shall include exterior lighting plans,
fixture and lighting control specifications, along with any additional
documentation required by the plan commission in order to verify that the
proposed exterior lighting conforms to the provisions of this section.
      2.   The following items shall accompany a lighting plan submission for
review and approval by the plan commission:
         a.   A site plan complete with all existing and proposed structures,
parking spaces, building entrances, traffic areas (both vehicular and
pedestrian), vegetation that might interfere with lighting, indicating with
shading or highlighting, all areas where pedestrians shall be walking or where
pedestrians may come in conflict with vehicles. The site plan shall show, by
location, and identify each existing and proposed fixture and shall specify its
installed height, pole foundation details and mounting methods.
         b.   A detailed lighting plan when the total number for all exterior
light fixtures on the property, exclusive of sign lighting, exceeds five
thousand (5,000) lumens, indicating initial illuminance levels as expressed in
foot-candle measurements on a grid of the site showing foot-candle readings in
every five foot (5') square. The grid shall include the location and installed
height of each existing and proposed fixture (i.e., pole mounted lights, wall
mounted lights and lighting, including streetlights), and the overall light
levels in foot-candles on the entire site. The grid shall extend at least
twenty feet (20') beyond the site property lines, indicating the zoning of all
adjacent properties to assure compliance with light trespass requirements.
Photometric plans shall be prepared by the fixture manufacturer or a licensed
professional, architect or engineer and shall provide calculation of average
maintained foot-candles, maximum and minimum foot-candle readings, and the
average to minimum and the maximum to minimum uniformity ratios.
         c.   A description of each light fixture as depicted and identified on
the site plan including the manufacturer, model number, a photograph of the
fixture and a manufacturer's catalog cut sheet, detailed IES formatted
photometric data, a description of the cutoff characteristics of each fixture,
light output in initial lumens and lamp type, verifying any compliance
requirements specified within this section.
         d.   Mounting height indicated with distance to nearest property line
for each proposed and existing fixture, including pole foundation description.
         e.   Shielding or glare reduction devices and all mounting details.
         f.   Types of timing devices or motion sensor devices used to control
the fixtures and a schedule of the proposed hours when each fixture will be
operated.
         g.   Total exterior lamp lumens for all fixtures on the property,
calculated at initial lumen output.
         h.   A summary key table identifying the maximum, minimum and average
light levels in foot-candles as well as uniformity ratios for all parking areas
and walkways.
      3.   When considering a site plan application, the plan commission may
require the use of motion sensor devices to control lighting for illumination
of a building entrance, recreation area, parking area, accessways or other such
areas.
      4.   In nonresidential zoning districts, when a site plan includes
additions to or modifications of an existing lighting system where the proposed
changes will increase the lighting on the site by more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the preexisting light output, the plan commission may require that all
or part of the preexisting lighting be changed to conform with the provisions
of this section.
      5.   Appropriate exterior lighting levels may be influenced by the
general nature of the surrounding environment, subject to village approval.
      6.   No exterior lighting shall be installed, replaced, substituted,
altered, changed, repaired, relocated, enlarged, moved, improved or converted
unless it conforms to a lighting plan approved by the plan commission. At its
discretion, the village may not require foot-candle renderings when the
exterior lighting for the entire site does not exceed five thousand (5,000)
lumens.
      7.   Where new installations have been designed by a licensed architect
or lighting engineer, he or she shall conduct a postinstallation inspection to
verify compliance with the approved plan. Such architect or engineer shall
submit a certification to the village, verifying that such inspection was
performed and that the installed system operates and is in conformance with the
approved plan prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or other
village approval.
      8.   The village shall have the right to conduct a postinstallation
inspection to verify compliance with the requirements of this section and, if
appropriate, to require remedial action at the expense of the applicant.
      9.   Guidelines will be made available to applicants to facilitate
compliance.
   (H)   Penalties:
      1.   Nonessential lighting or prohibited lighting can be ordered by the
village police department or the enforcing officer to be extinguished,
including mobile or ground mounted searchlights, laser light shows, decorative
flashing, blinking or tracing lights, exclusive of exempt lighting, at any
time.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, owner, tenant, person in
possession, partnership, corporation or other business entity to install,
alter, repair, move, equip, use or maintain or allow such installation of any
exterior lighting in violation of any of the provisions of this section, or to
fail in any manner to comply with a notice, directive or order of the village.
      3.   If, after investigation, the enforcing officer finds that any
provision of this section is being violated, notice shall be given by hand
delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of such violation to
the owner and/or to the occupant of such premises, demanding that the violation
be abated within thirty (30) days of the date of hand delivery or of the date
of mailing of the notice. Applicable staff shall be available to assist in
working with the violator to correct said lighting violation. If the violation
is not abated within the thirty (30) day period, the enforcing officer may
institute actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, to enjoin,
restrain or abate any violations of this section and to collect the penalties
for such violations.
      4.   A violation of this section, or any provision thereof, shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential
violations and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for nonresidential
violations for each day of the violation after the expiration of the thirty
(30) day period, and each day shall constitute a separate offense for the
purpose of calculating the civil penalty. (Ord. 11-01, 1-24-2011)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Establishment of Districts
5-4-2: Official Zoning Map
5-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Zoning Title, the
Village is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
   R1    Single-Family Residence District
   R2    Single-Family Residence District
   R3    Single-Family Residence District
   R4    Single-Family Residence District
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
   B1    Restricted Business District
   B2    Restricted Service District
   B3    General Business District
   B4    General Service District
MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
   Light Industrial District
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
5-4-2: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
   (A)   There shall be an Official Zoning Map of the Village, which shall show
the location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by Section
5-4-1 and other applicable provisions of this Zoning Title.
   (B)   The Official Zoning Map shall be published no later than March 31 of
each year, if there have been changes made to the zoning map in the preceding
calendar year. If in any calendar year after the first map is published there
are no changes in zoning uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations and
classifications in the village, or a text amendment affecting all property in a
designated zoning category no map shall be published for such calendar year.
The zoning map shall be adopted by resolution of the Board of Trustees, and
made available for review and purchase at the Village Hall.
   (C)   The following rules shall be applied by the Enforcing Officer whenever
any uncertainty exists as to the boundary line of any district as shown on the
Official Zoning Map.
      1.   In areas subdivided into lots or blocks, district boundary lines,
where indicated on the map, shall be construed to coincide with lot lines.
Where a boundary line coincides with the lot line of a Subdivision which
existed on the effective date of the incorporation of such Subdivision into the
Village, the district boundary lines shall be construed to be the subdivision
line at that location.
      2.   District boundary lines, where indicated on the map, shall be
construed to coincide with the center line of the right of way for toll roads,
expressways, highways, public or private streets, alleys, private easements, or
railroads.
      3.   District boundary lines for areas not subdivided into lots or blocks
shall be measured, in accordance with the scale shown on the map, at right
angles from the nearest adjacent and parallel center line of a street, highway
or railroad right of way or section, quarter section or similar such divisions
of range and township lines. (Ord. 84-34, 10-22-84; amd. Ord. 84-2, 1-23-84;
Ord. 19-13, 6-24-19)
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Use, Lot And Bulk Regulations
5-5-2: Permitted Uses
5-5-3: Special Uses
5-5-4: Lot Area
5-5-4-1: Minimum Lot Area, Permitted Uses
5-5-4-2: Minimum Lot Area, Special Uses
5-5-4-3: Minimum Lot Area, Accessory Uses
5-5-5: Average Lot Width
5-5-5-1: Minimum Average Lot Width, Permitted Uses
5-5-5-2: Minimum Average Lot Width, Special Uses
5-5-5-3: Minimum Average Lot Width, Accessory Uses
5-5-6: Front Yards
5-5-6-1: Minimum Front Yard, Permitted Uses
5-5-6-2: Minimum Front Yard, Special Uses
5-5-6-3: Minimum Front Yard, Accessory Uses
5-5-7: Interior Side Yards
5-5-7-1: Minimum Interior Side Yard, Permitted Uses
5-5-7-2: Minimum Interior Side Yard, Special Uses
5-5-7-3: Minimum Interior Side Yard, Accessory Uses
5-5-8: Corner Side Yards
5-5-8-1: Minimum Corner Side Yard, Permitted Uses
5-5-8-2: Minimum Corner Side Yard, Special Uses
5-5-8-3: Minimum Corner Side Yard, Accessory Uses
5-5-9: Rear Yards
5-5-9-1: Minimum Rear Yard, Permitted Uses
5-5-9-2: Minimum Rear Yard, Special Uses
5-5-9-3: Minimum Rear Yard, Accessory Uses
5-5-10: Floor Area Ratio
5-5-10-1: Maximum Floor Area Ratio, Permitted Uses
5-5-10-2: Maximum Floor Area Ratio, Special Uses
5-5-10-3: Maximum Floor Area Ratio, Accessory Buildings
5-5-11: [Reserved]
5-5-12: Off Street Parking, General Requirements
5-5-13: Off Street Parking, Specific Requirements
5-5-14: Off Street Loading, General Requirements
5-5-15: Off Street Loading, Specific Requirements
5-5-1: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to residence districts are
set forth in the following sections of this chapter. Also applying to residence
districts are regulations set forth in other chapters of this title as follows:
   Chapter 2, "Zoning Definitions", of this title.
   Chapter 3, "General Zoning Provisions", of this title.
   Chapter 9, "Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Uses", of this title.
   Chapter 10, "Administration And Enforcement", of this title. (Ord. 63-1, 4-
1-1963)
5-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted
in the districts indicated under the conditions specified. Other than accessory
uses, only one of the enumerated permitted uses may be established on a zoning
lot. Unless otherwise specifically set forth, wherever a permitted use is named
as a major category in this chapter, it shall be deemed to include all and only
those itemized uses listed under the said major category in the R1 through R4
districts, as set forth in this section. No building or zoning lot shall be
devoted to any use other than a use permitted hereinafter in the zoning
district in which such building or zoning lot shall be located, with the
exception of the following:
Special uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of section
5-5-3 of this chapter.
Uses lawfully established on April 1, 1963, subject to the regulations of
chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 09-05, 5-18-2009)
   (A)   Permitted Uses, R1 District: The following uses are permitted in the
R1 district:
      Accessory uses, incidental to and on the same or an adjacent zoning lot
or lots under one ownership, as the principal use:
         Agricultural buildings and structures.
         Garages and carports, as accessory only to single- family detached
dwellings.
         Greenhouses and conservatories, private.
         Guesthouses, private, as accessory only to single- family detached
dwellings.
         Home occupations, as accessory only to single-family detached
dwellings.
         Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises if
occupied only by such persons and their immediate family, as accessory only to
single- family detached dwellings.
         Playhouses.
         Roadside stands, as accessory only to agriculture.
         Satellite antennas, private.
         Sewage disposal units, individual, as regulated by section
5-3-5 of this title.
         Stables.
         Storage of building materials and equipment, and temporary buildings
for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such
construction.
         Swimming pools, as accessory only to single-family detached dwellings.
         Tennis courts, private, as accessory only to single-family detached
dwellings.
         Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings, for the storage of
domestic supplies.
         Water systems, individual, as regulated by section
5-3-5 of this title.
      Agriculture.
      Signs, as regulated by chapter 5-11.
      Single-family detached dwellings, provided that the owner, lessee or
manager of any single-family dwelling with three (3) or less domiciled,
unrelated minors maintain and provide to the Village, upon request, proof of a
State license, to the extent such license is required.
   (B)   Permitted Uses, R2 District:
      Any use permitted in the R1 district.
   (C)   Permitted Uses, R3 District:
      Any use permitted in the R1 district.
   (D)   Permitted Uses, R4 District:
      Any use permitted in the R1 district. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord. 09-
05, 5-18-2009; Ord. 14-19, 12-15-2014; Ord. 16-22, 12-7-2016; Ord. 21-21, 12-
16-2021)
5-5-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed in the zoning districts
indicated, subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with
the provisions of section
5-10-7 of this title. Unless otherwise specifically set forth, wherever a
special use is named as a major category in this chapter, it shall be deemed to
include all and only those itemized uses listed under the said major category
in the R1 district, subsection (A) of this section.
   (A)   Special Uses, R1 District: The following special uses may be allowed
in the R1 district:
      Accessory uses, incidental to and on the same or adjacent zoning lot or
lots under one ownership as the principal use, as established in subsection
5-5-2(A) of this chapter.
      Amateur radio and television stations and towers (transmitting and
receiving).
      Animal rescue shelters.
      Artificial lakes.
      Boathouses, private.
      Cemeteries:
         Cemeteries.
         Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums in cemeteries.
      Educational institutions and cultural institutions:
         Athletic fields and playgrounds on the grounds of educational or
cultural institutions.
         Colleges, junior colleges and universities, including fraternity and
sorority houses, dormitories and other structures and facilities necessary in
the operation of a college or university, but not business colleges or trade
schools.
         Nursery, elementary and high schools.
         Public libraries and public art galleries.
      Landfill.
      Non-Commercial Event Facility: As accessory only to single-family
detached dwellings, which are owner occupied. In no event shall any stand-alone
structure housing a non-commercial event facility have a floor area exceeding
the floor area of the existing single-family dwelling on site. Such use allows
the use of permanent structures or facilities to accommodate events, parties,
art or cultural exhibitions, lectures, conferences, theatrical productions, or
other scheduled and periodically held private non-commercial events. Non-
commercial event facility does not limit the use of property for events held
intermittently strictly for the benefit of the owner of the property (e.g.,
family wedding, birthday, etc.)
      Private landing fields for aircraft.
      Public utility and service uses:
         Electric substations.
         Fire stations.
         Gas regulator stations.
         Police stations.
         Post offices.
         Railroad right of way, but not including railroad yards and shops.
         Telephone exchanges and telephone transmission equipment buildings.
         Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants.
         Other governmental buildings, including a village hall.
      Recreational facilities:
         Athletic fields and playgrounds in public parks.
         Buildings, clubhouses and accessory structures, located on the grounds
of athletic fields, playgrounds, recreational clubs, golf courses and polo
fields, including the sale therein of sports equipment and the serving of
beverages, including alcoholic beverages, and food, if incidental to the
principal activity.
         Forest preserves.
         Golf courses, but not including commercially operated driving ranges,
pitch and putt, miniature or par 3 courses, and not including buildings or
structures.
         Grounds of recreational clubs, noncommercial.
         Polo fields, except their buildings and structures.
         Public parks.
      Religious institutions:
         Athletic fields and playgrounds on the grounds of religious
institutions.
         Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues.
         Columbariums associated with religious institutions.
         Rectories, parsonages and parish houses.
      Signs, which shall be deemed accessory to the principal use of the zoning
lot or lots.
   (B)   Special Uses, R2 District:
      Any use allowed as a special use in the R1 district.
   (C)   Special Uses, R3 District:
      Any use allowed as a special use in the R1 district, with the exception
of the following:
      Amateur radio and television stations and towers (transmitting and
receiving).
      Private landing fields for aircraft.
   (D)   Special Uses, R4 District:
      Any use allowed as a special use in the R1 district, with the exception
of the following:
      Amateur radio and television stations and towers (transmitting and
receiving).
      Private landing fields for aircraft. (Ord. 09-05, 5-18-2009; amd. Ord.
90-07, 7-27-2009; Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020; Ord. 21-04, 4-26-2021)
5-5-4: LOT AREA:
Lot area requirements shall be as set forth under each zoning district.
   (A)   No use shall be established or hereafter maintained on a lot recorded
after April 1, 1963, which is of less area than prescribed hereinafter for such
use in the zoning district in which it is to be located, unless such lot is a
lot of record or is subject to the provisions of subsection (C) of this
section.
   (B)   In any residence district, on a lot which is a lot of record, a
single-family dwelling may be established regardless of the area of the lot,
provided that all other requirements of this title are met.
   (C)   A zoning lot that is a conforming lot or an existing lot of record
that is reduced in area by the exercise of the right of eminent domain by an
authorized governmental body or by reason of a conveyance to an authorized
governmental body under threat of eminent domain if such lot is no longer
conforming, shall be treated as a lot of record for purposes of this section.
   (D)   In any residence district, a lot of record which does not meet the
area requirements of this title may be voluntarily increased in area, provided
that all other requirements of this title are met.
   (E)   No existing building shall be converted so as to conflict with, or
further conflict with, the lot area requirements of the district in which such
building is located. (Ord. 13-12, 7-22-2013)
5-5-4-1: MINIMUM LOT AREA, PERMITTED USES:
For each principal permitted use in section
5-5-2 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a zoning
lot shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified in this
section.
Agriculture:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 5 acres
 R3 5 acres
 R4 5 acres
Single-family detached dwellings:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 3 acres
 R3 2 acres
 R4 1 acre
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-4-2: MINIMUM LOT AREA, SPECIAL USES:
For each principal special use in section
5-5-3 of this chapter located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a zoning lot
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified in this
section.
Amateur radio and television stations and towers:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Artificial lakes:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Boathouses, private:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 3 acres
 R3 2 acres
 R4 1 acre
Cemeteries:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 5 acres
 R3 5 acres
 R4 5 acres
Educational institutions and cultural institutions:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 5 acres
 R3 5 acres
 R4 5 acres
Private landing fields for aircraft:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Public utility and service uses:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Recreational facilities:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 5 acres
 R3 5 acres
 R4 5 acres
Religious institutions:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 5 acres
 R3 5 acres
 R4 5 acres
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 89-7, 6-26-1989; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-
1993; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-4-3: MINIMUM LOT AREA, ACCESSORY USES:
For each accessory use in sections
5-5-2 and
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the minimum
lot area requirements shall not be less than those specified for the principal
uses in sections
5-5-4-1 and
5-5-4-2 of this chapter; except, however, the following accessory uses which
must meet the minimum lot area requirements specified in this section:
Guesthouses, private:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 3 acres
 R3 3 acres
 R4 3 acres
Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 3 acres
 R3 3 acres
 R4 3 acres
Sewage disposal units, individual:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 3 acres
 R3 2 acres
 R4 1 acre
Stables:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 5 acres
 R3 5 acres
 R4 5 acres
Water systems, individual:
 R1 5 acres
 R2 3 acres
 R3 2 acres
 R4 1 acre
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-1993; Ord. 06-03, 2-27-
2006)
5-5-5: AVERAGE LOT WIDTH:
Average lot width requirements shall be as set forth under each zoning
district.
   (A)   No use shall be established on a lot which was recorded as a lot after
January 26, 1981, which is of less "average lot width", as that phrase is
defined and determined according to section
5-2-1 of this title, than is prescribed hereinafter for such use in the zoning
district in which it is to be located.
   (B)   In any residence district, on a lot which was recorded between April
1, 1963 and January 26, 1981, the average lot width as prescribed hereinafter
shall be calculated using only the front lot line.
   (C)   In any residence district, on a lot which is a lot of record, a
single-family dwelling may be established regardless of the width of the lot,
provided that all other requirements of this title are met.
   (D)   A zoning lot that is a conforming lot or an existing lot of record
that is reduced in width by the exercise of the right of eminent domain by an
authorized governmental body or by reason of a conveyance under threat of
eminent domain if such lot is no longer conforming, shall be treated as a lot
of record for purposes of this section. (Ord. 13-12, 7-22-2013)
5-5-5-1: MINIMUM AVERAGE LOT WIDTH, PERMITTED USES:
For each principal permitted use in section
5-5-2 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a minimum
average lot width shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
specified in this section.
Agriculture:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Single-family detached dwellings:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 250 feet
 R3 200 feet
 R4 150 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-5-2: MINIMUM AVERAGE LOT WIDTH, SPECIAL USES:
For each principal special use in section
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a minimum
average lot width shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
specified in this section.
Amateur radio and television stations and towers:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Artificial lakes:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Boathouses, private:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 250 feet
 R3 200 feet
 R4 150 feet
Cemeteries:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Educational institutions and cultural institutions:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Private landing fields for aircraft:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Public utility and service uses:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Recreational facilities:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Religious institutions:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-1993; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-
1996)
5-5-5-3: MINIMUM AVERAGE LOT WIDTH, ACCESSORY USES:
For each accessory use in sections
5-5-2 and
5-5-3 of the chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the minimum
average lot width requirements shall not be less than those specified for the
principal uses in sections
5-5-5-1 and
5-5-5-2 of this chapter; except, however, the following accessory uses which
must meet the minimum average lot width requirements specified in this section:
Guesthouses, private:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 250 feet
 R3 250 feet
 R4 250 feet
Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 250 feet
 R3 250 feet
 R4 250 feet
Sewage disposal units, individual:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 250 feet
 R3 200 feet
 R4 150 feet
Stables:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Water systems, individual:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 250 feet
 R3 200 feet
 R4 150 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-1993; Ord. 06-03, 2-27-
2006)
5-5-6: FRONT YARDS:
Front yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter
indicated. Front yards shall be unobstructed from ground level to sky, except
as allowed in section
5-3-9 of this title. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code)
5-5-6-1: MINIMUM FRONT YARD, PERMITTED USES:
For each principal permitted use in section
5-5-2 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a front
yard shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified in this
section.
Agriculture:
 R1 No requirements
 R2 No requirements
 R3 No requirements
 R4 No requirements
Single-family detached dwellings:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-6-2: MINIMUM FRONT YARD, SPECIAL USES:
For each principal special use in section
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a front
yard shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified in this
section.
Amateur radio and television stations and towers:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Artificial lakes:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Boathouses, private:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Cemeteries:
 R1 No requirements
 R2 No requirements
 R3 No requirements
 R4 No requirements
Educational institutions and cultural institutions:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
Private landing fields for aircraft:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Public utility and service uses:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Recreational facilities:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Religious institutions:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 89-7, 6-26-1989; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-
1993; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-6-3: MINIMUM FRONT YARD, ACCESSORY USES:
For each accessory use in sections
5-5-2 and
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the minimum
front yard requirements shall not be less than those specified for the
principal uses in sections
5-5-6-1 and
5-5-6-2 of this chapter; except, however, the following accessory uses which
must meet the minimum front yard requirements specified in this section:
Agricultural buildings and structures:
 R1 150 feet
 R2 150 feet
 R3 150 feet
 R4 150 feet
Guesthouses, private:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 Front yard requirements of the R1 district shall apply
 R3 Front yard requirements of the R1 district shall apply
 R4 Front yard requirements of the R1 district shall apply
Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 Front yard requirements of the R1 district shall apply
 R3 Front yard requirements of the R1 district shall apply
 R4 Front yard requirements of the R1 district shall apply
Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums in cemeteries:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Roadside stands:
 R1 20 feet
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Satellite antennas, private:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Stables:
 R1 150 feet
 R2 150 feet
 R3 150 feet
 R4 150 feet
Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Temporary buildings for construction purposes:
 R1 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R2 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R3 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R4 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 84-17, 7-23-1984; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-
1993; Ord. 06-03, 2-27-2006; Ord. 09-05, 5-18-2009)
5-5-7: INTERIOR SIDE YARDS:
Interior side yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations
hereinafter indicated. Interior side yards shall be unobstructed from ground
level to sky, except as allowed in section
5-3-9 of this title. All accessory buildings which are attached to principal
buildings (as attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the
principal buildings. However, on a lot of record which is less than one hundred
feet (100') in width, each side yard shall be not less than ten percent (10%)
of the lot width, but in no case less than five feet (5'); or if the width of
such a lot shall be less than one hundred fifty feet (150') but shall be one
hundred feet (100') or more, each side yard shall be not less than fifteen
percent (15%) of the lot width. (Ord. 89-8, 7-24-1989)
5-5-7-1: MINIMUM INTERIOR SIDE YARD, PERMITTED USES:
For each principal permitted use in section
5-5-2 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the
interior side yards shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
specified in this section.
Agriculture:
 R1 No requirements
 R2 No requirements
 R3 No requirements
 R4 No requirements
Single-family detached dwellings:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 35 feet
 R4 25 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-7-2: MINIMUM INTERIOR SIDE YARD, SPECIAL USES:
For each principal special use in section
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the
interior side yards shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
specified in this section.
Amateur radio and television stations and towers:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Artificial lakes:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Boathouses, private:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 35 feet
 R4 25 feet
Cemeteries:
 R1 No requirements
 R2 No requirements
 R3 No requirements
 R4 No requirements
Educational institutions and cultural institutions:
 R1 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R2 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R3 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R4 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
Private landing fields for aircraft:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Public utility and service uses:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Recreational facilities:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Religious institutions:
 R1 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R2 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R3 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R4 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 89-7, 6-26-1989; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-
1993; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-7-3: MINIMUM INTERIOR SIDE YARD, ACCESSORY USES:
For each accessory use in sections
5-5-2 and
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the minimum
interior side yard requirements shall not be less than those specified for the
principal uses in sections
5-5-7-1 and
5-5-7-2 of this chapter; except, however, the following accessory uses which
must meet the minimum interior side yard requirements specified in this
section:
Agricultural buildings and structures:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Buildings accessory to single-family dwellings, except those uses specifically
itemized in this section:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 35 feet
 R4 25 feet
Guesthouses, private:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums in cemeteries:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Roadside stands:
 R1 75 feet
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Stables:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Temporary buildings for construction purposes:
 R1 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R2 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R3 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R4 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-1993; Ord. 06-03, 2-27-
2006; Ord. 09-05, 5-18-2009)
5-5-8: CORNER SIDE YARDS:
Corner side yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations
hereinafter indicated. Corner side yards shall be unobstructed from ground
level to the sky, except as allowed in section
5-3-9 of this title. All accessory buildings which are attached to principal
buildings (as attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the
principal buildings.
On a reversed corner lot, the side yard adjacent to the street shall be in no
case less in width than fifty percent (50%) of the least depth required under
this title for the front yard of the next property to the rear fronting on such
street. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code)
5-5-8-1: MINIMUM CORNER SIDE YARD, PERMITTED USES:
For each principal permitted use in section
5-5-2 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a corner
side yard shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified in
this section.
Agriculture:
 R1 No requirement
 R2 No requirement
 R3 No requirement
 R4 No requirement
Single-family detached dwellings:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 35 feet
 R4 25 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-8-2: MINIMUM CORNER SIDE YARD, SPECIAL USES:
For each principal special use in section
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a corner
side yard shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified in
this section.
Amateur radio and television stations and towers:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Artificial lakes:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Boathouses, private:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 35 feet
 R4 25 feet
Cemeteries:
 R1 No requirement
 R2 No requirement
 R3 No requirement
 R4 No requirement
Educational institutions and cultural institutions:
 R1 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R2 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R3 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R4 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
Private landing field for aircraft:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Public utility and service uses:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Recreational facilities:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Religious institutions:
 R1 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R2 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R3 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 R4 50 feet, plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building height exceeds
     15 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 89-7, 6-26-1989; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-
1993; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-8-3: MINIMUM CORNER SIDE YARD, ACCESSORY USES:
For each accessory use in sections
5-5-2 and
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the minimum
corner side yard requirements shall not be less than those specified for the
principal uses in sections
5-5-8-1 and
5-5-8-2 of this chapter; except, however, the following accessory uses which
must meet the minimum corner side yard requirements specified in this section:
Agricultural buildings and structures:
 R1 150 feet
 R3 150 feet
 R3 150 feet
 R4 150 feet
Guesthouses, private:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums in cemeteries:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Roadside stands:
 R1 75 feet
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Satellite antennas, private:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
Stables:
 R1 150 feet
 R2 150 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Temporary buildings for construction purposes:
 R1 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R2 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R3 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R4 No requirements, provided there that there shall not be undue interference
     with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 84-17, 7-23-1984; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-
1993; Ord. 06-03, 2-27-2006; Ord. 09-05, 5-18-2009)
5-5-9: REAR YARDS:
Rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter
indicated. Rear yards shall be unobstructed from ground level to the sky,
except as allowed in section
5-3-9 of this title. All accessory buildings which are attached to principal
buildings (as attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the
principal buildings. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code)
5-5-9-1: MINIMUM REAR YARD, PERMITTED USES:
For each principal permitted use in section
5-5-2 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a rear yard
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified in this
section.
Agriculture:
 R1 No requirements
 R2 No requirements
 R3 No requirements
 R4 No requirements
Single-family detached dwellings:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-9-2: MINIMUM REAR YARD, SPECIAL USES:
For each principal special use in section
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a rear yard
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified in this
section.
Amateur radio and television stations and towers:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Artificial lakes:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Boathouse, private:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Cemeteries:
 R1 No requirements
 R2 No requirements
 R3 No requirements
 R4 No requirements
Educational institutions and cultural institutions:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Private landing fields for aircraft:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Public utility and service uses:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Recreational facilities:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Religious institutions:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 89-7, 6-26-1989; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-
1993; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996)
5-5-9-3: MINIMUM REAR YARD, ACCESSORY USES:
For each accessory use in sections
5-5-2 and
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the minimum
rear yard requirements shall not be less than those specified for the principal
uses in sections
5-5-9-1 and
5-5-9-2 of this chapter; except, however, the following accessory uses which
must meet the minimum rear yard requirements specified in this section:
Agricultural buildings and structures:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Buildings accessory to single-family dwellings, except those uses specifically
itemized in this section:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
Guesthouses, private:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises:
 R1 50 feet
 R2 50 feet
 R3 50 feet
 R4 50 feet
Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums in cemeteries:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Roadside stands:
 R1 No requirements
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Stables:
 R1 100 feet
 R2 100 feet
 R3 100 feet
 R4 100 feet
Stadiums and grandstands in athletic fields:
 R1 300 feet
 R2 300 feet
 R3 300 feet
 R4 300 feet
Temporary buildings for construction purposes:
 R1 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R2 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R3 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 R4 No requirements, provided that there shall not be undue interference with
     the use and enjoyment of neighboring property
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 93-10, 9-27-1993; Ord. 06-03, 2-27-
2006; Ord. 09-05, 5-18-2009)
5-5-10: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
The floor area ratio requirements, as set forth under each zoning district,
shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings
(total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to
the gross area of the zoning lot. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code)
5-5-10-1: MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO, PERMITTED USES:
For each principal permitted use in section
5-5-2 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a maximum
floor area ratio shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
specified in this section.
 
Single-family detached dwellings:
 R1 0.05 times the lot area
 R2 0.08 times the lot area
 R3 0.12 times the lot area
 R4 0.15 times the lot area
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord. 72-16, 12-18-1972; 1977 Code; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-
1996)
5-5-10-2: MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO, SPECIAL USES:
For each principal special use in section
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, a maximum
floor area ratio shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
specified in this section.
Amateur radio and television stations and towers:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 Not allowed
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Cemeteries:
 R1 0.05 times the lot area
 R2 0.05 times the lot area
 R3 0.05 times the lot area
 R4 0.05 times the lot area
Educational institutions and cultural institutions:
 R1 0.05 times the lot area
 R2 0.05 times the lot area
 R3 0.05 times the lot area
 R4 0.05 times the lot area
Private landing field for aircraft:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 Not allowed
 R4 Not allowed
Public utility and service uses:
 R1 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R2 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R3 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
 R4 As specified by the zoning board of appeals
Recreational facilities:
 R1 0.05 times the lot area
 R2 0.05 times the lot area
 R3 0.05 times the lot area
 R4 0.05 times the lot area
Religious institutions:
 R1 0.05 times the lot area
 R2 0.05 times the lot area
 R3 0.05 times the lot area
 R4 0.05 times the lot area
 
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 96-3, 3-20-1996; Ord. 96-10, 5-20-
1996)
5-5-10-3: MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
For each accessory building in sections
5-5-2 and
5-5-3 of this chapter, located in the R1 to R4 districts inclusive, the maximum
floor area ratio shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
specified in this section.
   (A)   R1 District: In an R1 district the floor area of the accessory
buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the
zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in sections
5-5-10-1 and
5-5-10-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   R2 District: In an R2 district the floor area of the accessory
buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the
zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in sections
5-5-10-1 and
5-5-10-2 of this chapter.
   (C)   R3 District: In an R3 district the floor area of the accessory
buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the
zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in sections
5-5-10-1 and
5-5-10-2 of this chapter.
   (D)   R4 District: In an R4 district the floor area of the accessory
buildings shall be included in the total allowable floor area permitted on the
zoning lot, as specified for the principal uses in sections
5-5-10-1 and
5-5-10-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code)
5-5-11: [RESERVED]:
5-5-12: OFF-STREET PARKING, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Off-street parking spaces accessory to uses allowed in residence districts
shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in this Section,
Sections
5-5-13 and
5-3-10 of this Title.
   (A)   Utilization: Except as may otherwise be provided for the parking of
trucks in the granting of special uses, required accessory off-street parking
facilities provided for uses listed herein shall be solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles of patrons, occupants or employees of such uses.
   (B)   Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this Title results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded while a fraction in
excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
   (C)   Collective Provision: Off-street parking facilities for separate uses
may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and provided
that all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces in relation
to the use served are adhered to. Further, no parking space or portion thereof
shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise
authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section
5-10-5 of this Title.
   (D)   Area: A required off-street parking space shall be at least eight feet
in width and at least nineteen feet in length (8' x 19'), exclusive of access
drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office or work areas. Such space shall have
a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
   (E)   Access: Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off-street
parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in such a manner as to minimize interference with traffic
movement. No driveway across public property at the right-of-way line shall
exceed a width of twenty five feet (25').
   (F)   In Yards: Off-street parking spaces open to the sky may be located in
any yard except required front yards. Enclosed buildings and carports
containing off-street parking shall be subject to applicable yard requirements.
   (G)   Design and Maintenance:
      1.   Parking Spaces: Off-street parking spaces must be open to the sky.
      2.   Surfacing: All off-street parking areas, except parking spaces
accessory to a single-family dwelling, shall be surfaced or treated with some
all-weather dustless material.
      3.   Screening and Landscaping: All automobile parking areas containing
more than four (4) parking spaces, except those accessory to a single-family
dwelling, shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining any property
situated in a residence district or any institutional premises by a wall, fence
or densely planted compact hedge not less than five feet (5') nor more than
eight feet (8') in height.
      4.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
interfere with the residential use. All such lighting shall be extinguished
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
except as may be otherwise permitted by the Enforcing Officer.
      5.   Signs: Accessory signs are permitted on parking areas in accordance
with the provisions of Section Chapter 5-11.
      6.   Repair and Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in association with parking facilities provided in
residence districts.
   (H)   Maximum Number of Spaces: The total number of accessory parking spaces
provided for a dwelling shall not exceed that required by this Zoning Title for
such use or for an equivalent new use by more than fifty percent (50%) or four
(4) spaces, whichever number is greater.
   (I)   Location: All parking spaces required for uses which are established
after the effective date hereof shall be located on the same zoning lot as the
use served.
   (J)   Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees, on duty or residing, or both, on
the premises at any one time.
5-5-13: OFF-STREET PARKING, SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   R1 District: Off-street parking spaces accessory to uses allowed in
the R1 District shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum
requirements:
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings: No requirements.
      2.   Agriculture: There shall be no requirements, except with respect to
accessory roadside stands for which shall be provided spaces adequate in
number, as determined by the Enforcing Officer, to serve the public.
      3.      Cemeteries: Parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number,
as determined by the Enforcing Officer, to serve the public.
4. Educational institutions, boarding:
                                         1 parking space shall be provided for
                                         each 2 employees, and one parking
a. Colleges, junior colleges and         space shall be provided for each 6
universities                            students, based upon the maximum
                                         number of students attending classes
                                         on the premises at any one time during
                                         any 24 hour period
b. Fraternities, sororities and          1 parking space shall be provided for
dormitories in conjunction with         each 3 active members or dormitory
colleges, junior colleges and            residents, plus 1 parking space for
universities                             the manager
c. Gymnasiums, stadiums and             1 parking space shall be provided for
grandstands                              each 6 seats
d. Nursery, elementary and high         1 parking space shall be provided for
schools, boarding                        each 2 employees
e. School auditoriums                   1 parking space shall be provided for
                                         each 6 seats
5. Educational (nonboarding) and cultural institutions:
a. Elementary and nursery schools,      1 parking space shall be provided for
nonboarding                              each 2 employees
                                         1 parking space shall be provided for
                                         each 2 employees, and 1 parking space
                                         shall be provided for each 10
b. High schools, nonboarding            students, based on the maximum number
                                         of students attending classes on the
                                         premises at any one time during any 24
                                         hour period
c. Public libraries, art galleries      1 space shall be provided for each 800
                                         square feet of gross floor area
d. School auditoriums                   1 space shall be provided for each 6
                                         seats
e. School gymnasiums, stadiums and      1 parking space shall be provided for
grandstands                              each 6 seats
                                         1 parking space shall be uses provided
                                         for each 2 employees, plus spaces
6. Public utility and service           adequate in number, as determined by
                                         the enforcing officer, to serve the
                                         public
7. Recreational facilities:
a. Athletic fields, golf courses, polo   Parking spaces shall be provided in
fields, swimming pools and tennis       adequate number, as determined by the
courts                                   enforcing officer, to serve the public
                                         Parking spaces shall be provided equal
b. Private clubs                        in number to 30% of the capacity in
                                         persons of such club, plus 1 parking
                                         space for each lodging room
c. Recreational and community center     Parking spaces shall be equal in
buildings, noncommercial                number to 30% of the capacity in
                                         persons
8. Religious institutions:               
a. Churches, chapels, temples and       1 parking space shall be provided for
synagogues                               each 3 seats
                                         Parking spaces shall be provided in
b. Rectories, parsonages and parish      adequate number, as determined by the
houses                                  enforcing officer, to serve persons
                                         employed or residing on the premises
                                         as well as the visiting public
 
   (B)   R2 District: The regulations of the R1 District shall apply.
   (C)   R3 District: The regulations of the R1 District shall apply.
   (D)   R4 District: The regulations of the R1 District shall apply.
5-5-14: OFF-STREET LOADING, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Off-street loading berths accessory to uses allowed in residence districts
shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth hereinafter as
well as in Section
5-3-10 of this Title.
   (A)   Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. All motor vehicle loading berths which abut a
residence district or intervening alley separating such loading berth from a
residence district shall be completely screened therefrom by building walls, or
a uniformly painted solid fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof, not
less than eight feet (8') in height. No permitted or required loading berth
shall be located within thirty feet (30') of the nearest point of intersection
of any two (2) streets. No loading berth shall be located in a required front
or side yard, and any loading berth located in a required rear yard shall be
open to the sky.
   (B)   Area: Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street loading berth
shall be at least ten feet in width by at least twenty five feet in length (10'
x 25'), exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical
clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
   (C)   Access: Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such manner as to
minimize interference with traffic movement, and shall be subject to approval
by the Enforcing Officer.
   (D)   Surfacing: All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches (7") thick, surfaced with
not less than two inches (2") of asphalt or treated with some comparable all-
weather dustless material.
   (E)   Repair and Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in association with loading facilities provided in any
residence district.
   (F)   Utilization: Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-
street parking facilities or portions thereof.
   (G)   Minimum Facilities: Uses for which off-street loading facilities are
required herein but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the
minimum prescribed for such required facilities shall be provided with adequate
receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle, off any adjacent alley,
service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
5-5-15: OFF-STREET LOADING, SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   R1 District: In the R1 District, off-street loading facilities for
nonresidential uses shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum
requirements:
      1.   For the uses listed hereunder one loading berth shall be provided
for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand
(200,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth
for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of gross floor
area or fraction thereof:
         a.   Educational cultural institutions.
         b.   Religious institutions.
      2.   Recreational Facilities: For buildings containing ten thousand
(10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area one
loading berth shall be provided; for each additional ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of gross floor area up to five hundred thousand (500,000) square
feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional
loading berth for each additional five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet
of gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of five hundred thousand
(500,000) square feet.
      3.   For all other nonresidential uses, loading facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the following requirements:
         a.   For buildings containing less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of gross floor area, there shall be provided on the same zoning lot
adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle, off any adjacent
alley, service drive or open space.
         b.   For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, one off-street loading
berth shall be provided.
         c.   For buildings containing over one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of gross floor area, there shall be provided one loading berth for
each one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof.
   (B)   R2 District: The regulations of the R1 District shall apply.
   (C)   R3 District: The regulations of the R1 District shall apply.
   (D)   R4 District: The regulations of the R1 District shall apply. (Ord. 63-
1, 4-1-63; amd. 1977 Code)
CHAPTER 6
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Preamble
5-6-2: Use, Lot And Bulk Regulations
5-6-3: Permitted Uses
5-6-4: Special Uses
5-6-5: Lot Area
5-6-6: Front Yards
5-6-7: Transitional Yards
5-6-8: Floor Area Ratio
5-6-8-1: BP District Bulk Requirements
5-6-9: [Reserved]
5-6-10: Off Street Parking
5-6-11: Off Street Loading
5-6-12: Nonresidential Lighting Standards
5-6-13: Development Plan For BP District
5-6-14: BP District Site Design
5-6-14-1: General Requirements And Procedures
5-6-14-2: Specific Requirements And Procedures
5-6-14-3: Variations
5-6-1: PREAMBLE:
   (A)   The B1 restricted business district is designed for the convenient
shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential areas, and to permit only
such uses as are necessary to satisfy those basic shopping needs which occur
daily or frequently and so require shopping facilities in relative proximity to
places of residence.
   (B)   The B2 restricted service district is designed primarily to furnish
areas served by the restricted business district with basic necessary services
(and goods) incompatible with the uses permitted in the restricted business
district and so not allowed therein.
   (C)   The B3 general business district is designed to cater to the needs of
a relatively larger consumer population than served by the restricted business
district, and so a wide variety of business uses are permitted for both daily
and occasional shopping.
   (D)   The B4 general service district is designed primarily to furnish areas
served by the general business district with a wide variety of necessary
services (and goods) incompatible with the uses permitted in the general
business district and so not allowed therein. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (E)   The BP business park district is designed to provide for a wide range
of business, office and research uses in a quality environmental setting. Very
limited retail and service businesses are also permitted when those uses are
designed primarily to provide service to the business, office and research uses
within the district. Performance standards are intended to limit the placement
and intensity of such uses. Uses that require outdoor sales or storage of
materials shall not be permitted. No BP district shall be established unless
the land to be located within the district has a gross lot area of at least ten
(10) acres. No planned development under chapter 8 of this title shall be
permitted in a BP district. (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to business districts are
set forth in the following sections of this chapter. Also applying to business
districts are regulations set forth in other chapters of this title as follows:
   Chapter 2, "Zoning Definitions" of this title.
   Chapter 3, "General Zoning Provisions" of this title.
   Chapter 9, "Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Uses" of this title.
   Chapter 10, "Administration And Enforcement" of this title. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-
1963)
5-6-3: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted
in the districts indicated under the conditions specified. No building or
zoning use shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted hereinafter
in the zoning district in which such building or zoning lot shall be located,
with the exception of the following:
   Uses lawfully established on April 1, 1963, and
   Special uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of section
5-6-4 of this chapter.
   Uses lawfully established on April 1, 1963, and rendered nonconforming by
the provisions thereof, shall be subject to the regulations of chapter 9 of
this title.
   (A)   Permitted Uses, B1 District:
      1.   Uses permitted in the B1 district are subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted.
         b.   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
         c.   All business, servicing or processing, except for off street
parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
         d.   Establishments of the "drive-in" type offering goods or services
directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted.
         e.   The parking of trucks and delivery vehicles as an accessory use,
when enclosed parking for same is provided and when used in the conduct of a
permitted business listed hereafter in this subsection, shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-
1963)
      2.   The following uses are permitted in the B1 district:
         Art and school supply stores.
         Barbershops.
         Beauty parlors.
         Book and stationery stores.
         Camera and photographic supply stores.
         Candy and ice cream stores.
         Clothes pressing establishments.
         Currency exchanges.
         Drugstores.
         Dry cleaning and laundry receiving stations, processing to be done
elsewhere.
         Florist shops and conservatories.
         Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, fish markets, bakeries and
delicatessens.
         Gift shops.
         Haberdasheries.
         Hardware stores.
         Restaurants; entertainment, dancing and serving of alcoholic beverages
are prohibited.
         Sewage disposal units, individual, as regulated by section
5-3-5 of this title.
         Shoe, clothing and hat repair stores.
         Signs, as regulated by chapter 5-11.
         Telephone booths and coin telephones (outdoor).
         Telephone exchanges.
         Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to
exceed the duration of such construction.
         Variety stores.
         Water systems, individual, as regulated by section
5-3-5 of this title.
         Wearing apparel shops. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code)
   (B)   Permitted Uses, B2 District:
      1.   Uses permitted in the B2 district are subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted.
         b.   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
         c.   All business, servicing or processing, except for off street
loading and automobile service station operations, shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings.
         d.   Establishments of the "drive-in" type offering goods or services
directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted,
except in the case of automobile service stations.
         e.   All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products shall conform with
the performance standards established for the light industrial district chapter
7 of this title; provided, that performance standards shall in every case be
applied at the boundaries of the zoning lot on which such activities take
place.
         f.   The parking of trucks and delivery vehicles as an accessory use,
when enclosed parking for same is provided and when used in the conduct of a
permitted business listed hereafter in this subsection shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity.
      2.   Any use permitted in the B1 district, as set forth in subsection (A)
of this section shall be permitted in the B2 district, and in addition, the
following uses shall be permitted:
         Automobile service stations, for the retail sale and dispensing of
fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories and supplies, including
installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto; facilities for
chassis and gear lubrication and for washing of not more than two (2) vehicles
are permitted only if enclosed in a building.
         Dry cleaning establishments, employing not more than two (2) persons
in addition to one owner or manager.
         Laundries, employing not more than two (2) persons in addition to one
owner or manager.
         Newspaper distribution agencies, for home delivery and retail trade.
         Radio and television service and repair shops.
         Restaurants, including the serving of alcoholic beverages at dining
tables and booths only, if incidental to the serving of food as the principal
activity, but not including live entertainment or dancing.
         Vending machines, ice and milk sales.
   (C)   Permitted Uses, B3 District:
      1.   Uses permitted in the B3 district are subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted.
         b.   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
         c.   All business, servicing or processing, except for off street
parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
         d.   Establishments of the "drive-in" type offering goods or services
directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted.
         e.   All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products shall conform with
the performance standards established for the light industrial district in
chapter 7 of this title; provided, that performance standards shall, in every
case, be applied at the boundaries of the zoning lot on which such activities
take place.
         f.   The parking of trucks and delivery vehicles as an accessory use,
when enclosed parking for same is provided and when used in the conduct of a
permitted business listed hereafter in this subsection, shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-
1963)
      2.   Any use permitted in the B1 district, as set forth in subsection (A)
of this section, shall be permitted in the B3 district, and in addition, the
following uses shall be permitted:
         Antique shops.
         Art galleries, but not including auction rooms.
         Banks and financial institutions.
         Business machine sales and service.
         Carpet and rug stores.
         China and glassware stores.
         Coin and philatelic stores.
         Customer dressmaking.
         Dry goods stores.
         Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio and
television sales.
         Furniture stores, including upholstering when conducted as part of the
retail operations and secondary to the principal use.
         Furrier shops.
         Garden supply and seed stores.
         Hobby shops, for retail of items to be assembled or used away from the
premises.
         Interior decorating shops, including upholstering and making of
draperies, slipcovers and other similar articles, when conducted as part of the
retail operations and secondary to the principal use.
         Jewelry stores, including watch repair.
         Leather goods and luggage stores.
         Liquor stores, package.
         Medical and dental clinics.
         Millinery shops.
         Musical instrument sales and repair.
         Office supply stores.
         Offices, business and professional.
         Optician sales, retail.
         Paint and wallpaper stores.
         Phonograph record and sheet music stores.
         Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures
when conducted as part of the retail business on the premises.
         Picture framing, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
         Post offices.
         Restaurants, including the serving of alcoholic beverages if
incidental to the serving of food as the principal activity, but not including
live entertainment and dancing.
         Sewing machine sales and service, household appliances only.
         Shoe stores.
         Sporting goods stores.
         Tailor shops.
         Telegraph offices.
         Ticket agencies, amusement.
         Tobacco shops.
         Toy shops.
         Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-
1963; amd. 1977 Code)
   (D)   Permitted Uses, B4 District:
      1.   Uses permitted in the B4 district are subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted.
         b.   All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the
premises where produced.
         c.   All business, storage, servicing or processing, except for off
street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings.
         d.   Establishments of the "drive-in" type offering goods or services
directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted,
except in the case of automobile service stations.
         e.   All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products shall conform with
the performance standards established for the light industrial district in
chapter 7 of this title; provided, that performance standards shall, in every
case, be applied at the boundaries of the zoning lot on which such activities
take place.
         f.   The parking of trucks and delivery vehicles as an accessory use,
when enclosed parking for same is provided, and when used in the conduct of a
permitted business listed hereafter in this subsection, shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-
1963)
      2.   Any use permitted in the B3 district, as set forth in subsection (C)
of this section, shall be permitted in the B4 district, and in addition, the
following uses shall be permitted:
         Automobile accessory stores.
         Automobile service stations, for the retail sale and dispensing of
fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories and supplies, including
installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto; facilities for
chassis and gear lubrication and for washing of not more than two (2) vehicles
are permitted only if enclosed in a building.
         Bicycle sales, rental and repair stores.
         Catering establishments.
         Dry cleaning establishments, employing not more than four (4) persons
in addition to one owner or manager.
         Harness shops.
         Launderettes, automatic, self-service only, or hand laundries,
employing not more than four (4) persons in addition to one owner or manager.
         Laundries, employing not more than four (4) persons in addition to one
owner or manager.
         Locksmith shops.
         Medical and dental clinics.
         Newspaper distribution agencies, for home delivery and retail trade.
         Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not including the
assembly or manufacture of such articles.
         Plumbing showrooms and shops.
         Radio and television service and repair shops.
         Religious institutions, churches, chapels, temples and synagogues.
         Vending machines, ice and milk sales. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord.
65-4, 9-27-1965)
   (E)   Permitted Uses, BP District:
         Uses permitted in the BP district are subject to the requirements of
section
5-6-13 of this chapter and are subject to an approved development plan.
         Daycare centers in office buildings provided they are located on the
ground floor and do not occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
ground floor area of such building.
         Office. Office uses include:
         Agricultural support and services (offices only) (NAICS 115).
         Business services (NAICS 55, 5611-5616, 5619, 8139).
         Civic and social organizations (NAICS 8132 -34).
         Educational services, such as business schools (NAICS 6114),
technological, and trade schools (excluding public and private schools).
         Finance, banks, trusts, lending (NAICS 521, 522, 525, 533).
         Governmental offices (NAICS 92 excluding public service).
         Health services (NAICS 621).
         Insurance carriers, agents, brokers, and service (NAICS 524).
         Professional and technical services (NAICS 5411-5419).
         Real estate (NAICS 531).
         Security, commodity brokers and services (NAICS 523).
         Social services (NAICS 624) (except care facilities).
         Research uses. These are a combination of office, research and
development facilities, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   Such uses shall not involve the use, manufacture or storage of
hazardous chemicals, alcohol, or explosives.
      2.   All products, produced or assembled on the premises in the research
and development process must be of a nature that they can be shipped other than
by rail or by trucks that must be designated as wide load designation in order
to carry the product.
      3.   All such activities shall be within fully enclosed buildings.
      4.   The development plan permitting research uses shall contain a
village approved architectural covenant that ensures a uniform quality of
buildings. At a minimum, the architectural covenants shall govern permitted
materials, provide for harmony between buildings, require three hundred sixty
degree (360°) architectural detailing, and provide design standards to ensure
windowless walls are not a negative factor.
      5.   No loading docks shall be visible beyond the boundaries of the
development plan, and any such loading docks must be screened either by the
buildings or by a combination of walls and landscaping.
      6.   No single building shall have a floor area in excess of forty
thousand (40,000) square feet, and the total square footage for such use in any
property included in a development plan shall be limited to the sum of forty
thousand (40,000) square feet plus twenty thousand (20,000) for each additional
building.
Restaurants located on the ground floor of an office building and occupying no
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the ground floor of the building. (Ord.
04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed in the zoning districts
indicated, subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with
the provisions of section
5-10-7 of this title.
   (A)   Special Uses, B1 District: The following special uses may be allowed
in the B1 district, subject to the provisions of section
5-10-7 of this title:
      Accessory uses, incidental to, as determined by the zoning board of
appeals, and on the same zoning lot as a principal use.
      Landfill.
      Parks.
      Public utility and service uses:
      Fire stations.
      Police stations.
      Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants.
      Other governmental buildings, including a Village hall.
      Signs in excess of thirty feet (30') in height from the curb level.
      Signs set back less than fifteen feet (15') from the front lot line.
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord. 72-16, 12-18-1972)
   (B)   Special Uses, B2 District: Any special use allowed in the B1 District
may be allowed in the B2 District, subject to the provisions of section
5-10-7 of this title.
   (C)   Special Uses, B3 District: Any special use allowed in the B1 District
may be allowed in the B3 District, subject to the provisions of section
5-10-7 of this title, and in addition, the following special uses may be
allowed:
      Parking lots, open and other than accessory, for the storage of private
passenger automobiles and subject to the provisions of section
5-6-10 of this chapter.
      Recreation buildings and community centers, noncommercial.
      Summer theaters, which are theaters operated only during the months of
May through October of any year within completely enclosed premises used for
the performance of dramatic or musical productions by live performers. (Ord.
63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord. 69-4, 7-28-1969)
   (D)   Special Uses, B4 District: Any special use allowed in the B3 District
may be allowed in the B4 District, subject to the provisions of section
5-10-7 of this title, unless already permitted in subsection
5-6-3(D) of this chapter, and in addition the following special uses may be
granted:
      Amusement establishments, bowling alleys, dance halls, gymnasiums, pool
halls, skating rinks and swimming pools.
      Clubs, private (nonprofit).
      Convention halls.
      Garages, for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles of not over
one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity, but not including body repair, painting
or engine rebuilding.
      Hotels and motels.
      Laboratories, medical and dental.
      Public utility and service uses:
         Bus terminals, bus turnarounds (off street), bus garages and bus lots.
         Electric substations.
         Gas regulator stations.
         Railroad passenger stations.
         Railroad rights-of-way, but not including railroad yards and shops
other than for passenger purposes.
         Telephone transmission equipment buildings, and microwave relay
towers. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (E)   Special Uses, BP District: The following special uses may be allowed
in the BP District, subject to the provisions of section
5-10-7 of this title:
      Communications towers.
      Daycare centers, freestanding.
      Drive-throughs, provided drive-throughs serving restaurants are not
permitted.
      Hospitals.
      Hotels within a development containing at least eight (8) lots. Such use
shall, together with restaurants, occupy no more than ten percent (10%) of the
land area covered by a development plan.
      Public and private schools, related administrative offices and athletic
fields, playgrounds, parks, and parking of passenger automobiles.
      Restaurants as a freestanding building in a development containing at
least eight (8) lots. Such uses shall, together with hotels, occupy no more
than ten percent (10%) of the land area covered by a development plan. (Ord.
17-23, 12-19-2017)
5-6-5: LOT AREA:
Lot area requirements shall be as set forth under each zoning district.
No use shall be established or hereafter maintained on a lot recorded after
April 1, 1963, which is of less area than prescribed hereinafter for such use
in the zoning district in which it is to be located.
No existing building or dwelling unit shall be converted so as to conflict
with, or further conflict with, the lot area requirements of the district in
which such building is located.
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area, B1 District: In the B1 District the minimum lot area
requirements shall not be less than those specified below:
      There shall be provided not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of lot area for each business structure.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Area, B2 District: In the B2 District the minimum lot area
requirements shall not be less than those specified below:
      The minimum requirements for lot area per business structure shall be the
same as in the B1 District.
   (C)   Minimum Lot Area, B3 District: In the B3 District the minimum lot area
requirements shall not be less than those specified below:
      The minimum requirements for lot area per business structure shall be the
same as in the B1 District.
   (D)   Minimum Lot Area, B4 District: In the B4 District the minimum lot area
requirements shall not be less than those specified below:
      The minimum requirements for lot area per business structure shall be the
same as in the B1 District. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (E)   Minimum Lot Area, BP District: In the BP District, the minimum lot
area shall not be less than one acre for each structure. (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-
2004)
5-6-6: FRONT YARDS:
Front yards shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth
under each zoning district. Front yards shall be unobstructed from ground level
to the sky, except as allowed in section
5-3-9 of this title. All accessory buildings which are attached to principal
buildings (as attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the
principal building. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
Exception: Telephone booths and coin operated telephones (outdoor) shall be
permitted in the required front yard of all business districts with the
exception of the BP District. However, if such telephone is installed near an
intersection of two (2) streets or rights-of-way, the minimum setback from one
of such intersecting right-of-way lines shall be twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 04-
01, 2-23-2004)
   (A)   Minimum Front Yard, B1 District: In the B1 District there shall be
provided a front yard of not less than fifty feet (50') in depth along the
front lot line; except, however, agricultural buildings and structures shall
provide a front yard of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') in depth
along the front lot line.
   (B)   Minimum Front Yard, B2 District: In the B2 District the regulations
governing front yards in the B1 District shall apply.
   (C)   Minimum Front Yard, B3 District: In the B3 District the regulations
governing front yards in the B1 District shall apply.
   (D)   Minimum Front Yard, B4 District: In the B4 District the regulations
governing front yards in the B1 District shall apply. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (E)   Minimum Front Yard, BP District: In the BP District there shall be
provided a front yard of not less than fifty feet (50') in depth along the
front lot line, except that along arterial roads the front yard shall have a
depth of not less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-7: TRANSITIONAL YARDS:
Where a business district adjoins a residence district, transitional yards
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth under each
zoning district. Transitional yards shall be unobstructed from ground level to
the sky, except as allowed in section
5-3-9 of this title.
   (A)   Minimum Transitional Yards, B1 District:
      1.   In the B1 district the minimum transitional yard requirements for
all structures other than agricultural buildings and structures shall not be
less than those specified below:
         a.   Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in
an adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such side lot
line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which
would be required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent
residential lot.
         b.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line.
Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be
required under this title for a residential use on the adjacent residential
lot.
         c.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an
adjacent residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line.
Such yard shall be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
         d.   Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with
the front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residence district, a yard
equal in depth to the minimum front yard required by this title on such
adjacent residential lot shall be provided along such front or side lot line
for a distance of at least fifty feet (50'), in addition to the width of any
intervening alley, from such residential lot.
      2.   In the B1 district agricultural buildings and structures shall
provide a transitional yard of not less than fifty feet (50') in depth along
all lot lines that coincide with a lot line in an adjacent residence district.
   (B)   Minimum Transitional Yards, B2 District: In the B2 district the
regulations governing transitional yards in the B1 district shall apply.
   (C)   Minimum Transitional Yards, B3 District: In the B3 district the
regulations governing transitional yards in the B1 district shall apply.
   (D)   Minimum Transitional Yards, B4 District: In the B4 district the
regulations governing transitional yards in the B1 district shall apply. (Ord.
63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (E)   Minimum Transitional Yards, BP District:
      1.   In the BP district the minimum transitional yard requirements shall
be not less than those specified below:
         a.   The minimum transitional yard adjoining any parking areas shall
be fifty feet (50') and shall require a buffer screening of four (4) canopy
trees (3 inch caliper) and thirty three (33) shrubs (3 foot height) per one
hundred (100) linear feet of parking area.
         b.   The minimum transitional yard adjoining any buildings shall be as
follows:
            (1)   Buildings less than eighteen feet (18') in height: Fifty feet
(50').
            (2)   Buildings eighteen (18) to thirty feet (30') in height:
Seventy five feet (75').
            (3)   Buildings thirty one feet (31') or more in height: One
hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-8: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
The floor area requirements, as set forth under each zoning district, shall
determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings (total
floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the
gross area of the zoning lot.
   (A)   Maximum Floor Area Ratio, B1 District: In the B1 district the floor
area ratio shall not exceed one to two (1:2).
   (B)   Maximum Floor Area Ratio, B2 District: In the B2 district the floor
area ratio shall not exceed one to two (1:2).
   (C)   Maximum Floor Area Ratio, B3 District: In the B3 district the floor
area ratio shall not exceed one to two (1:2).
   (D)   Maximum Floor Area Ratio, B4 District: In the B4 district the floor
area ratio shall not exceed one to two (1:2). (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
   (E)   Maximum Floor Area Ratio, BP District: In the BP district the floor
area ratio shall not exceed 0.4 times the gross lot area. (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-
2004)
5-6-8-1: BP DISTRICT BULK REQUIREMENTS:
The following bulk requirements for the BP district shall apply to each lot
within the BP district and the building located on such lot:
   (A)   Minimum landscaped surface ratio shall not be less than 0.50 times the
gross lot area.
   (B)   Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 0.30 times the gross lot
area.
   (C)   Maximum building height shall not exceed forty five feet (45'). (Ord.
04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-9: [RESERVED]:
5-6-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
   (A)   Regulations: Off street parking facilities for motor vehicles in
business districts shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set
forth hereafter, as well as in section
5-3-10 of this title.
   (B)   Area: A required off street parking space shall be at least nine feet
(9') in width and at least eighteen feet (18') in length, exclusive of access
drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or any use other than parking. Such space
shall have a vertical clearance of at least eight feet (8'). (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-
2004)
   (C)   Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off street
parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in such a manner as to minimize interference with traffic
movement. No driveway across public property at the right of way line shall
exceed a width of twenty five feet (25').
   (D)   In Yards: Off street parking spaces open to the sky may be located in
any yard.
   (E)   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Parking Spaces: Off street parking spaces shall be open to the sky.
      2.   Surfacing: All off street parking areas shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, not less than four inches (4") thick, surfaced with
asphalt or treated with some comparable all weather dustless material.
      3.   Screening And Landscaping: All automobile parking areas shall be
effectively screened on each side adjoining any property situated in a
residence district or any institutional premises by a wall, fence or densely
planted compact hedge, not less than five feet (5') nor more than eight feet
(8') in height.
      4.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas
shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
interfere with the residential use.
      5.   Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in association with parking facilities in a B1 or B2
district. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any
accessory parking facilities provided in a B1 or B2 district.
   (F)   Location: All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses
erected or established after the effective date hereof shall be located on the
same zoning lot as the building or use served. Buildings or uses existing on
the effective date hereof which are subsequently altered or enlarged so as to
require the provision of parking spaces under this title may be served by
parking facilities located on land other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served is located, provided such facilities are within five
hundred feet (500') walking distance of a main entrance to the use served.
   (G)   Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees on duty on the premises at any one
time. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
   (H)   Parking Specifications: All uses in the business districts shall
provide off street parking as in the following table:
   Table 5-6-10(H)
   PARKING STANDARDS
Zoning District Use Parking Requirements
Zoning District      Use                         Parking Requirements
B4 (special use)     Amusement uses except       1 space per 200 square feet
                     bowling alleys              of floor area.
                                                 1 space for each employee.
B2, B3, B4           Automobile service stations Accessory uses shall provide
                                                 the space required for such
                                                 uses.
                                                 5 spaces for each alley plus
B4 (special use)     Bowling alleys              1 space for each 200 feet of
                                                 accessory use such as bar or
                                                 restaurants.
B4 (special use)     Hotels and motels           1 space for each 3 rooms.
B4 (special use), BP Laboratories, medical and   1 space for each 2 employees.
                     dental
                                                 3 spaces for each regularly
B4 (special use), BP Medical and dental clinics  visited doctor or staff
                                                 person.
B3, B4, BP           Offices                     1 space per 250 square feet.
                                                 1 space for each 2 employees,
                                                 1 space for each truck
B3, B4               Post offices                stationed at the building,
                                                 and 1 space per 200 square
                                                 feet of public space.
B3 (special use)     Recreation buildings and    Spaces for 50 percent of the
                     community centers           capacity in persons.
B1, B2, B3, B4, BP   Restaurants, freestanding   1 space per 66 square feet.
BP                   Restaurants in office       1.2 spaces per employee.
                     buildings
All                  All other uses              1 space per 200 square feet.
 
(Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-11: OFF STREET LOADING:
Off street loading facilities accessory to uses allowed in business districts
shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth hereinafter, as
well as in section
5-3-10 of this title:
   (A)   Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. All motor vehicle loading berths which abut a
residence district or intervening alley separating a residence district from a
business district shall be completely screened therefrom by building walls, or
a uniformly painted solid fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof,
which is an extension of the building wall and is not less than eight feet (8')
in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within
thirty feet (30') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets.
No loading berth shall be located in a required front or side yard, and any
loading berth located in a required rear yard shall be open to the sky.
   (B)   Area: Unless otherwise specified, a required off street loading berth
shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by at least twenty five feet (25') in
length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical
clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
   (C)   Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as
to minimize interference with traffic movement.
   (D)   Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches (7") thick, surfaced with
not less than two inches (2") of asphalt or treated with some comparable all
weather dustless material.
   (E)   Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in association with loading facilities provided in any
business district.
   (F)   Utilization: Space allocated to any off street loading berth shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off
street parking facilities or portions thereof.
   (G)   Minimum Facilities: Uses for which off street loading facilities are
required herein but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the
minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be provided with
adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle, off any adjacent
alley, service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-
1963)
   (H)   Loading Specifications: All uses in the business districts shall
provide off street loading as in the following table:
   Table 5-6-11(H)
   LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Zoning District Use Gross Floor Area In Square Feet (sf) Spaces And Size
Zoning District    Use                 Gross Floor Area In Spaces And Size
                                       Square Feet (sf)
                   Banks and financial 10,000 to 100,000   1 - 12 x 50 foot
                   institutions,       sf                  space
                   medical and dental  100,001 to 500,000  2 - 12 x 50 foot
B3, BP             clinics, offices,   sf                  spaces
                   and recreation      For each additional 1 additional 12 x 50
                   buildings           50,000 sf or        foot space
                                       fraction thereof
                                       10,000 to 100,000   1 - 12 x 50 foot
                   Amusement           sf                  space
B4 (special use)   establishments      For each additional 1 additional 12 x 50
                                       100,000 sf or       foot space
                                       fraction thereof
                   Clubs and lodges,   10,000 to 200,000   1 - 12 x 50 foot
                   hotels and motels,  sf                  space
B4 (special use)   meeting halls, and  For each additional 1 additional 12 x 50
                   theaters            200,000 sf or       foot space
                                       fraction thereof
                                       5,000 to 10,000 sf  1 - 10 x 25 foot
                                                           space
                                       10,001 to 25,000 sf 2 - 10 x 25 foot
                                                           space
                                       25,001 to 40,000 sf 2 - 12 x 25 foot
B1, B2, B3, B4, BP All other uses                          space
                                       40,001 to 100,000   3 - 12 x 25 foot
                                       sf                  space
                                       For additional      1 additional 12 x 50
                                       200,000 sf or       foot space
                                       fraction thereof
 
(Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-12: NONRESIDENTIAL LIGHTING STANDARDS:
Two (2) types of light sources or luminaries are available. One is a fixture
having no cutoff, directing the light to limit view of the light source or
luminaire. The second is a cutoff fixture, shielding the light source from
view.
All business district property shall meet the following lighting standards:
   (A)   Type Of Fixture: All fixtures shall be cutoff fixtures that prevent
the light source to be visible at the property line, except that decorative
pedestrian lighting may be permitted subject to subsection (B) of this section.
   (B)   No Cutoff Lights: The actual light source for no cutoff decorative
lighting shall be no more than 100 watt incandescent luminaire per fixture.
   (C)   Maximum Illumination Cutoff Luminaries: The maximum illumination from
cutoff luminaries at a property line with abutting residential shall be one-
tenth (0.1) foot-candle. On abutting nonresidential properties or public
streets the maximum illumination at the property line shall be two (2) foot-
candles. Where residential is across a street the maximum illumination at the
use's boundary shall not increase the ambient light on centerline of the
street. The maximum illumination at any one point shall not exceed forty (40)
foot-candles.
   (D)   Maximum Illumination No Cutoff Luminaries: The maximum illumination
from no cutoff luminaries at a distance ten feet (10') in from a property line
with abutting residential shall be one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle. On abutting
nonresidential properties or public streets the maximum illumination at the
property line shall be three (3) foot-candles. Where residential is across a
street the maximum illumination at the use's boundary shall be one foot-candle.
The maximum illumination at any one point shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot-
candles.
   (E)   Maximum Height: Any lighting fixture or luminaire that exceeds twenty
feet (20') in height or proposes more than 400 watts or more than three (3)
luminaries per pole shall be approved as a special use and reviewed for impact
on all surrounding uses.
   (F)   Floodlights: The use of floodlights or other lighting that is in
excess of these standards may be requested as a special use permit.
      1.   The lighting shall be necessary for safety or health requirements.
      2.   The applicant shall have to demonstrate that buffer yards are in
place that screen neighboring residential properties from glare reaching their
windows.
Shielded spots shall be screened by evergreen landscaping, walls, berms, or
cutoff shielding so the light source is not visible off site. In most cases, a
combination of cutoff shielding and a landscape or other feature will be needed
to provide the necessary screening.
   (G)   Hours: The lighting shall be extinguished between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. except that lighting may be
allowed to remain on for one-half (1/2) hour after the end of an event in the
building but not later than one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M.,
provided a permit has been issued in advance of such event by the zoning
enforcement officer. The enforcing officer may permit security lighting or
lighting for maintenance or other after hours employees, provided such lighting
shall be on separate circuits and the areas to remain lighted must be located
or screened in such a way to reduce impact substantially from the normal
lighting. (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-13: DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR BP DISTRICT:
No subdivision shall be approved under title 6 of this code nor shall any
building permit be issued until a development plan is approved as provided in
this section.
The owner or owners of any tract of land within the BP district shall submit to
the president and board of trustees a plan for the use and development of all
the tract of land. The proposed development plan shall first be submitted in
preliminary form. The preliminary development plan shall be referred to the
plan commission for study, public hearing, and report. The plan commission,
upon receipt of the preliminary development plan, shall set a day certain for a
public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
shall be published at least once, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than
thirty (30) days before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in
the village.
Upon approval by the plan commission of the preliminary development plan, after
a public hearing thereon, the applicant shall, within one hundred twenty (120)
days thereof, present to the plan commission a final development plan which
shall not vary materially from the approved preliminary plan, for final
approval by the plan commission.
The plan commission shall within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the final
plan make its report and recommendations to the president and board of trustees
with such additional conditions as are, in its opinion, necessary to fulfill
the objectives of this chapter; provided, however, that if the preliminary plan
had received the approval of the plan commission, the final plan shall be so
approved, with or without conditions, if the final plan is substantially the
same as the preliminary plan, and the planned uses shall be consistent with the
permitted and special uses (if a special use permit has been issued) in the BP
district.
In its consideration of the preliminary development plan, the plan commission
shall require evidence that:
   (A)   The plan complies with the requirements of this title, including,
section
5-6-14 of this chapter;
   (B)   The property in the general vicinity of the area included in the plan
will not be adversely affected;
   (C)   The plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of the zoning
regulations of the village to promote public health, safety, and welfare;
   (D)   The planned use shall form a compatible, harmonious community group or
groups;
   (E)   The development plan provides for a uniform quality of buildings
pursuant to a village approved architectural covenant, requiring, at a minimum,
permitted materials and harmony between buildings; and
   (F)   Any unobstructed open space or conservation area whose acreage shall
be utilized in the determination of the common land, if any be provided, shall,
upon the recommendation of the plan commission, be designated as such on the
plan and conservation area established by conveyance or easement to the village
or other not for profit entity approved by the village to ensure the continued
existence and maintenance of said area. (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-14: BP DISTRICT SITE DESIGN:
The following standards shall apply to all development plans submitted pursuant
to section
5-6-13 of this chapter:
   (A)   Parking Lot Landscaping: For every three (3) spaces there shall be at
least one canopy tree planted. The trees shall be planted in islands between
parking spaces, at the ends of aisles, or between aisles. The minimum width of
a planting island shall be five feet (5') of pervious material suitable as a
planting medium.
   (B)   Street Landscaping: For each one hundred feet (100') of street, four
(4) canopy trees shall be planted on each side of the street.
   (C)   Lot Landscaping: For each acre of land not covered by pervious
surfaces (roads, parking, buildings, or walks) there shall be six (6) canopy
trees, and six (6) understory or evergreen trees planted per a landscape plan
approved by the plan commission.
   (D)   Trees: All canopy trees shall be three inch (3") caliper. Understory
trees shall be two inch (2") caliper, and evergreens seven (7) to eight feet
(8') in height.
   (E)   Loading, Truck Access, And Waste Storage: Where loading and truck
access is in the yard between residential uses or vacant land that is zoned for
residential use or faces a public street, the area shall be enclosed. If the
wall or berm options are used, the plan commission may require additional
landscape planting to further screen the area.
   (F)   Accessory Waste Or Trash Storage: Where dumpsters or common waste
storage facilities are used they shall be located to be screened from view from
public roads or residential areas. The area where a dumpster and/or garbage
cans are stored shall be fully enclosed with a wood or masonry fence (or other
durable low maintenance materials approved by the plan commission) or berms.
The gates shall be kept closed. The area shall be landscaped, with hedges
planted to screen the wall and one canopy, understory, or evergreen tree per
fifty feet (50') of perimeter wall or berm.
   (G)   Building Materials: The following are approved building materials:
masonry (brick or stone), curtain walls (except reflective glass), and wood.
Metal sided buildings are prohibited. Concrete block (but not concrete brick or
concrete curtain wall) is prohibited. The prohibited materials may be permitted
only if the plan commission finds the buildings to have sufficient
architectural detailing so as to be of the same architectural quality and
character as buildings built with the permitted materials. Reflective glass is
prohibited to ensure that reflected rays from the sun do not create glare
visible in residential areas. Where a building is in a wooded area that screens
all residential uses, the plan commission may, upon consideration of such
effect, permit the use of reflective glass.
   (H)   Sign Package: All signage proposed for the development shall be
described in a sign package, including such detail as may be required by the
plan commission. (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-14-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Notice Of Intent: All applicants for a development plan shall notify
the village clerk of their intention to develop land within a BP district.
   (B)   Preapplication Conference: All applicants for development within a BP
district are encouraged to request a preapplication conference with the plan
commission. No more than one preapplication conference shall be held for any
proposed development, other than as may be permitted by the plan commission.
   (C)   Development Plan Review: All proposed development plans shall be
reviewed by the village in the following steps:
      1.   Preliminary plan approval, pursuant to the provisions of subsection
5-6-14-2(A) of this chapter.
      2.   Final plan approval, pursuant to the provisions of subsection
5-6-14-2(B) of this chapter.
   (D)   Submission Of Applications; Determination Of Completeness Of
Applications And Supporting Documentation: An application for preliminary or
final development plan approval shall be submitted to the village clerk on a
form to be provided by the village, accompanied by thirty (30) copies thereof
(plus 2 dimensionally stabilized reproducible copies), thirty (30) copies of
all required documentation, and all required fees (together, "the application")
on or before the deadlines for submittal established annually by the village.
All plans accompanying the application shall also be submitted in an electronic
format as may be from time to time determined by the village. Within five (5)
days after receipt of an application for preliminary or final development plan
approval, as the case may be, the village engineer shall determine if the
application is complete. If the application is complete and the filing fee
paid, it shall be referred to the staff for review in accordance with the terms
of the applicable subsections. If the village engineer determines that the
application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the
deficiencies of the application. For the purposes of this section
"completeness" shall mean that all required documentation has been submitted;
it shall not mean that the application conforms to the standards of this title.
   (E)   Plan Commission Consideration: All applications for preliminary or
final development plan approval, as the case may be, shall be considered by the
plan commission in accordance with the established submittal schedule, except
as such date may be extended by mutual consent.
   (F)   Waiver Of Submission Requirements: In the event the plan commission
determines, at the request of an applicant, that any of the matters required to
be submitted as part of an application are not necessary to the proper review
of a particular proposal, the commission may waive the requirement if it
determines that such waiver is consistent with the purposes of this section.
   (G)   Filing Fee: A filing fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) plus
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per acre shall be paid at the time a preliminary
development plan is submitted to the village clerk.
   (H)   Review Expenses:
      1.   The applicant shall reimburse the village for the entire cost
incurred in reviewing the preliminary development plan, the final development
plan, and accompanying submittals; for reprinting any documents submitted with
the preliminary or final development plan; and in publishing notice. Review
expenses also shall include the fees and costs incurred by the village
engineer, the village attorney or special counsel, or any other expert deemed
necessary or desirable by the chairman of the plan commission, in regard to the
proposed village of Barrington Hills development plan for every discussion or
meeting after the preapplication conference.
      2.   The village clerk shall bill the applicant monthly for the review
expenses incurred by the village. The applicant shall pay such expenses within
ten (10) days after receipt of an invoice from the village. No further
processing shall occur if an invoice remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after
the invoice date (or, if earlier, the next scheduled date for some action to be
taken), and in no event shall a preliminary or final development plan be
approved by the village board unless the applicant has paid all review expenses
which have been billed prior to the date of consideration of such preliminary
or final development plan.
      3.   Upon approval of the applicant's final development plan by the board
of trustees, the village clerk shall determine the balance of any unbilled
review expenses. Credit toward said balance of review expenses shall be given
for the filing fee paid pursuant to subsection (G) of this section. In the
event the said balance exceeds the filing fee, such excess cost shall be paid
within ten (10) days of receipt of village invoice. (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-14-2: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Preliminary Plan:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of the preliminary plan is to provide the
village with sufficient information to evaluate a proposed development at an
early stage in the process in order to permit alterations in plans as may be
required prior to the developer incurring large expenditures in the preparation
of the final development plan.
      2.   Application: In addition to the requirements of subsection
5-6-14-1(D) of this chapter, applications for preliminary plan approval shall
contain the following:
         a.   Location And Description Of Property: Location and legal
description of property by county, township, section number, development (with
block and lot numbers), place or locality name as applicable shall be
specified, and in case of unsubdivided properties, location on roads by which
property is reached.
         b.   Information As To Ownership:
            (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the legal owner,
beneficial owner or owners and any persons enjoying options or rights to
acquire the property.
            (2)   Title insurance commitment or policy, including access
endorsement, dated within sixty (60) days of the date of the application
submittal, and a sworn statement of any changes to legal or beneficiary
ownership or any contracts, options, leases and/or easements, licenses or
covenants granted or reserved subsequent to the date of the title commitment or
policy.
            (3)   A copy of the recorded instruments granting, conveying or
reserving any existing legal rights of way or easements affecting the property.
            (4)   A copy of the instruments creating any covenant affecting the
property.
            (5)   The applicant shall have an affirmative obligation to
provide, without request from the village, updated information as any of the
above described information may change between the time of submittal and the
approval and execution of the final development plan.
         c.   Applicant's Representatives: Name, address and telephone number
of engineer, surveyor and other professionals and technicians responsible for
surveys and for plan design, legal representation, and any other representation
of the applicant.
         d.   Preliminary Analysis And Inventory: Preliminary inventory and
analysis of the site and surrounding properties, for a distance of not less
than one thousand feet (1,000'). To the extent that they relate to the site,
such inventory and analysis shall consider topography; soils and geology;
waterways, wetlands and drainage; vegetation; wildlife; historic features;
adjacent land uses and zoning; utilities and related easements; riding trails,
roadways and traffic circulation; and other information critical to an
understanding of the capability of the site to accommodate the proposed
development. Aerial photographs may be required by the plan commission.
         e.   Preliminary Plan Proposals: Preliminary plan proposals which
shall include alternatives therefor, describing proposed uses and densities;
general parking and circulation layout; water supply, wastewater and storm
water management; conservation and landscaping; ownership and maintenance
concepts, site lighting; and other features that characterize the proposed
development.
         f.   Basic Facts And Proposals: Basic facts and proposals pertaining
to the property, including:
            (1)   Size of tract in acres or existing lots, if any, in square
feet.
            (2)   Gross lot area, net lot area and zoning lot area for each lot
within the development, plus minimum, average and maximum gross lot area for
the development as a whole.
            (3)   Areas to be preserved as public or private open space.
            (4)   Number and area of parcels of land intended to be dedicated,
conveyed or reserved for public use, and the conditions proposed for such
disposal and use.
         g.   Plan Submission Requirements: The preliminary development plan
shall be submitted in the following manner:
            (1)   Plan Scale: The preliminary development plan shall be drawn
at a scale suitable to the project involved. Unless otherwise determined by the
village engineer, a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (100' = 1") shall be
used. Drawings shall be oriented so that north is at the top of the sheet, with
a north arrow shown. The date of latest revision also shall be shown. The
preliminary development plan shall also be submitted in an electronic format
prescribed by the village from time to time.
            (2)   Sheet Identification: Each separate sheet shall be entitled
according to its subject matter and identified with the development. Any other
appropriate identification of the land, scale, contour intervals, north arrow,
date of preparation, including the date of latest revision, etc., shall be
included.
            (3)   Vicinity Sketch: A vicinity sketch or small scale key map of
the area surrounding the property to be developed shall be included.
            (4)   Existing Features:
               A.    Every preliminary development plan shall show clearly the
extent and condition of the property which is included in the development plan,
together with sufficient information with respect to existing conditions in
adjoining properties for a distance of not less than one thousand feet (1,000')
from the proposed development which will enable proper determinations to be
made as to the suitability of the proposed development.
               B.    The boundary of the property shall be shown by bold lines.
The bearing and distance of each course in the boundary outline shall be
provided.
               C.    The true relationship between the boundary of the property
and the right of way of existing roads upon which it may border, together with
the location of existing improvements in such right of way shall also be
provided. Existing permanent buildings shall be shown.
               D.    The relationship between the property and the village
coordinate system.
            (5)   Additional Information:
               A.    The names of owners of unsubdivided and subdivided
property within two thousand feet (2,000') of the boundaries of the proposed
development, but not more than two hundred fifty feet (250') beyond the
boundaries of the village.
               B.    The location, name and present width of right of way and
paving or improved surfacing for all adjacent roads, streets and alleys,
including those intersecting any road or street that bounds the property.
               C.    Identification by block and lot number of recorded lots or
parcels immediately adjoining the subject property.
               D.    The location, width and type of use of any existing roads,
rights of way, easements or other special purpose areas, including riding
trails, within the property, or immediately adjacent thereto, together with the
location of any towers, poles or other structures in connection with electric
transmission lines, and communication systems.
               E.    Approximate location of any existing underground
facilities, sewers, culverts, water mains, storm drains, gas or oil
transmission lines, etc., within the property or immediately adjacent thereto,
with pipe sizes and directions of slope.
               F.    Existing topography showing contours at two foot (2')
intervals for land that slopes more than two percent (2%) or one foot (1')
intervals for land that slopes less than two percent (2%), together with
drainage channels, streams, springs, swamps, rock outcrops, buildings, wooded
areas or other features likely to affect the plan. All contours shall be on
USGS datum and shall be determined from current field data or aerial
photography. If any part of the proposed subdivision is subject to flooding, a
line indicating the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood shall be
shown on the drawing.
               G.    The plan commission may allow the omission of contours
from plans of those development plans which do not require the installation of
on site drainage retention or detention; provided that each plan from which
contours are omitted shall be accompanied by a surveyor's certification that no
part of the proposed development consists of flood hazard areas.
            (6)   Preliminary Landscape Plan: A general depiction of proposed
landscaping plan required by subsection (B) of this section shall be provided.
In addition, to assist in the overall planning procedure and location of
proposed improvements, existing tree growth and ground cover within a proposed
development shall be identified and located in accordance with the following
categories:
               A.    Undisturbed Areas: Within areas which will not be
disturbed by construction of improvements, tree growth shall be designated only
by an outline of the forested areas. The various tree species within forested
areas and freestanding trees shall be designated.
               B.    Disturbed Areas: Within areas to be disturbed by
construction of improvements, a tree inventory shall be made showing the
location, size and species of all trees over ten inches (10") in diameter as
measured at a point two feet (2') above natural ground. Existing ground cover
in all areas to be disturbed by construction shall be delineated.
The above required inventories shall be prepared by a practicing arborist or
landscape architect. All plants will be designated using their English names.
            (7)   Preliminary Development Plan: The preliminary development
plans shall show, superimposed upon the drawing of the property outlines and
its existing features, a graphic representation of the development which is
being proposed for approval. The items to be shown, as applicable in each case,
include the following:
               A.    General Site Plan Data: Site plan data shall be compiled
to identify: net site area; projected density, total floor area; floor area
ratio; ground coverage of buildings; impervious surface coverage; maximum
building height; numbers of buildings by building type; and subcategories of
data of each type of land use, if mixed use is proposed for the site.
               B.    Existing Zoning And Uses: Existing zoning districts and
current use of the land on the site and on adjacent property.
               C.    Layout Of Streets: Details showing right of way and
pavement widths, proposed street names (unless the street is an extension of an
already named street, in which event that name shall be used) and showing
proposed through streets extended to the boundaries of the development.
               D.    Layout, Numbers, And Dimensions Of Proposed Lots, Building
Envelopes, And Uses: Layout, numbers and typical dimensions of any subdivided
lots and building locations to the nearest foot; and the proposed land use for
each lot, parcel, or tract.
               E.    Setbacks: Proposed setback lines and dimensions.
               F.   Proposed Buildings: All proposed buildings, indicating
their use, height, number of units or floor area, and building materials.
               G.    Open Space Areas: Areas other than street right of way
intended to be dedicated or reserved for open space or other public use and
showing the approximate area in acres of open space areas.
               H.    Sidewalks And Pedestrian And Riding Trails: Pedestrian
facility information including: dimensions of all sidewalks and pedestrian and
riding trails.
               I.    Parking And Loading: Parking and loading information
including: number of parking/loading spaces required and provided; dimensions
of all spaces and maneuvering aisles; number and location of barrier free
parking spaces; pavement details for all proposed parking and loading areas;
and proposed methods of screening.
               J.    Location And Screening Of Waste Receptacles: Location of
waste receptacle(s) and proposed method of screening. All dumpster enclosures
shall be designed to be compatible with the building architecture.
               K.    Screening And Ground Mounted And Rooftop Mechanical
Equipment: The proposed method of screening for all exterior mechanical
equipment shall be shown on the building elevations (if rooftop) or the site
plan (if ground mounted). All screening shall be designed to be architecturally
compatible with the building.
         h.   Additional Information: Such other information as may be required
by the plan commission or board of trustees.
      3.   Notification Of Neighboring Property Owners:
         a.   All property owners within two thousand feet (2,000') of the
boundaries of the tract of land being considered for development, but not more
than two hundred fifty feet (250') beyond the boundaries of the village, shall
be notified by the applicant in person or by certified mail a minimum of
fifteen (15) days prior to the plan commission hearing on the preliminary plan.
         b.   In addition, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the plan
commission hearing, a two foot by three foot (2' x 3') notice thereof,
including such information as shall be described in the application form, shall
be posted by the applicant in plain view on the road or street frontages of the
property for which the application has been filed.
         c.   Notice of the plan commission hearing shall be submitted by the
village clerk for publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village at least fifteen (15) days and no more than thirty (30) days prior to
the date of the plan commission hearing.
         d.   Prior to the opening of the plan commission public hearing, the
applicant shall present to the village attorney or special counsel a sworn
statement that notice as required herein was given by the applicant to the
persons at the addresses shown on a list to be attached to the sworn statement.
      4.   Staff Review: If an application for preliminary plan approval is
determined to be complete, as provided in subsection
5-6-14-1(D) of this chapter, the application for preliminary plan approval
shall be reviewed by the village engineer, the village planner and the village
attorney or special counsel (hereinafter "staff"). Staff shall, submit a report
or reports thereon to the plan commission within fourteen (14) days after the
determination of completeness. Staff may post the application and preliminary
plan on the village website so as to engender public comment.
      5.   Plan Commission Review And Action:
         a.   The plan commission shall review the preliminary development plan
at its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the report or
reports from staff, unless such time is extended by mutual consent, and shall
recommend to the board of trustees the approval, with or without conditions, or
disapproval of the preliminary development plan.
         b.   The plan commission may permit any applicant to make any changes
or additions as may be required by the plan commission prior to submission of
its recommendation to the board of trustees.
         c.   The recommendation of the plan commission shall be in writing,
shall state the basis for the recommended action, and shall report on:
            (1)   The conformity of the preliminary development plan with the
village's comprehensive plan;
            (2)   The conformity of the preliminary development plan with the
purposes, objectives, standards and criteria of this title, including
specification of any variances requested;
            (3)   The Illinois department of conservation's endangered and
threatened species consultation; and
            (4)   The report of the soil conservation district.
         d.   If the recommendation of the plan commission on the proposed
development plan is for disapproval, the plan commission shall furnish the
applicant with a written statement of the reasons for such disapproval,
forwarding a copy of said statement to the board of trustees. Such disapproval
does not constitute rejection.
         e.   After action on the preliminary development plan by the plan
commission, the plan commission shall file with the village clerk one copy of
the proposed development plan, together with the recommendation of the
commission. The village clerk shall submit the development plan and
recommendation of the commission to the board of trustees.
      6.   Board Of Trustees Review And Action:
         a.   At its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the
proposed preliminary development plan and the recommendation of the plan
commission, the board of trustees shall consider the development plan and the
commission's recommendation in accordance with the purposes, objectives,
standards and criteria of this title. The board of trustees shall then approve
the preliminary development plan, with or without conditions, or disapprove it.
         b.   Upon disapproval of the preliminary development plan by the board
of trustees, the board of trustees shall return the development plan to the
applicant and the plan commission with a written statement setting forth the
reasons for said disapproval. Once deficiencies are corrected, the applicant
may resubmit the preliminary development plan to the village clerk for referral
to staff and the plan commission, in accordance with the procedures set forth
in this title, without additional filing fees.
         c.   If the proposed preliminary development plan is approved by the
board of trustees, the original and one print or copy of the plat shall be
endorsed by the board of trustees as follows:
   This development plan and accompanying documents has received preliminary
approval by Resolution                of the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Barrington Hills, and the Plan Commission is now ready to receive the final
development plan for consideration.
   Dated                    
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF BARRINGTON HILLS
   By                                           
      President
      ATTEST:                                  
      Village Clerk
The village may post the approved preliminary development plan on the village
web site or otherwise make the same publicly available for comment.
      7.   Authority To Proceed With Final Development Plan: Receipt by the
applicant of the copy of the endorsed preliminary development plan together
with the approval of the board of trustees, shall constitute authority for the
applicant to proceed with the final development plan.
      8.   Time Limit On Submission Of Development Plan: After approval of the
preliminary development plan by the board of trustees, the applicant shall,
within twelve (12) months thereafter, submit an application for final
development plan approval. If a phasing plan was approved as part of the
preliminary development plan, the applicant may submit a final development plan
constituting only that portion of the approved preliminary development plan
which he proposes to develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms
in all respects to the preliminary development plan. If final development plan
covering all portions of the preliminary development plan is not submitted
within twenty four (24) months after the date of approval of the preliminary
development plan by the board of trustees, the preliminary development plan
shall be resubmitted according to the regulations of subsection
5-6-14-1(D) of this chapter.
   (B)   Final Development Plan:
      1.   Purpose: Upon approval of the preliminary development plan, an
application for final development plan approval may be filed to fully describe
the proposed development, including final engineering.
      2.   Application: In addition to the requirements of subsection (A) of
this section, applications for final development plan approval shall contain
the following:
         a.   Date: The date of preliminary development plan approval and
identification of any changes from said approved development plan.
         b.   Drawing: The final development plan shall be clearly and legibly
drawn in black ink upon tracing cloth or Mylar to a scale of one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger from an accurate survey. All notations
of distances, bearings and labels shall have a minimum height of one-tenth inch
(1/10"). It shall be drawn on one or more sheets whose maximum dimensions shall
not exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). If more than
two (2) sheets are required, an index sheet of the same dimensions shall be
filed showing the entire plan on one sheet and the component areas shown on the
other sheet or sheets. The drawing shall be oriented so that north is at the
top of the sheet. The final development plan shall show:
            (1)   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles or
bearings.
            (2)   Municipal, township or section lines accurately tied to lines
of the subdivision by distances and angles and the description of any section
corner monuments.
            (3)   The relationship between the property and the village
coordinate system.
            (4)   Correct legal description of the land embraced in the
development plan, showing the township and range in which such land is
situated. If there is any excepted parcel within the development plan boundary,
it must be accurately described by metes, bounds and courses.
            (5)   Lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths
and names.
            (6)   Accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to
be dedicated or granted for public use.
            (7)   Line of departure of one street from another.
            (8)   Names and widths of adjoining streets and alleys.
            (9)   Building setback lines.
            (10)   Location of all easements, labeled for their intended uses.
            (11)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for
locating the boundaries of the lots, streets, alleys, easements and other areas
for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to the nearest one
one-hundredth of a foot (1/100').
            (12)   Radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency and central angles
for all curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners.
            (13)   Location of all required monuments and their descriptions.
            (14)   Name of the development, scale of the plan, true north
point, the name of owner or owners, of applicant, if different, and date of
preparation, including the date of the latest revision.
         c.   Final Landscape Plan: A landscape plan shall be prepared by a
practicing landscape architect in accordance with the standards in subsection
(A)2g(6) of this section and contain the following information:
            (1)   Plant name, both Latin and English.
            (2)   Planting location.
            (3)   Number of plants in any one location.
            (4)   Total number of plants to be provided.
         d.   Improvement Plans: Improvement plans showing street profiles for
each new street and all drainage improvements in the proposed development shall
be submitted in accordance with the standards of sections
6-4-3 and
6-4-4 of this code. However, in cases where grades of streets involved are
already established, such improvement plans may not be required if determined
by the village engineer to not be necessary. All plans shall be prepared under
the supervision of a registered professional engineer whose experience and
educational background is civil engineering. Plans submitted for the
improvements shall contain the following minimum information:
            (1)   Title or cover sheet.
            (2)   Large scale location map showing the general area of the
development.
            (3)   General notes as required.
            (4)   Typical street sections.
            (5)   Summary of quantities with a per sheet breakdown.
            (6)   Layout plan, if required, for clarity.
            (7)   Plan and profile sheets, scale one inch equals fifty feet (1"
= 50') H, one inch equals five feet (1" = 5') V or one inch equals twenty feet
(1" = 20') H, one inch equals two feet (1" = 2') V.
            (8)   Landscape plan.
            (9)   Erosion control details.
            (10)   Special construction details, as required.
            (11)   Cross section sheets.
            (12)   Standard construction details as required.
            (13)   Floor plans and elevations for all existing and proposed
buildings.
            (14)   A site lighting plan.
            (15)   Perspective drawings of the proposed structures.
            (16)   Sign elevations.
Plans shall be prepared in ink on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x
36") linen or Mylar sheets conforming to federal aid standards and shall be
submitted in an electronic format as prescribed by the village from time to
time.
         e.   Designation Of Existing Or Proposed Streets: Designation of
existing or proposed streets to be used during construction of the proposed
development.
         f.   Topographic Overlay: A surface water drainage plan and
topographical map (referred to as "the topographic overlay") in accordance with
765 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
      3.   Staff Review: If an application for final development plan approval
is determined to be complete, as provided in subsection
5-6-14-1(D) of this chapter, the application shall be reviewed by staff. Staff
shall submit a report or reports thereon to the plan commission within twenty
eight (28) days after the determination of completeness of the application. The
village engineer shall then return the development plan to the plan commission
together with a report indicating that plans and specifications and technical
details have been checked and found satisfactory or his recommendations for
corrections. At any time the final development plan may be posted on the
village website or otherwise made publicly available for comment.
      4.   Plan Commission Review And Action: The plan commission shall review
the final development plan at its next regularly scheduled meeting following
receipt of the report or reports from staff, unless such period is extended by
mutual consent. If the plan commission determines that the final development
plan conforms to the approved preliminary development plan and that the final
development plan meets all requirements of this title, the commission shall
recommend approval of the final development plan, with or without conditions.
If the plan commission determines that the final development plan does not
conform to this title, then the commission shall recommend disapproval to the
board of trustees. The plan commission shall transmit the final development
plan and all supporting documents to the board of trustees for consideration at
their next regular meeting following plan commission action.
      5.   Board Of Trustees Review And Action: At its next regular meeting
following action on a final development plan by the plan commission and such
other bodies as may be required by applicable law, the board of trustees shall
consider the final development plan. The board of trustees shall either adopt
the recommendations of the plan commission and approve the planned development,
with or without conditions, or reject the recommendations of the plan
commission and approve or disapprove the planned development, with or without
conditions. (Ord. 04-01, 2-23-2004)
5-6-14-3: VARIATIONS:
   (A)   Where the plan commission finds that extra hardships or particular
difficulties may result from strict compliance with the development plan
regulations under this section or section
5-6-13 or
5-6-14 of this chapter, the plan commission may recommend variations or
exceptions to such regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest secured. Such variations or exceptions shall not, however, have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this title. The plan
commission shall not recommend variations or exceptions to the development plan
regulations unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented in
each specific case that:
      1.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out;
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not
applicable, generally, to other property;
      3.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire
to increase the economic return from the development of the property;
      4.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to public
health, safety or general welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
      5.   The special circumstances or conditions have not resulted from any
act of the applicant subsequent to the effective date hereof, whether or not in
violation of any portion thereof;
      6.   The variation granted is the minimum adjustment necessary for the
reasonable use of the land; and
      7.   The aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the strict
application of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of the
reasonable use of his land. Mere loss in value shall not justify a variation;
there must be deprivation of beneficial use of land.
   (B)   The plan commission shall submit a report to the board of trustees
regarding the basis and justification for any variations recommended. (Ord. 04-
01, 2-23-2004)
CHAPTER 7
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-7-1: Use, Lot And Bulk Regulations
5-7-2: Permitted Uses, Exceptions
5-7-3: Permitted Uses, Specific Conditions
5-7-4: Special Uses
5-7-5: Performance Standards, Noise
5-7-6: Performance Standards, Vibration
5-7-7: Performance Standards, Smoke And Particulate Matter
5-7-8: Performance Standards, Toxic Matter
5-7-9: Performance Standards, Noxious And Odorous Matter
5-7-10: Performance Standards, Fire And Explosive Hazards
5-7-11: Performance Standards, Glare And Heat
5-7-12: Minimum Front Yard
5-7-13: Minimum Corner Side Yard
5-7-14: Minimum Transitional Yards
5-7-15: Maximum Floor Area Ratio
5-7-16: Regulations Along Business And Residence District Boundaries
5-7-17: [Reserved]
5-7-18: Off Street Parking
5-7-19: Off Street Loading
5-7-20: Moratorium On Applications
5-7-1: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the light industrial
district are set forth in this chapter. Also applying to the light industrial
district are regulations set forth in other chapters of this title as follows:
   Chapter 2, "Zoning Definitions" of this title.
   Chapter 3, "General Zoning Provisions" of this title.
   Chapter 9, "Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Uses" of this title.
   Chapter 10, "Administration And Enforcement" of this title. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-
1963)
5-7-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted
under the conditions specified. No buildings or zoning lot shall be devoted to
any use other than a use permitted hereinafter, with the exception of the
following:
   (A)   Uses lawfully established on April 1, 1963; and
   (B)   Special uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of Section
5-7-4 hereunder.
Uses lawfully established on April 1, 1963, and rendered nonconforming by the
provisions hereof, shall be subject to the regulations of Chapter 9 of this
Title. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
5-7-3: PERMITTED USES, SPECIFIC CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Uses permitted are subject to the following conditions:
      1.   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking
and off-street loading as regulated by Sections
5-7-18 and
5-7-19 of this Chapter, or establishments of the "drive-in" type offering goods
or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise indicated
hereinafter.
   (B)   The following uses are permitted:
      1.   Agricultural buildings and structures.
      2.   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
storage of materials, goods or products, except those uses involving the
storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by
detonation, as itemized in Section
5-7-2 of this Chapter, which conform with the performance standards set forth
in Sections
5-7-5 through
5-7-11 hereof, and which shall not be injurious or offensive to the occupants
of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration,
smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious materials, odors,
fire or explosive hazards, or glare or heat.
      3.   Public utility and service uses:
         a.   Electric substations.
         b.   Fire stations.
         c.   Gas regulator stations.
         d.   Police stations.
         e.   Railroad rights of way.
         f.   Telephone exchanges, telephone transmission equipment buildings
and microwave relay towers.
         g.   Utility service substations, electric, gas, telephone and water.
         h.   Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants.
(Ord. 65-4, 9-27-65)
         i.   Other governmental buildings, including a Village Hall. (Ord. 72-
16, 12-18-72)
      4.   Publishing.
      5.   Sewage disposal units, individual, as regulated by Section
5-3-5 of this Title.
      6.   Signs, as regulated by Chapter 5-11.
      7.   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed the duration of such construction.
      8.   Water systems, individual, as regulated by Section
5-3-5 of this Title.
      9.   Accessory uses, incidental to (as determined by the Zoning Board of
Appeals) and on the same zoning lot as a principal use. (Ord. 65-4, 9-27-65)
5-7-4: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Special Uses): Special uses, as
hereinafter listed, may be allowed, subject to the issuance of special use
permits in accordance with the provisions of Section
5-10-8 of this Title.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Special Uses): The following special uses
may be allowed, subject to the provisions of Section
5-10-8 of this Title:
      1.   Heliports, private.
      2.   Landfill.
      3.   Parks and playgrounds.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, community.
      5.   Signs in excess of thirty feet (30') in height from curb level.
      6.   Signs set back less than fifteen feet (15') from the front lot line.
      7.   Accessory uses, incidental to, as determined by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, and on the same zoning lot as a principal use.
5-7-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, NOISE:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Performance Standards, Noise):
      1.   Any use established in the Light Industrial District after April 1,
1963 shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing
noise set forth hereinafter. No use lawfully established on April 1, 1963 shall
be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the
performance standards governing noise established hereinafter.
      2.   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat
network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the
performance standards hereinafter prescribed; provided, that such noises shall
be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of
being so measured, for the purpose of this Title, shall be those noises which
cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter with a
variation of no more than plus or minus two (2) decibels. Noises incapable of
being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall
be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Performance Standards, Noise): At no point
on the boundary of a residence or business district shall the sound pressure
level of any operation or plant (other than background noises produced by
sources not under control of this Title, such as the operation of motor
vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel limits in the
octave bands designated below:
                                          Maximum Permitted Sound Leve l(In
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Decibels)
                                          ALONG RESIDENCE
                                          DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
                                          Maximum Permitted Sound Leve l(In
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Decibels)
                                          ALONG RESIDENCE
                                          DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
0 to 75                                   72
75 to 150                                 67
150 to 300                                59
300 to 600                                52
600 to 1200                               46
1200 to 2400                              40
2400 to 4800                              34
above 4800                                32
 
                                          Maximum Permitted Sound Level
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Per Second) (in Decibels)
                                          ALONG BUSINESS DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
                                          Maximum Permitted Sound Level
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Per Second) (in Decibels)
                                          ALONG BUSINESS DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
0 to 75                                   79
75 to 150                                 74
150 to 300                                66
300 to 600                                59
600 to 1200                               53
1200 to 2400                              47
2400 to 4800                              41
above 4800                                39
 
5-7-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, VIBRATION:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Performance Standards, Vibration): Any
use established in the Light Industrial District after April 1, 1963 shall be
so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing vibration set
forth hereinafter. No use lawfully established on April 1, 1963 shall be so
altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the
performance standards governing vibration established hereinafter.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Performance Standards, Vibration):Any
industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point
along the nearest adjacent lot line, earth-borne vibrations, (other than
background vibrations produced by some source not under control of this Title,
such as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) in
excess of the limits set forth in Column I of the following table is
prohibited. In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall
cause, at any time and at any point along a residence district boundary line,
earth-borne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column II of the
following table is prohibited. Vibration shall be expressed as displacement in
inches and shall be measured with a three-component measuring system approved
by the Enforcing Officer.
 
Frequency           I*           II*
(Cycles Per Second) Displacement Displacement
                    (Inches)     (Inches)
0 to 10             .0008        .0004
10 to 20            .0005        .0002
20 to 30            .0002        .0001
30 to 40            .0002        .0001
40 and over         .0001        .0001
 
*Steady State: Vibrations, for the purpose of this Title, which are continuous
or, if in discrete pulses, are more than one hundred (100) per minute. Impact
vibration, that is, discrete pulses which do not exceed one hundred (100)
impulses per minute shall not cause in excess of twice the displacements
stipulated.
5-7-7: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Performance Standards, Smoke and
Particulate Matter):
      1.   Any use established in the Light Industrial District after April 1,
1963 shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing
smoke and particulate matter set forth hereinafter. No use lawfully established
on April 1, 1963 shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or
further conflict with, the performance standards governing smoke and
particulate matter established hereinafter. Any use lawfully established on
April 1, 1963 shall be permitted to be altered, enlarged, expanded or modified;
provided, that new sources of smoke and/or particulate matter conform to the
performance standards established hereinafter. The total emission weight of
particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of the lot shall not
exceed the net amount permitted after such alteration, enlargement or
modification.
      2.   In addition to the performance standards specified hereinafter, the
emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
      3.   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann
Chart, published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be
employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than
No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times, except as otherwise
provided hereinafter.
      4.   The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of particulate
matter containing more than ten percent (10%) by weight of particles having a
particle diameter larger than forty four (44) microns is prohibited.
      5.   Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads and so forth, within lot boundaries,
shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other
acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources in excess of
the weight limitations specified hereinafter is prohibited.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Performance Standards, Smoke and
Particulate Matter):The emission of more than ten (10) smoke units per hour per
stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann No.
2. However, once during any six (6) hour period each stack may emit up to
twenty (20) smoke units, not to exceed Ringelmann No. 2, when blowing soot or
cleaning fires. Only during fire-cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of
Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted, and then for not more than four (4) minutes per
period.
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the
boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of
lot area during any one hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission
per acre the correction factor set forth in the following table:
   Allowance for Height of Emission*
 
Height of Emission Correction
Above Grade (Feet) (Pounds Per Hour Per Acre)
50                 0.01
100                0.06
150                0.10
200                0.18
300                0.30
400                0.50
 
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within
the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
      1.   Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source
of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area, thereby
obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
      2.   From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in subsection 1
above, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required) for height of
emission set forth in the table, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in
pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission.
      3.   Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in
subsection 2 above, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all sources
of emission within the boundaries of the lot. Such total shall not exceed one
pound per acre of lot area during any one hour.
5-7-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, TOXIC MATTER:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Performance Standards, Toxic Matter):
Any use established in the Light Industrial District after April 1, 1963 shall
be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing emission
of toxic matter set forth hereinafter. No use lawfully established on April 1,
1963 shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict
with, the performance standards governing toxic matter established hereinafter.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Performance Standards, Toxic Matter): No
activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of toxic matter
in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business.
5-7-9: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, NOXIOUS AND ODOROUS MATTER:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Performance Standards, Noxious and
Odorous Matter):
      1.   Any use established in the Light Industrial District after April 1,
1963 shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing
noxious and odorous materials set forth hereinafter. No use lawfully
established on April 1, 1963 shall be so altered or modified as to conflict
with, or further conflict with, the performance standards governing noxious and
odorous materials established hereinafter.
      2.   In addition to the performance standards specified hereinafter, the
emission of noxious and odorous matter in such manner or quantity as to be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Performance Standards, Noxious and Odorous
Matter):No activity or operation shall cause at any time the discharge of
matter in such concentration as to be noxious. The emission of matter in such
quantities as to be readily detectable as an odor at any point along lot lines
is prohibited.
5-7-10: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Performance Standards, Fire and
Explosive Hazards):Any use established in the Light Industrial District after
April 1, 1963 shall be so operated as to comply with performance standards
governing fire and explosive hazards set forth hereinafter. No use lawfully
established on April 1, 1963 shall be so altered or modified as to conflict
with, or further conflict with, the performance standards governing fire and
explosive hazards established hereinafter.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Performance Standards, Fire and Explosive
Hazards):
      1.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
      2.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted,
provided the following condition is met:
Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or manufactured within
completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected
throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
      3.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or
materials* which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, shall be
permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of
finished products in original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted:
   Total Capacity of Flammable Materials Permitted
   (In Gallons)
Industries Engaged in Above Ground Underground
Storage Only:
Industries Engaged in                                  Above Ground Underground
Storage Only:
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187°F. Prohibited   100,000
From and including 105°F. to and including 187°F.    Prohibited   100,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than Prohibited   100,000
105°F.
Industries Engaged in Utilization and Manufacture of Flammable Materials:
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187°F. 50,000       100,000
From and including 105°F. to and including 187°F.    20,000       100,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 5,000        100,000
105°F.
 
*When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in
cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (at S.T.P.) permitted shall not exceed
three hundred (300) times the quantities as listed above.
5-7-11: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, GLARE AND HEAT:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Performance Standards, Glare and Heat):
Any use established in the Light Industrial District after April 1, 1963 shall
be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing glare and
heat set forth hereinafter. No use lawfully established on April 1, 1963 shall
be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the
performance standards governing glare and heat established hereinafter.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Performance Standards, Glare and Heat): Any
operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a
completely enclosed building in such manner as not to create a public nuisance
or hazard along lot lines. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not
to create a nuisance across lot lines.
5-7-12: MINIMUM FRONT YARD:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Minimum Front Yard): Front yards shall
be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter indicated. Front
yards shall be unobstructed from ground level to the sky, except as allowed in
Section
5-3-9 of this Title. All accessory buildings which are attached to principal
buildings shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building.
Exception: Telephone booths and coin telephones (outdoor) shall be permitted in
the required front yard. However, if such telephone is installed near an
intersection of two (2) streets or rights of way, the minimum setback from one
of such intersecting right-of-way lines shall be twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 63-1,
4-1-63)
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Minimum Front Yard): There shall be
provided a front yard of not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth along
the front lot line; except, however, agricultural buildings and structures
shall provide a front yard of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') in
depth along the front lot line. (Ord. 65-4, 9-27-65)
5-7-13: MINIMUM CORNER SIDE YARDS:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Minimum Corner Side Yards): Corner side
yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter
indicated. Comer side yards shall be unobstructed from ground level to the sky,
except as allowed in Section
5-3-9 of this Title. All accessory buildings which are attached to principal
buildings shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building.
Exception: Telephone booths and coin telephones (outdoor) shall be permitted in
the required corner side yard. However, if such telephone is installed near an
intersection of two (2) streets or rights of way, the minimum setback from one
of such intersecting right-of-way lines shall be twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 63-1,
4-1-63)
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Minimum Corner Side Yards): In every
instance where the side property line is adjacent to a public street, there
shall be provided a corner side yard of not less than one hundred feet (100')
in depth; except, however, agricultural buildings and structures shall provide
a corner side yard of not less than one hundred feet (100') in depth along all
lot lines that coincide with lot lines in an adjacent business or residential
district. (Ord. 65-4, 9-27-65)
5-7-14: MINIMUM TRANSITIONAL YARDS:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Minimum Transitional Yards): Where the
Light Industrial District adjoins either a residence district or a business
district, transitional yards shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations hereinafter indicated. Transitional yards shall be unobstructed
from ground level to the sky, except as allowed in Section
5-3-9 of this Title. All accessory buildings which are attached to principal
buildings shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building.
(Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Minimum Transitional Yards): The minimum
transitional yard requirements to all structures, other than agricultural
buildings and structures, shall not be less than those specified below:
      1.   Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an
adjacent business or residence district, a yard shall be provided along such
side lot line. Such yard shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') in
width.
      2.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent
business or residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot
line. Such yard shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') in depth.
      3.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent
business or residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot
line. Such yard shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') in depth.
Agricultural buildings and structures shall provide a transitional yard of not
less than one hundred feet (100') in depth along all lot lines that coincide
with a lot line in an adjacent business or residence district. (Ord. 65-4, 9-
27-65)
5-7-15: MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Maximum Floor Area Ratio): The floor
area ratio requirements, as set forth herein, shall determine the maximum floor
area allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area of both
principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the
zoning lot. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Maximum Floor Area Ratio): The floor area
ratio shall not exceed zero point three (0.3). (Ord. 65-4, 9-27-65)
5-7-16: REGULATIONS ALONG BUSINESS AND RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (District Boundaries): Where a Light
Industrial District abuts a business or residence district and along any zoning
district boundary separating such Light Industrial District from a business or
residence district, there shall be provided, with respect to all buildings,
structures and uses constructed or established after the effective date hereof,
unobstructed open space from ground level to the sky (except as allowed in
Section
5-3-9 of this Title) in accordance with the regulations established
hereinafter.
   (B)   Industrial District (District Boundaries): In the Light Industrial
District on properties or portions thereof located directly across a street
from a business or residence district, if any point on the exterior surface of
any building or structure is at a greater height than thirty five feet (35')
above curb level, such point projected vertically upon the ground shall in no
case be nearer to the business or residence district boundary line than a
horizontal distance equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the height of such
point above curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads or ventilating
equipment, including towers enclosing same, shall be exempt from such
limitation if not exceeding in the aggregate twenty five feet (25') in lineal
dimension parallel to the street for any one hundred feet (100') of street
frontage. Parapets not exceeding three feet (3') in height shall also be exempt
from such limitation.
In the Light Industrial District, on properties or portions thereof located
adjacent to a side or rear property line of a business or residence district,
if any point on the exterior surface of any building or structure is at a
greater height than thirty five feet (35') above curb level, the vertical
projection of such point upon the ground shall in no case be nearer to the side
or rear lot line of any property in the adjacent business or residence district
than a horizontal distance equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the height of
such point above curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads or ventilating
equipment, including towers enclosing same shall be exempt from such height
limitation if not exceeding in the aggregate twenty five feet (25') in lineal
dimension parallel to such business or residential lot line(s) for any one
hundred feet (100') of length of such lot line(s). Parapets not exceeding three
feet (3') in height shall also be exempt from such limitations. (Ord. 63-1, 4-
1-63)
5-7-17: [RESERVED]:
5-7-18: OFF-STREET PARKING:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Off-Street Parking): Off-street parking
facilities for motor vehicles in the Light Industrial District shall be
provided in accordance with the regulations set forth hereinafter, as well as
in Section
5-3-10 of this Title:
      1.   Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this Title results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded while a fraction in
excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
      2.   Collective Provision: Off-street parking facilities for separate
uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is
not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and
provided that all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces,
in relation to the use served, are adhered to. Further, no parking spaces or
portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless
otherwise authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section
5-10-4 of this Title.
      3.   Area: A required off-street parking space shall be at least ten feet
in width and at least twenty feet in length (10' x 20'), exclusive of access
drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office or work areas. Such space shall have
a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
      4.   Access: Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off-street
parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in such a manner as to minimize interference with traffic
movement. No driveway across public property at the right-of-way line shall
exceed a width of twenty five feet (25').
      5.   In Yards: Off-street parking spaces, open to the sky, shall not be
located in any required yard, except rear yards. Enclosed buildings containing
off-street parking shall be subject to applicable yard requirements.
      6.   Design and Maintenance:
         a.   Open and Enclosed Parking Spaces: Off-street parking spaces may
be open to the sky or enclosed in a building.
         b.   Surfacing: All open off-street parking areas shall be improved
with a compacted macadam base, not less than four inches (4") thick, surfaced
with asphalt or treated with some comparable all-weather dustless material.
         c.   Screening and Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas
shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining any property situated in a
residence district or any institutional premises by a wall, fence or densely
planted compact hedge not less than five feet (5') nor more than eight feet
(8') in height.
         d.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking
areas shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not
to interfere with the residential use.
         e.   Repair and Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of
any kind shall be permitted in association with any open accessory parking
facilities.
      7.   Location: All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses
erected or established after April 1, 1963 shall be located on the same zoning
lot as the building or use served. Buildings or uses existing on April 1, 1963
which are subsequently altered or enlarged so as to require the provision of
parking spaces under this Title may be served by parking facilities located on
land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served is located.
      8.   Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees on duty, on the premises at any one
time.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Off-Street Parking): Off-street parking
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum
requirements:
                                        1 parking space shall be provided for
1. Auto laundries. Maximum capacity, in each 3 employees, plus 1 space for the
this instance, shall mean the greatest  owner or manager, and in addition,
number possible of automobiles          reservoir parking spaces, equal in
undergoing some phase of laundering at  number to 5 times the maximum capacity
the same time                           of the auto laundry, for automobiles
                                        awaiting entrance to the auto laundry
                                        1 parking space shall be provided for
2. Automobile service stations          each 2 employees, plus 1 space for the
                                        owner or manager
                                        1 parking space shall be provided for
3. Cartage and express facilities       each vehicle maintained on the
                                        premises, plus 1 space for each 2
                                        employees
                                        1 parking space shall be provided for
                                        each 2 employees
                                        a. Contractors', architects' and
4. For the uses listed hereunder:       engineers' offices and shops
                                        b. Highway maintenance shops
                                        c. Sewage treatment plants, community
                                        d. Weighing stations
                                        1 parking space shall be provided for
                                        each 2 employees, plus spaces adequate
5. For the uses listed hereunder:       in number, as determined by the
                                        Enforcing Officer, to serve the
                                        visiting public
                                        a. Public utility and service uses
                                        1 parking space shall be provided for
                                        each 3 employees
                                        a. Any production, processing,
                                        cleaning, servicing, testing,repair or
6. For the uses listed hereunder:       storage of materials, goods or products
                                        b. Laundries
                                        c. Mail order houses
                                        d. Packing and crating
                                        e. Printing
                                        f. Publishing
                                        parking spaces equal in number to 50%
7. For the uses listed hereunder:       of the capacity in persons
                                        a. Restaurants
                                        1 parking space shall be provided for
                                        each 200 square feet of gross floor
                                        area
                                        a. Banks
                                        b. Building material sales
                                        c. Currency exchanges
                                        d. Drug stores
8. For the uses listed hereunder:       e. Dry cleaning establishments
                                        f. Fuel and ice sales
                                        g. Garages for storage, repair and
                                        servicing of motor vehicles
                                        h. Retail outlet stores
                                        i. Temporary buildings for construction
                                        purposes
                                        j. Wholesale establishments
                                        parking spaces, if any, shall be
9. Heliports, private                   provided as determined by the Enforcing
                                        Officer
10. Medical and dental clinics          3 parking spaces for each staff and
                                        regularly- visiting doctor
 
5-7-19: OFF-STREET LOADING:
   (A)   Use, Lot and Bulk Regulations (Off-Street Loading): Off-street loading
facilities accessory to uses allowed in the Light Industrial District shall be
provided in accordance with the regulations set forth hereinafter, as well as
in Section
5-3-10 of this Title:
      1.   Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. All motor vehicle loading berths which abut a
residence district or intervening alley separating a residence district from
the Light Industrial District shall be completely screened therefrom by
building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence, wall or door, or any
combination thereof, not less than eight feet (8') in height. No permitted or
required loading berth shall be located within fifty feet (50') of the nearest
point of intersection of any two (2) streets. No loading berth shall be located
in a required front or side yard, and any loading berth located in a required
rear yard shall be open to the sky.
      2.   Area: Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street loading
berth shall be at least ten feet in width by at least twenty five feet in
length (10' x 25'), exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a
vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
      3.   Access: Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a
manner as to minimize interference with traffic movement.
      4.   Subsurfacing: All open off-street loading berths shall be improved
with a compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches (7") thick, surfaced
with not less than two inches (2") of asphalt or treated with some comparable
all-weather dustless material.
      5.   Repair and Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in association with any open loading facilities
provided in the Light Industrial District.
      6.   Utilization: Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-
street parking facilities or portions thereof.
      7.   Minimum Facilities: Uses for which off-street loading facilities are
required herein but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the
minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be provided with
adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle, off any adjacent
alley, service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
   (B)   Light Industrial District (Off-Street Loading): In the Light
Industrial District off-street loading facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following minimum requirements:
      1.   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
storage of materials, goods or products:
         a.   For buildings containing 5,000 to 40,000 square feet of gross
floor area, one loading berth shall be provided.
         b.   For buildings containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross
floor area, 2 loading berths shall be provided, plus one additional loading
berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof.
         c.   Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area shall be not less than 10 feet in width by 50 feet in
length (10' x 50').
      2.   For the uses listed hereunder one loading berth shall be provided
for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, for
each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 500,000 square
feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional
loading berth for each additional 500,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof in excess of 500,000 square feet:
         a.   Banks.
         b.   Medical and dental clinics.
         c.   Recreation buildings or community centers, noncommercial.
      3.   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided
for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus one additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in
excess of 20,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be not less than 10 feet
in width by 50 feet in length (10' x 50');
         a.   Sewage treatment plants, community.
      4.   For the uses listed hereunder there shall be no requirement for off-
street loading:
         a.   Parking lots.
         b.   Weighing stations.
      5.   For all other uses, loading facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
Gross Floor Area of Establishment in Required Number and Size of Berths
Thousands of Square Feet
5 to 10                              1 - (10 ft. x 25 ft.)
10 to 25                             2 - (10 ft. x 25 ft. ea.)
25 to 40                             2 - (10 ft. x 25 ft. ea.)
40 to 100                            3 - (10 ft. x 50 ft. ea.)
 
For each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, one additional loading berth
shall be provided, such additional berth to be at least 10 feet in width by 50
feet in length (10' x 50'). (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
5-7-20: MORATORIUM ON APPLICATIONS:
The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village shall not recommend approval and the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village shall not approve a building
permit, variance, special use, map amendment or text amendment for development
within the existing light industrial zoning districts for a period of one
hundred eighty (180) days commencing on the effective date of this Section,
unless such an application was filed with the Village on or before the
effective date of this Section. If any application for a building permit,
variance, special use, map amendment or text amendment for development within
the existing light industrial zoning districts is received during the said one
hundred eighty (180) day period, such application shall be reviewed and
considered after the expiration of said one hundred eighty (180) day period and
shall be subject to the code provisions then in effect and applicable to that
district. (Ord. 83-9, 9-25-83)
CHAPTER 8
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Purpose and Intent
5-8-2: Procedure
5-8-3: Preliminary Development Plan
5-8-4: Final Development Plan
5-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The planned development is intended to permit, in accordance with the master
plan, the development of areas containing not less than sixty (60) contiguous
acres under one ownership or control, whereby the location of all residential,
commercial, industrial and governmental uses, school sites, parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas, parking areas and other open spaces shall be controlled in
such a manner as to permit housing accommodations and land uses in orderly
relationship to one another. Such planned developments, when approved, shall
constitute a part of the master plan of the Village as a whole, and the
consideration of such planned developments by the Plan Commission shall be
based on recognition of this requirement.
Such planned developments are intended to conserve local areas of natural
beauty, to add to the sense of spaciousness, to achieve better design in
buildings and to help promote the public health, safety, morals and welfare of
the people residing therein and nearby, and to aid in stabilizing and improving
property values.
It is intended that this Chapter on Planned Developments superimposes the
requirements of this Zoning Title upon the underlying district without changing
the fundamental intent of the underlying district requirements as to the land
use and density of said use. There shall be no minimum lot size, no minimum lot
width and no minimum setback lines, except there shall be a building setback
line of one hundred feet (100') from the boundary lines of any such planned
development.
No planned development shall be permitted in R1 or R2 Districts.
5-8-2: PROCEDURE:
The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than
sixty (60) acres may submit to the President and Board of Trustees a plan for
the use and development of all the tract of land. The proposed development plan
shall first be submitted in preliminary form. The preliminary development plan
shall be referred to the Plan Commission for study, public hearing and report.
The Plan Commission, upon receipt of the preliminary development plan, shall
set a day certain for a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of
such public hearing shall be published at least once, not less than fifteen
(15) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village.
Upon preliminary approval by the Plan Commission of the preliminary development
plan, after a public hearing thereon, the applicant shall, within one hundred
twenty (120) days thereof, present to the Plan Commission a final development
plan which shall not vary materially from the preliminary plan, for final
approval by the Plan Commission.
The Plan Commission shall, within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the
final plan, make its report and recommendations to the President and Board of
Trustees with such additional conditions as are, in its opinion, necessary to
fulfill the objectives of this Chapter; provided, however, that if the
preliminary plan has received the approval of the Plan Commission, the final
plan shall be so approved if the final plan is substantially the same as the
preliminary plan, and the planned use shall be consistent with the underlying
zoning district.
In its consideration of the preliminary development plan, the Plan Commission
shall require evidence that:
   (A)   The property in the general area of the area included in the plan will
not be adversely affected;
   (B)   The plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of the zoning
regulations of the Village to promote the public health, safety and welfare;
   (C)   The planned use shall form a compatible, harmonious community group or
groups;
   (D)   Any open space, tree cover, recreational area, scenic vista or other
authorized land use whose acreage shall be utilized in the determination of the
common land, if any be provided, shall, upon the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, be conveyed in fee simple title by the owner to a not-for-profit,
Illinois corporation with an agreement and restrictive covenants to insure the
continued existence and maintenance of said area.
5-8-3: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The preliminary development plan shall consist of:
   (A)   An overall development plat showing the use or uses, dimensions and
locations of proposed structures, parking space, if any, location of streets,
location of parks, open space, tree cover and all other common land, if any.
   (B)   Topographic survey.
   (C)   Proposed covenants and agreements insuring the continued existence and
maintenance of all common lands and the development of the site in accordance
with the plan.
   (D)   Engineering reports showing types and locations of wells, sanitary
systems and water drainage, within the development, including the effects on
wells, sanitary systems and water drainage in surrounding areas within the
Village.
   (E)   Such other pertinent information as may be necessary to a
determination that the contemplated arrangement for uses makes it desirable to
apply regulations and requirements different from those ordinarily applicable
under the zoning regulations of the Village.
5-8-4: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The final development plan shall consist of:
   (A)   A final plat which shall conform to the subdivision regulations of the
Village 1 , and in addition thereto shall show the location of all buildings
and structures to be erected in the planned development and a statement of the
restrictions, covenants and agreements running with the land.
   (B)   Topographic survey.
   (C)   Covenants, agreements and restrictions insuring the continued
existence and maintenance of all common lands and the development of the site
in accordance with the plan, executed in triplicate by the owner or owners and
mortgagee, if any; provided, however, the mortgagee may, in lieu of executing
said documents, present a good and sufficient subordination agreement.
   (D)   Final engineering reports showing types and locations of wells,
sanitary systems and water drainage within the development, including the
effects on wells, sanitary systems and water drainage in surrounding areas
within the Village.
   (E)   Such other documents as may be required by the Plan Commission which
would be consistent with the purpose of this Chapter.
The corporate authorities shall, within seventy (70) days after the receipt of
the recommendations of the Plan Commission, either adopt the recommendations of
the Plan Commission and approve the planned development, or reject the
recommendations of the Plan Commission and disapprove the planned development.
(Ord. 66-2, 6-27-66)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 6 of this Code.
CHAPTER 9
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES
SECTION:
5-9-1: Statement of Purpose
5-9-2: Authority to Continue Nonconformance
5-9-3: Nonconforming Buildings and Structures, and Uses Thereof
5-9-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming buildings, structures and uses, and specify those circumstances
and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses
which adversely affect the maintenance, development or use, and taxable value
of other property in the district in which they are located shall be permitted
to continue.
This Zoning Title establishes separate districts, each of which is an
appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that
district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those
districts that those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses which
substantially and adversely affect the orderly development and taxable value of
other property in the district not be permitted to continue without
restriction.
5-9-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMANCE:
Any nonconforming buildings, structure or use which existed lawfully at the
time of the effective date hereof and which remains nonconforming, and any such
building, structure or use which shall become nonconforming upon effective date
hereof or upon the adoption of any subsequent amendments of this Title, may be
continued, subject to the regulations set forth in this Chapter.
5-9-3: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, AND USES THEREOF:
Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located may be continued, subject to
the provisions of this Section.
   (A)   Repairs and Alterations:
      1.   Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Nonconforming Use:
Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure,
provided that no structural alterations which increase the bulk of the building
or structure shall be made in or to a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, except those required by law or except to
make the building or structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located. For the purpose of this Section, repairs
shall include the replacement of storage tanks where the safety of operation of
the installation requires such replacement, and other replacements of,
substitutions for, machinery or equipment not involving structural alterations
to the building or structure except as hereinabove provided.
      2.   Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Permitted Use:
Repairs, alterations and structural changes may be made to a nonconforming
building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or
intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, provided
said repairs, alterations or structural changes conform to the regulations of
the district in which said building or structure is located.
   (B)   Additions and Enlargements: A nonconforming building or structure
which is nonconforming as to bulk, or all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall not be added to, or enlarged, in any manner unless such
additions or enlargements thereto are made to conform to all the regulations of
the district in which it is located, and unless such nonconforming building or
structure, including all additions and enlargements thereto, shall conform to
the following:
      1.   Applicable regulations concerning the amount of lot area provided
per dwelling unit, as provided in Chapters 5 and 6 of this Title.
      2.   The allowable floor area ratio as provided in Chapters 5, 6 and 7 of
this Title.
      3.   The allowable gross floor area per establishment as provided in
Chapter 6 of this Title.
   (C)   Relocation of Building or Structure: No building or structure which
does not conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is
located, except those required by law, shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other location unless every portion of such building or structure which is
moved and the use thereof is made to conform to all the regulations of the
district in which it is to be located.
   (D)   Restoration of Damaged Building or Structure:
      1.   Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Nonconforming Use:
A building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or
intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is
located, and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of
God to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was
before the occurrence shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the
restoration of the entire building new, shall not be restored, except as
required by law, unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
In the event such damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of the
cost of restoration of the entire building new, no repairs or reconstruction
shall be made unless such restoration is started within one year from date of
the partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
      2.   Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Permitted Use: A
building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or
intended for a use which is permitted in the district in which it is located,
and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to
the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before
the occurrence shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of restoration of
the entire building new, shall not be restored, except as required by law,
unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all of
the regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event such
damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
restoration of the entire building new, no repairs or reconstruction shall be
made unless such restoration is started within one year from date of the
partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
   (E)   Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use:
      1.   In Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Nonconforming
Use: A building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of
which is designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district
in which it is located, which is, or hereafter becomes, vacant and remains
unoccupied or is not used for a continuous period of one year, shall not
thereafter be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to the use
regulations of the district in which it is located.
      2.   In Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Permitted Use:
If a nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially all of
which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the
district in which it is located, is discontinued for a period of six (6)
consecutive months, it shall not be renewed and any subsequent use of the
building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in
which the premises are located.
      3.   Land: The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or
structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, if discontinued for a
period of six (6) consecutive months, shall not thereafter be renewed, and any
subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
   (F)   Expansion of Nonconforming Use:
      1.   In Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Nonconforming
Use: The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, may be extended throughout the building or
structure in which said use is presently located, but no changes or structural
alterations which increase the bulk of the building or structure, except those
required by law, shall be made unless such changes or structural alterations
and the use thereof conform to all the regulations of the district in which the
building or structure is located.
      2.   In Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Permitted Use:
The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, all or substantially
all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted
in the district in which it is located, shall not be expanded or extended into
any other portion of such building or structure, nor changed to any
nonconforming use.
      3.   Land: The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or
structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be expanded
or extended beyond the area it occupies.
   (G)   Change of Nonconforming Use:
      1.   In Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Nonconforming
Use: The nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially all
of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in
which it is located may not be changed to another nonconforming use, but may be
changed to a use permitted in the same district as the nonconforming use which
presently occupies the building or structure or to a use permitted in a more
restrictive district. For the purpose of this subsection only, the R1 District
shall be considered the more restrictive and the Light Industrial District the
least restrictive district.
      2.   In a Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Permitted Use:
No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use when such
nonconforming use is located in a building or structure, all or substantially
all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a permitted use.
      3.   Land: The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or
structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be changed
to any other use except to a use permitted in the district in which the land is
located. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
5-10-1: Organization
5-10-2: Zoning Certificates
5-10-3: Compliance Certificates
5-10-4: Variations
5-10-5: Appeals
5-10-6: Amendments
5-10-7: Special Uses
5-10-8: Fees
5-10-9: Penalties
5-10-1: ORGANIZATION:
The administration and enforcement of this title is vested in the following
offices of the village:
   The enforcing officer 1
   The zoning board of appeals 2
The officers shall abide by the procedure and substantive standards set forth
in this chapter for the following administrative functions:
   Issuance of zoning certificates
   Issuance of compliance certificates
   Variations
   Appeals
   Amendments
   Special uses
   Fees
   Penalties (Ord. 84-35, 10-22-1984)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 6 of this code.
2 2. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
5-10-2: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or
buildings shall be issued by any officer, department or employee of the village
unless the application for such permit has been examined by the enforcing
officer and has affixed to it a certificate of the enforcing officer indicating
that the proposed building or structure complies with all of the provisions of
this title. Any permit or certificate of compliance issued in conflict with the
provisions of this title shall be null and void.
Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by:
   (A)   A plat in triplicate of the piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block
or blocks, or parts or portions thereof, drawn to scale showing the actual
dimensions and certified by a land surveyor or civil engineer licensed by the
state of Illinois as a true copy of the piece or parcel, lot, lots, block or
blocks or portions thereof, according to the registered or recorded plat of
such land; and
   (B)   A statement showing the name of the owner and applicant, the legal
description of the property, a statement and description of the uses to be
established or expanded and a plat in triplicate drawn to scale in such form as
may from time to time be prescribed by the enforcing officer showing the ground
area, height and bulk of the building or structure, the building lines in
relation to lot lines and such other information as may be required by the
enforcing officer for the proper enforcement of this title.
One copy of each of the two (2) plats shall be attached to the application for
a building permit when it is submitted to the enforcing officer for a zoning
certificate and shall be retained by him as a public record.
The enforcing officer shall issue a written permit or a denial thereof with
reasons in writing, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the acceptance of
the application. In the event the permit or denial thereof is not issued within
fifteen (15) days, the applicant may appeal directly to the zoning board of
appeals, which shall order the issuance of the permit or the denial thereof
with reasons in writing.
Except where an extension has been obtained in writing from the enforcing
officer, permits heretofore and hereafter issued shall expire within ninety
(90) days if a substantial beginning has not been made in the construction or
establishment of the use applied for and within one year, if not completed. All
fees shall be as established by resolution of the board of trustees. (Ord. 63-
1, 4-1-1963)
5-10-3: COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATES:
No building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date hereof,
and no addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied, and no
land vacant on the effective date hereof shall be used for any purpose, until a
certificate of compliance has been issued by the enforcing officer. No change
in a use other than that of a permitted use shall be made until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the enforcing officer. Every certificate of
compliance shall state that the use or occupancy complies with all the
provisions of this title.
   (A)   Application For Compliance Certificate: Every application for a
building permit shall be deemed to be an application for a compliance
certificate. Every application for a compliance certificate for a new use of
land where no building permit is required shall be made directly to the
enforcing officer.
   (B)   Issuance Of Compliance Certificate: No compliance certificate for a
building or addition thereto constructed after the effective date hereof shall
be issued until construction has been completed and the premises inspected and
certified by the enforcing officer to be in conformity with the plans and
specifications upon which the building permit was based. No compliance
certificate for a building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective
date hereof shall be issued and no addition to a previously existing building
shall be occupied until the premises has been inspected and certified by the
enforcing officer to be in compliance with all the applicable performance
standards of the zoning district in which it is located and all violations of
this code have been resolved and all fines and penalties assessed against the
owner or the property under any of the provisions of this code have been paid
in full. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate
may be issued, to be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its
date during the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the
premises.
A compliance certificate shall be issued, or written notice shall be given to
the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, not later
than fourteen (14) days after the enforcing officer is notified in writing that
the building or premises is ready for occupancy.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person who occupies or uses a building or structure
without the issuance of a certificate of compliance shall be liable for a fine
of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 13-09, 6-24-2013)
5-10-4: VARIATIONS:
   (A)   Purpose: The zoning board of appeals, after a public hearing, may
determine and vary the regulations of this title in harmony with their general
purpose and intent, only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth, where
the board makes findings of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter
prescribed, and further finds that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this title, relating to the use, construction or alteration of
buildings or structures or the use of each portion of land.
   (B)   Application For Variation And Notice Of Hearing: An application for a
variation shall be made by the owner of the subject property, or if by another
person having an interest therein, with the written concurrence of the owner of
the subject property. An application for a variation shall be filed in writing
with the enforcing officer. The application shall contain such information as
the zoning board of appeals may from time to time, by rule, require. Notice of
the time and place of such public hearing shall be published at least once, not
less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village. The published notice may be supplemented by such
additional form of notice as the board, by rule, may require.
   (C)   Standards For Variations: The zoning board of appeals shall not vary
the regulations of this title, as authorized in subsection (A) of this section,
unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case that:
      1.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
the district for which it is zoned; and
      2.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
      3.   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality.
The zoning board of appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon
the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the
standards established in this subsection (C) to reduce or minimize the effect
of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to better carry
out the general intent of this title. If the petitioner is in violation of any
provision of this code or is subject to any fines or penalties imposed under
any provision of this code, the zoning board of appeals may condition the
granting of any variation upon the petitioner first correcting or curing any
such violation or paying any such fines or penalties.
   (D)   Authorized Variations: Variations from the regulations of this title
shall be granted by the zoning board of appeals only in accordance with the
standards established in subsection (C) of this section, and may be granted
only in the following instances and in no others:
      1.   To permit any yard or setback less than the yard or setback required
by the applicable regulations.
      2.   To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited
solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or lots but in no
event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than
ninety percent (90%) of the required area and width.
      3.   To permit the same off street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two (2) or more uses provided the substantial use of
such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours
of the same days of the week.
      4.   To reduce the applicable off street parking or loading facilities
required by not more than one parking space or loading space or twenty percent
(20%) of the applicable regulations, whichever number is greater.
      5.   To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum
distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use
served.
      6.   To vary the regulations as set forth in the Sign Regulations,
Chapter 5-11, by no more than twenty percent (20%) for any of the following:
gross area of any sign; height above grade at the location of the sign; and/or
setback.
      7.   To increase by not more than ten percent (10%) the maximum gross
floor area of any use so limited by the applicable regulations.
      8.   To exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under this
subsection, when a lot of record or a zoning lot, vacant or legally used on
April 1, 1963, is, by reason of the exercise of the right of eminent domain by
an authorized governmental body or by reason of a conveyance under threat of an
eminent domain proceeding, reduced in size so that the remainder of said lot of
record or zoning lot or structure on said lot does not conform with one or more
of the regulations of the district in which said lot of record or zoning lot or
structure is located.
      9.   To permit increases in the height of fences and walls permitted as
obstructions in required yards.
      10.   To permit the location of a satellite antenna, private, on a lot or
lots where it would otherwise be prohibited solely because of insufficient
screening, but in no event shall the requirement for screening be waived along
the front yard line.
The concurring vote of five (5) members of the zoning board of appeals shall be
necessary to grant a variation. No order of the zoning board of appeals
granting a variation shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months
from the date of such order unless a building permit is obtained within such
period and the erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is
commenced within such period. The zoning board of appeals may, upon application
made within said six (6) months, for good cause, extend said time an additional
six (6) months; provided, that said time limit shall not apply and there shall
be no fixed time limit in cases where the variation granted is a variation as
to the area or width of a lot or lots granted under subsection (D)2 of this
section, if a plat containing the lot or lots in question, utilizing the said
area or width variation as granted, and conforming to law, including the
Barrington Hills subdivision ordinance (if applicable), shall be recorded in
the office of the recorder of deeds or (if applicable) registered in the office
of the registrar of titles, within two (2) years of the date of the order of
the zoning board of appeals granting said variation. (Ord. 13-09, 6-24-2013;
amd. Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-10-5: APPEALS:
   (A)   Scope Of Appeal: An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals
by any person aggrieved by a decision of the enforcing officer made pursuant to
this title or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the village in
respect of this title. Such appeal shall be taken within forty five (45) days
of the action complained of, by filing with the enforcing officer a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The enforcing officer shall forthwith
transmit to the zoning board of appeals all of the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken. (Ord. 89-18, 12-18-1989)
   (B)   Findings On Appeals: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the enforcing officer certifies
to the zoning board of appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with
him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the zoning board of appeals or by a court of record on application
on notice to the enforcing officer and on due cause shown.
The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the
appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a written
decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. The board may affirm or may,
upon the concurring vote of five (5) members, reverse, wholly or in part, or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, as in its opinion
ought to be done, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken.
The enforcing officer shall maintain complete records of all actions of the
board relative to appeals. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963)
5-10-6: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Authority: For the purposes of promoting the public health, safety,
morals, comfort and general welfare, conserving the values of property
throughout the village, and lessening or avoiding congestion in the public
roads and highways, the president and the board of trustees of the village may,
from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the regulations
imposed and the districts created by this title; provided, that in all
amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this section, due
allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation of property
values, the directions of building development to the best advantage of the
entire Village, and the uses to which property is devoted at the time of the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
   (B)   Initiation of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by a Trustee, the
Zoning Board of Appeals, the Enforcing Officer or by any person owning or
having an interest in the subject property. (Ord. 77-1 7, 9-26-77)
   (C)   Application for Amendment: An application for an amendment shall be
filed with the Enforcing Officer, in such form and accompanied by such
information as required by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (D)   Hearing on Application: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a
public hearing on each application for an amendment at such time and place
within the Village as shall be established by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
hearing shall be conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved
in such manner as the Zoning Board of Appeals shall, by rule, prescribe from
time to time. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
   (E)   Notice of Public Hearing:
      1.   Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village not more than thirty (30) nor
less than fifteen (15) days before such hearing. Supplemental or additional
notices may be published or distributed as the Zoning Board of appeals may, by
rule, prescribe from time to time. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63; amd. 1977 Code)
      2.   Where the amendment is initiated by a Trustee, the Zoning Board of
Appeals, or the Enforcing Officer, and proposes a change of district
classification of a particular property, a true copy of the application or of
the Board's order shall be served upon the owner or owners of record in person
or by certified United States mail within ten (10) days after the filing of the
application or the entry of the Board order initiating the proceeding. Where
the application is filed by a person having an interest in the subject
property, a notice and copy of the application shall be served in like manner
upon each of the other co-owners or those having an interest. The foregoing
notice and service requirements shall be in addition to the publishing
requirements of this subsection. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63; amd. Ord. 77-17, 9-26-77)
   (F)   Findings of Fact and Recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals:
Within a reasonable time after the close of the hearing on a proposed
amendment, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make written findings of fact and
shall submit same together with its recommendation to the Board of Trustees of
the Village. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to
change the zoning classification of particular property, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case with respect to the following matters:
      1.   Existing uses of property within the general area of the property in
question.
      2.   The zoning classification of property within the general area of the
property in question.
      3.   The suitability of the property in question for the uses permitted
under the existing zoning classification.
      4.   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes, if any, which may have taken place
since the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning
classification.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed
amendment unless it finds that the adoption of such an amendment is in the
public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the zoning
classification of the property in question to any higher classification than
that requested by the applicant. For the purpose of this paragraph the R1
District shall be considered the highest classification and the Light
Industrial District shall be considered the lowest classification.
   (G)   Action by the Board of Trustees:
      1.   The Board of Trustees of the Village shall not act upon a proposed
amendment to this Title until it shall have received a written report and
recommendation from the Zoning Board of Appeals on the proposed amendment.
      2.   In cases where the Zoning Board of Appeals recommends that a
proposed amendment not be adopted or in case of written protest against any
proposed amendment signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the property proposed to be altered or by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the property adjacent to the property proposed to be altered, and
filed with the Clerk of the Village, such amendment shall not be passed except
by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Board of
Trustees.
      3.   If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally
by the Board of Trustees of the Village within sixty (60) days of the time of
receipt of the Zoning Board of Appeals' recommendations, it shall be deemed to
have been denied.
   (H)   Minimum Size of Parcel: A lot, lots or parcel of land shall not
qualify for a zoning amendment unless it possesses a minimum of one hundred
fifty feet (150') of frontage and contains a minimum of forty thousand (40,000)
square feet of area, or adjoins a lot, lots or parcel of land which bears the
same zoning district classification as the proposed zoning amendment.
5-10-7: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   Purpose: The development and execution of a zoning ordinance is based
upon the division of the Village into districts, within which districts the use
of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that
there are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot
be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land
and of the public or private need for the particular use at the particular
location. Such special uses fall into two (2) categories:
      1.   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest.
      2.   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-63)
   (B)   Initiation of Special Use: An application for a special use may be
made by the owner of the subject property, or by another person having an
interest therein with the written concurrence of the owner thereof, to use said
property for one or more of the special uses provided for in this Zoning Title
in the zoning district in which the land is situated. (Ord. 72-3, 3-27-72)
   (C)   Application for Special Use: An application for a special use shall be
filed in writing with the Enforcing Officer. The application shall contain such
information as the Zoning Board of Appeals may from time to time, by rule,
require. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published
at least once, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days
before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. The
published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the
Board, by rule, may require. (Ord. 77-17, 9-26-77)
   (D)   Authorization: For each application for a special use the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall report to the Board of Trustees of the Village its findings
and recommendations, including the stipulations of additional conditions and
guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they are deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest.
The Board of Trustees may grant or deny any application for a special use;
provided, however, that in the event of written protest against any proposed
special use, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the property adjacent to the property proposed for a special use, and filed
with the Village Clerk, such special use shall not be granted except by the
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the Board of Trustees.
   (E)   Standards: No special use shall be recommended by the Zoning Board of
Appeals unless said Board shall find:
      1.   That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare.
      2.   That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
      3.   That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
      4.   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
      5.   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets
and roads.
      6.   That the special use shall in all other respects conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may in each instance be modified by the board of trustees pursuant
to the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals.
   (F)   Conditions And Guaranties: Prior to the granting of any special use,
the zoning board of appeals may recommend, and the board of trustees shall
stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as deemed necessary
for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the
standards and requirements specified in subsection (E) of this section. In all
cases in which special uses are granted, the board of trustees shall require
such evidence and guaranties as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being, and will be, complied
with.
   (G)   Effect Of Denial Of A Special Use: No application for a special use
which has been denied wholly or in part by the board of trustees shall be
resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to
be valid by the zoning board of appeals and the board of trustees. (Ord. 63-1,
4-1-1963)
   (H)   Revocation: In any case where a special use has not been established
within six (6) months after the date of granting thereof, then without further
action by the zoning board of appeals or the board of trustees, the special use
authorization shall be null and void. The zoning board of appeals may, upon
application filed within said six (6) months, and for good cause, extend said
time an additional six (6) months. (Ord. 77-17, 9-26-1977)
   (I)   Special Uses On Historical Sites: An applicant may request as a unique
historical use any permitted and/or special use allowed in any zoning district
to be allowed in any other zoning district, subject to compliance with the
following conditions:
      1.   Proof that the subject property or the improvements thereon are of
historic value or significance and that preservation of the same will be
enhanced, maintained or assisted by permitting the unique use as proposed.
      2.   Proof that permitting the unique use will be of some affirmative
benefit, from a land use or preservation standpoint, to the subject property,
the surrounding properties and neighborhood, and the village.
      3.   The application shall have the burden of presenting clear and
convincing proof that the unique use is justified and proper. (Ord. 79-5, 2-26-
1979)
5-10-8: FEES:
Any application for an amendment, appeal, special use or variation shall be
accompanied by a fee. The fee shall be established by resolution of the board
of trustees. All fees shall be paid to the village clerk. There shall be no
such fee, however, in the case of applications filed in the public interest by
members of the zoning board of appeals, board of trustees or the enforcing
officer. (Ord. 06-11, 6-26-2006)
5-10-9: PENALTIES:
Any person or agents, employees or contractors of such person, who shall
violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with, or who shall resist
enforcement of any provisions of the zoning regulations of the village shall be
subject to the penalty provisions under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 63-1, 4-1-1963; amd. 1977 Code)
CHAPTER 11
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-11-1: Title
5-11-2: Authority, Purpose, Guidelines, And Standards
5-11-3: Definitions
5-11-4: Permitted Signs - Residential Districts
5-11-5: Permitted Signs - B, BP Districts
5-11-6: Permitted Signs - Light Industrial District
5-11-7: Permitted Signs - Open Space Property
5-11-8: Permitted Signs - Non-Residential Use In A Residential District
5-11-9: Temporary Signs
5-11-10: Variations, Special Use Permits
5-11-11: Appeals
5-11-12: Amortization Of Nonconforming Signs
5-11-13: Penalty
5-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter is entitled the Village of Barrington Hills Sign Regulations, and
may be referred to as the Sign Regulations or the Sign Code. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-
2020)
5-11-2: AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, GUIDELINES, AND STANDARDS:
(A)   Authority: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be
erected any sign located within the village contrary to the provisions of this
chapter as hereinafter provided.
(B)   Purpose: The purposes of these sign regulations are:
   1.   To regulate signs that may, by reason of their size, location,
construction or manner of display, endanger the public safety of individuals.
   2.   To regulate signs that may confuse, mislead or obstruct the vision
necessary for traffic safety.
   3.   To maintain the character of each district as set forth in this title.
   4.   To encourage and promote way finding.
   5.   To encourage and promote the integration of signs into their
surroundings.
   6.   To encourage and promote the general aesthetic and public safety in the
village.
(C)   General Guidelines And Standards:
   1.   General Standards:
      a.   Construction Of This Chapter: These sign regulations shall be
construed to comply with the United States Constitution, particularly the First
Amendment guarantee of free speech, the Illinois Constitution, and other
applicable state and federal laws.
      b.   Compliance With Code: Signs shall be classified and permitted in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter and only those signs
specifically permitted by the text of this chapter shall be permitted. The
classification of signs shall be in accordance with the various use districts
designated now or hereafter established in this title and shall be subject to
further restrictions by all applicable provisions of this code.
      c.   Exempt Signs: The following signs are exempt from the regulations of
this chapter, and are allowed in every zoning district: traffic control signs,
traffic signals, and/or safety warnings, whether within a public right-of-way
or on private property; municipal way finding signs, directional signs, traffic
signals and/or devices, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger signs,
temporary emergency signs, public utility signs, trail marking signs and those
required or recommended by state or federal law, and other similar signs.
      d.   Abandoned Signs: Any sign which identifies a use, occupancy, and/or
activity no longer being conducted for thirty (30) calendar days or longer
shall be removed by the owner of the property or the person having occupancy of
and/or control over the property upon which such sign is located, and shall be
declared abandoned and are subject to removal.
      e.   Removal Of Illegal Nonconforming Signs: Any sign that is in
violation of these sign regulations and is erected after the effective date
hereof is hereby classified as "illegal and nonconforming". Whenever the Zoning
and Building Enforcement Officer determines that an illegal and nonconforming
sign exists, he shall notify the person displaying such sign by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Such person shall, within ten (10) calendar days of
the date of the notice, either remove the sign or initiate action necessary to
bring the sign into compliance with regulations set forth herein, including
applying for any required permit.
      f.   Maintenance, Damage To Nonconforming Signs: Normal maintenance of
signs, including necessary non-structural and non-electrical repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming
features of the sign, is permitted during any amortization period or the period
in which permit applications are pending. However, no structural alterations,
enlargement or extensions shall be made to a sign unless the alteration will
result in eliminating the nonconforming features of the sign. If a sign is
damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement value or fifty percent (50%) of its surface area, the sign may not
be rebuilt or used thereafter unless it conforms to all of the provisions of
these sign regulations.
      g.   Unsafe Signs: If the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer finds
that any sign is unsafe or unsecure, or constitutes a danger to the public, he
or she shall give written notice to the owner of the premises. If the owner
fails to make corrections or fails to remove or alter the sign within ten (10)
calendar days of the date of said notice, the sign may be removed by the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer at the expense of the owner of the
property upon which such sign is located. However, the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer may cause any sign that is an immediate and imminent peril
to persons or property to be removed summarily with or without notice. Any
expense incidental thereto shall be paid by the owner of the property on which
the sign is located.
      h.   Signs Not To Constitute Traffic Hazard Or Cause Glare: No sign of
any nature or type shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision, or so as to distract the attention of the
driver of any vehicle, bicyclist, and/or pedestrian by reason of the position,
shape or other characteristics thereof.
      i.   Signs may not be located within ten feet (10') from any side or rear
lot line.
      j.   Illumination of signs shall be in accordance with the village's
lighting ordinance.
      k.   Only one sign shall be permitted identifying a contractor,
architect, engineer, and subcontractors engaged in the construction or
improvement of a building upon the property which the sign is located, provided
such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and no more than six
feet (6') in height. Such signs shall be removed upon completion of the project
for which the permit was issued.
      l.   Neighborhood or other similar type residential association
identification signs shall be permitted only by special use permit issued
subsequent to public notice and hearing and a recommendation the Zoning Board
of Appeals and approved by the Board of Trustees. Such signs shall contain only
the name or identifying character of the subdivision. No advertising, names,
addresses or phone numbers of any person shall be permitted thereon.
      m.   Signs advertising motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, trailers,
watercraft or any other similar property "For Sale" are prohibited in all
districts. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the following meanings indicated in this section,
which definitions shall prevail over any other definitions relative to signs
set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
BANNER SIGN: Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic or canvas or flags
or pennants and used for attracting the attention of the public.
BUILDING AND ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Shall mean and include the duly
appointed Building Inspector, building Commissioner, Building Officer or any
deputy thereof.
BUSINESS SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession or
service sold or offered upon the premises, with the commodity or entertainment
being incidental thereto.
ELECTRONIC SIGN: Any sign which uses changing lights to form a sign message or
messages or visual graphics, wherein the sequence of the message or graphics
and the rate of change is electronically, electrically, remotely or
automatically programmed and may be modified by electronic, electric, remote or
automatic processes.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
also include the initial painting of all signs.
FOR SALE: Notice or sign promoting the offering of real estate and/or personal
property for sale, for example, garage sales, estates sales, and the like.
PERSON: Shall mean and include any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PREMISES: Any property, improved or unimproved.
OPEN SPACE: Private property permanently dedicated by deed or held by a
private, not-for-profit organization for landscape maintenance, restoration or
for habitat maintenance, which adjoins a public road.
SIGN: Any device or advertising symbol including, but not limited to, exterior
clock, temperature indicator, marquee, canopy, awning, placard, or other
representation, which may or may not contain words, letters, printing, picture,
designs or combinations thereof used in the nature of advertisement,
announcement or directions calculated to attract the attention of the public.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign with or without structural frame, intended to be
displayed for a limited duration of time as further defined in this chapter.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Barrington Hills.
(Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-4: PERMITTED SIGNS - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following signs shall be permitted in residential districts in accordance
with the regulations set forth in this Sign Code, and, as more particularly set
forth hereinafter.
(A)   Nameplates and identification signs, subject to the following:
   1.   Area and Content: A single nameplate/identification sign, not exceeding
six (6) square feet (not including any post(s) and frame), shall be permitted.
Such nameplate/identification sign shall indicate occupant and/or property name
and/or address and may include an accompanying graphic. In the case of a corner
zoning lot, one (1) such sign per frontage shall be permitted.
(B)   Signage designating multiple addresses, subject to the following:
   1.   Signage shall be permitted to be posted at an intersection to designate
multiple addresses located on a single public or private road intersecting the
intersection.
   2.   Height: No sign shall project higher than eight feet (8') above grade
on which the sign is located.
(C)   Signs designating a parking area, subject to the following:
   1.   Area And Number: Signs designating parking area entrances or exits are
limited to one sign for each such exit or entrance and to a maximum size of two
(2) square feet each. One (1) sign per parking area, designating the conditions
of use or identity of such parking area and limited to a maximum size of six
(6) square feet shall be permitted. On a corner zoning lot two (2) such signs,
one facing each street, shall be permitted.
   2.   Projection: No sign shall project into the public way.
   3.   Height: No sign shall project higher than eight (8) feet above grade on
which the sign is located.
(D)   "No Solicitation"; "No Trespass"; "Security", "Warning" and similar
signs, subject to the following:
   1.   Number: No more than one (1) of each sign shall be located per driveway
entrance on a zoning lot.
   2.   Location: The sign(s) shall be affixed to a pole, stake, mailbox or
tree on the property and shall be spaced a minimum of fifty feet (50') from
another sign of same message ("no trespassing" sign spacing in relation to
another "no trespassing" sign).
   3.   Size: The sign(s) shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area.
(E)   Private Drive: Signs designating private drives shall be permitted,
subject to the following:
   1.   Number: No more than one (1) of each sign shall be located per driveway
entrance on a zoning lot.
   2.   Size: The sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area.
(F)   Small Subdivision: Signs designating small subdivisions shall be
permitted as part of the approval of the subdivision, or pursuant to the
provisions of section 5-10-7. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-5: PERMITTED SIGNS - B, BP DISTRICTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect in any B or BP district any sign which does not
comply with the following regulations.
(A)   Permitted Signs: Business signs, as defined in this chapter.
(B)   Requirements for construction and maintenance of any sign:
   1.   Sign Placement: Signs attached to a building or buildings shall be
erected parallel to the vertical wall surfaces and shall not project more than
eighteen inches (18") outward from the wall on which it is attached. No sign
shall extend to closer than three feet (3') of the top or sides of the wall
upon which it is attached. No signs shall be permitted on any wall, fence or
standard facing a transitional yard.
   2.   Sign Area:
      a.   Signs in the B-1 through B-4 districts shall have an area of no more
than three hundred (300) square feet or twenty percent (20%) of the total area
of the facade on which it is placed, whichever is less.
      b.   Signs in the BP district shall have an area of no more than one
hundred (100) square feet or five percent (5%) of the total area of the facade
on which it is placed, whichever is less. Developers may use wall or
freestanding signs provided the total area of all signs does not exceed the
above requirement and provided further that all signs shall be presented as a
sign package subject to the approval of the plan commission as part of the site
design pursuant to section 5-6-14 of this chapter.
      c.   Marquee Or Canopy Signs: Signs attached to or hung from a marquee or
canopy shall be completely within the borderline of the outer edge of the
marquee or canopy and shall in no instance be lower than eight feet (8') above
the ground or surface over which the marquee or canopy is constructed.
      d.   Freestanding Signs: Signs, clocks or other advertising devices
erected upon standards or separate supports shall be placed so as to be
entirely within the property lines of the premises upon which it is located,
and no part of the sign or standard shall have a total height greater than
twenty five feet (25') above the road grade of the street or highway upon which
the sign faces or above the adjoining ground level if such ground level is
above the road grade. The surface area of any such sign shall not exceed an
area of one hundred (100) square feet.
      e.   Traffic Or Directional Signs: Traffic or directional signs
designating entrances, exits and conditions or use of parking facilities
accessory to the material use of the premises may be erected and maintained,
provided they are located within the property lines of the subject property,
and provided that any such sign shall not exceed an area of twelve (12) square
feet.
      f.   Right-Of-Way: No sign or other advertising device shall be erected
or located within three hundred feet (300') of the right-of-way of any limited
access highway.
      g.   Residential Districts: No sign or other advertising device shall be
permitted within seventy five feet (75') of any residence district boundary.
      h.   Illumination: Signs or other advertising devices permitted hereunder
may be illuminated, provided that no such illumination shall be of the flashing
or intermittent type. Upward lighting is prohibited in all instances.
      i.   Conflicting Signs: Signs or other advertising devices which may be
in conflict with public traffic signals shall not be permitted.
      j.   In the BP district, no freestanding sign of any type shall be
erected unless it is a monument sign replacing the building sign whose area is
calculated as in subsection (B) of this section, and having a maximum height of
seven feet (7') above the grade on which the sign is located. All portions of
freestanding signs shall be at least five feet (5') back from the lot line.
(Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-6: PERMITTED SIGNS - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain in the Light Industrial District any
sign other than the following: signs identifying the occupant of a building or
buildings subject to the regulations governing the erection and maintenance of
signs in a B-1 through B-4 district. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-7: PERMITTED SIGNS - OPEN SPACE PROPERTY:
Significant property in the village has been dedicated by deed or permanent
easement for landscape maintenance, restoration, or habitat maintenance or open
space preservation. Such property should be permitted to be duly identified to
the public as open space preserved for the benefit of the public. When such
property adjoins a public right-of-way, signage is permitted on such property
to designate its status as open space, subject to the following regulations:
(A)   Only one (1) sign is permitted per frontage.
(B)   The sign may identify the owner or conservator of the open space which
identification may allow the use of a logo, the name of the property, and
address of the property and/or use of the property.
(C)   For parcels ten (10) acres or less, the sign may be a maximum of six (6)
square feet. Properties ten (10) acres or greater are permitted a sign to a
maximum of twenty (20) square feet.
(D)   No sign may project higher than eight feet (8') above grade on which the
sign is located and must be set back no less than ten feet (10') from the
adjacent road pavement.
(E)   All other sign regulations apply unless specifically contradicted in this
section. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-8: PERMITTED SIGNS - NON-RESIDENTIAL USE IN A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
Signs on non-residential properties located in residential districts shall be
subject to the same provisions of residential properties unless otherwise
allowed as part of a special use permit. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-9: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Temporary signs shall be permitted in all districts, pursuant to the
regulations set forth herein.
(A)   For sale or for rent signs, subject to the following:
   1.   Number: No more than one (1) for sale or for rent sign shall be located
on a zoning lot. On a corner zoning lot one (1) such sign per frontage shall be
permitted.
   2.   Location: All for sale and for rent signs shall be located on the lot
or tract to which the sign pertains, provided, however, if a lot does not front
or abut on a public or private right-of-way, a for sale or for rent sign
permitted in this subsection may be located on the lot adjacent to the lot to
which it pertains with the permission of the owner.
   3.   Size: No for sale or for rent sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in
area.
   4.   Height: No for sale or for rent sign shall project higher than eight
feet (8') as measured from the ground to the top of the sign.
   5.   Subdivision For Sale Sign: A subdivision with multiple lots may have
one (1) for sale sign, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area or
projecting higher than eight feet (8') above ground level, the sign shall be
located on the premises of the subdivision at a location to be determined by
the Zoning and Building Enforcement Officer.
   6.   Duration: Any for sale or for rent sign may be displayed on private
property during the time such property is on the market for sale or lease;
however, any such sign shall be removed within seven (7) calendar days of the
property's sale, lease or removal from the market.
(B)   Open House, Estate Sale, Garage Sale, And Other Similar Temporary Events
   1.   One (1) sign is permitted per frontage.
   2.   No event sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in area.
   3.   Signs shall be permitted for a period not to exceed three (3) days in
advance of the event, and such signs shall be removed no more than twenty four
(24) hours after the day of the event.
   4.   As an exception to the provisions of paragraph (B)1-3, signage, such as
banner signs, for large scale, neighborhood or community-wide events or
announcements, shall be permitted as follows:
      a.   No event or announcement sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet
in area, nor exceed eight (8) feet in height, as measured from grade on which
the sign is located.
      b.   Signs shall be permitted for a period of fourteen (14) days prior to
the event, so long as the date of the event is clearly stated or understood on
the sign. Signs shall be removed within seven (7) calendar days following the
last day of the event.
(C)   Political Signs: All political signs shall be restricted to private
property except that the placement of temporary political signs on public
property is authorized if the property is used as polling place for early or
election day voting and only during the time period authorized for early or
election day voting subject to the "campaign free zone" restrictions provided
in the Illinois Election Code.
(D)   Public Statement Signs: Signs expressing a public statement shall be
restricted to private property. No such sign shall exceed six (6) square feet
in area. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-10: VARIATIONS, SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
Variations: Requests for variations from this chapter may be sought pursuant to
section 5-10-4. Requests for signage may also be sought pursuant to special use
sought pursuant to section 5-10-7. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-11: APPEALS:
Appeals relative to the interpretation of the language of this chapter shall be
heard as set forth in section 5-10-5. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-12: AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
All signs that become nonconforming by the application of the provisions of
this chapter shall be removed, altered or repaired so as to conform to the
provisions of this chapter within sixty (60) months (the "amortization period")
of the adoption of this chapter with the following exceptions:
(A)   Temporary Signs: The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable
immediately to all such temporary signs.
(B)   Subdivision And Neighborhood Signs: All subdivision and neighborhood
signs in existence at the time of passage of this chapter and in conformance
with this chapter shall be deemed permitted and legal conforming and shall not
require any additional zoning approval. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-2020)
5-11-13: PENALTY:
Any person or agents, employees or contractors of such person, who shall
violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with, or who shall resist
enforcement of any provisions of the sign regulations of the village shall be
subject to the penalty provisions under section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 20-07, 3-24-
2020)
TITLE 6
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SECTION:
6-1-1: Short Title
6-1-2: Adoption of Plan
6-1-3: Composition of Plan
6-1-4: Amendment of Plan
6-1-5: Maps and Plats, Conformity to Plan
6-1-6: Enforcement
6-1-7: Disconnection
6-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall establish the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of
Barrington Hills (hereinafter sometimes called the "Plan"). (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-
93)
6-1-2: ADOPTION OF PLAN:
Upon request of the Board of Trustees, the Village Plan Commission has prepared
and has recommended to the Board of Trustees a proposed Official Comprehensive
Plan for the present and future development of the Village and regulating
subdivisions within the corporate limits thereof and in contiguous
unincorporated territory one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond such limits, and
the Plan Commission has held a public hearing, scheduled by the Board of
Trustees, thereon, after required published notice; and the Board of Trustees,
after considering the recommendations of the Plan Commission and the
information derived from such public hearing, hereby adopts said proposed
Official Comprehensive Plan, as modified or amended herein, as the Official
Comprehensive Plan for the Village of Barrington Hills. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-1-3: COMPOSITION OF PLAN:
The Plan hereby adopted consists of:
   (A)   The Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Barrington Hills of
1978, adopted by the Village by virtue of Ordinance No. 78-12 passed and
approved on August 28, 1978.
   (B)   Barrington Hills Comprehensive Plan Map, including the unincorporated
area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the Village boundaries, which Map
shall be and remain on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and as
hereafter amended.
   (C)   The Barrington Hills Road Network Map, which shall be and remain on
file in the office of the Village Clerk, and as hereafter amended.
   (D)   The Barrington Hills Subdivision Ordinance, contained in Chapters 2
through 6 of this Title 6 of the Village Code of Barrington Hills, as amended
or hereafter amended.
   (E)   The 1975 BACOG Comprehensive Plan (not including the 2 maps included
therein) as amended on the face thereof in the form of the BACOG Comprehensive
Plan, which Plan is hereby adopted by reference and shall be and remain on file
in the office of the Village Clerk.
   (F)   The "BACOG Area Land-Use Policies Map" and the "BACOG Area
Environmental Analyses and Policies Map" adopted by BACOG as parts of the BACOG
Comprehensive Plan except to the extent that said maps differ from the
Barrington Hills Comprehensive Plan Map or the Barrington Hills Road Network
Map, both dated August 27, 1973; whenever said BACOG Maps and the said
Barrington Hills Maps shall differ, the Barrington Hills Comprehensive Plan Map
or the Barrington Hills Road Network Map shall remain in full force and effect
and be controlling.
The Village Plan, together with the Maps referred to in this Section, shall be
placed on file with the Village Clerk and shall be available for public
inspection at all times during business hours. Copies shall be made available
to all interested parties upon payment of the printing and distribution fee
established from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 93-5, 5-
24-93)
6-1-4: AMENDMENT OF PLAN:
The Official Comprehensive Plan, or any one or more of the components thereof,
may be amended, from time to time, according to law and any changes so made
shall become a part of the Plan. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-1-5: MAPS AND PLATS, CONFORMITY TO PLAN:
No map or plat of any subdivision presented for record affecting any land
within the corporate limits of the Village or any contiguous territory outside
of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such corporate
limits (except as said 11/2 miles distance may have been lessened by agreement
with another municipality pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-
9 made to conform with
6-1-7(A), formerly Illinois Revised Statutes chapter 24, section 11-12-9) and
not included in any city, village or unincorporated town, shall be entitled to
record or shall be valid unless the subdivision shown thereon shall provide for
streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities, storm and
flood water run-off channels and basins, and public grounds, in conformity with
the applicable requirements of the Village ordinances including the Official
Map; provided, that a certificate of approval by the corporate authorities,
certified by the Clerk of the Village, shall be sufficient evidence of
compliance with this Section upon which the Recorder of Deeds may accept the
plat for recording. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Village Board of Trustees, or its delegated
Enforcement Officer, to enforce the requirements of the Plan. He may call upon
any other department or official of the Village to furnish him with such
information or assistance as he may deem necessary for the observance or
enforcement of the Plan, and it shall be the duty of such other departments or
officials to furnish such information or assistance when requested. (Ord. 93-5,
5-24-93)
6-1-7: DISCONNECTION:
   (A)   Purpose: The provisions of this Section
6-1-7 shall supersede the disconnection provisions of sections
7-3-4 and 7-3-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/7-3-4 and 7-3-6, formerly Illinois Revised Statutes chapter 24, paragraphs
7-3-4 and 7-3-6) and shall constitute the sole and exclusive process and
standards for disconnection of territory from the corporate limits of the
Village of Barrington Hills.
   (B)   Eligibility: In order to be eligible to apply for disconnection from
the Village of Barrington Hills, in addition to the standards hereinafter
provided, the territory to be disconnected shall:
      1.   Contain twenty (20) or more acres, except that the Village Board of
Trustees may initiate disconnection of territory that is less than twenty (20)
acres in size;
      2.   Be located on the border of the Village; and
      3.   If disconnected, not result in the functional or geographic
isolation of any part of the Village from the remainder of the Village.
   (C)   Petition:
      1.   Generally: One or more owners of real property who wish to
disconnect his or their property from the Village shall file with the Village
Clerk a petition (using a form to be provided by the Village Clerk) and such
accompanying documentation as may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with
the standards and requirements set forth herein.
      2.   Content: A petition for disconnection shall contain such information
as may be required from time to time by the Village's Plan Commission or Zoning
Board of Appeals, but in all instances shall include the following:
         a.   Plat of Disconnection, with surveyor's calculation of acreage
involved.
         b.   Information as to Ownership:
            (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the legal owner,
beneficial owner or owners, and any persons enjoying options or rights to
acquire the property.
            (2)   Title insurance commitment or policy, including access
endorsement, dated within sixty (60) days of the date of the application
submittal, and a sworn statement of any changes to legal or beneficiary
ownership or any contracts, options, leases and/or easements, licenses or
covenants granted or reserved subsequent to the date of the title commitment or
policy.
            (3)   A copy of the instrument(s) granting, conveying or reserving
any existing legal rights of way or easements affecting the property.
            (4)   A copy of the instrument(s) creating any covenant affecting
the property.
            (5)   The petitioner shall have an affirmative obligation to
provide, without request from the village, updated information as any of the
above described information may change between the time of submittal and the
approval and execution of the plat of disconnection.
         c.   Location and legal description of territory, including township,
section number, subdivision (if any), street boundaries, existing zoning and
current use(s).
         d.   Complete discussion of the reason for disconnection, including
proposed or anticipated use of the territory.
         e.   Inventory and analysis of the territory and surrounding
properties, for a distance of not less than one thousand feet (1,000') ("the
inventoried area"). To the extent that they relate to the territory, such
inventory and analysis shall consider: topography; soils and geology;
waterways, wetlands and drainage; vegetation; wildlife; historic features;
adjacent land uses and zoning; utilities and related easements; riding trails,
roadways and traffic circulation; and other information critical to an
understanding of the capability of the territory to accommodate development.
Aerial photographs may be required.
         f.   The petitioner shall be responsible to provide notice to state or
federal agencies of their opportunity to provide comment on the purpose of the
petition.
      3.   Quantity: The petitioner shall submit to the village clerk thirty
(30) copies of the petition form and all supporting materials (together, "the
petition").
   (D)   Fees: A petition shall be accompanied by: 1) a filing fee in the
amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus an additional one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each five (5) acres or portion thereof beyond ten (10)
acres, except that the maximum filing fee shall not exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for territory one hundred (100) acres or less in
size and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for territory over one hundred (100)
acres plus 2) an initial retainer in the amount of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) to cover all costs incurred by the village in providing
notice as required herein and in reviewing the petition, including, but not
limited to, the fees and costs of experts in planning, traffic engineering,
stormwater drainage, wetlands, limnology, real estate appraisal and surveying
and all legal and engineering fees and costs ("review expenses"). Credit toward
said review expenses shall be given for the filing fee. Upon demand of the
village clerk at any time after payments are made for review expenses, the
petitioner shall deposit such additional funds as may be necessary to maintain
on account with the village an amount equal to the full amount of the initial
retainer. No petition shall be placed on an agenda for action by the board of
trustees unless the full amount of the retainer is on file.
   (E)   Preliminary Determination Of Eligibility And Completeness Of Petition:
      1.   Within ten (10) days after receipt of a petition, the village clerk
shall determine whether: 1) the eligibility requirements of subsection (B) of
this section appear, from the face of the petition, to be met, 2) the petition
is complete, and 3) the appropriate fees are paid.
      2.   If the eligibility requirements do not appear to be met or the
petition is incomplete, the village clerk shall return the petition to the
petitioner with a letter specifying the deficiency. A determination that the
eligibility requirements do not appear to have been met may be appealed to the
board of trustees by letter from the petitioner received by the village clerk
at least five (5) days before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board
of trustees. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
      3.   If the eligibility requirements appear to be met, the petition is
complete and the appropriate fees are paid, the village clerk shall refer the
petition to staff for review in accordance with the terms of this section and
to the village's police chief shall place the item on the agenda for public
hearing at the next regular meetings (or a joint meeting) of the plan
commission and the zoning board of appeals, and shall provide notice of the
public hearing(s) as required hereinbelow. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993; amd. Ord. 15-
17, 9-28-2015)
   (F)   Notice:
      1.   Published Notice: The village clerk shall, at the petitioner's
expense, provide that notice of the time and place of the public hearing(s)
shall be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing (or the first thereof), in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village.
      2.   Mailed Notice: The petitioner shall give at least fifteen (15) days
prior written notice of the time and place of the public hearing(s) by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to:
         a.   All owners of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') (not
including street rights of way) of the boundaries of the territory proposed for
disconnection; and
         b.   The Trustees or other officers of: the fire protection district
in which the territory is located, the school district in which it is located,
the library district in which it is located, the park district in which it is
located, and the planning director and sheriff of the county in which it is
located.
      3.   Posted Notice: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing, the petitioner shall post a two foot by three foot (2' x 3') notice of
the hearings or joint hearing on each road or street frontage of the territory
proposed for disconnection.
   (G)   Hearing on Petition: The Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of
Appeals each shall hold a public hearing on the petition, or may jointly hold a
hearing, at such time and place within the Village as shall have been stated in
the published, mailed and posted notices. The hearing shall begin with
presentation of the petitioner's case, followed by presentation of staff
review, questions from the Plan Commission and/or ZBA members, and questions
and comments from other governmental entities and the public.
   (H)   Burden of Proof: The petitioner shall have the burden of proving
compliance with the requirements set forth herein.
   (I)   Plan Commission; Findings of Fact and Recommendations: Within twenty-
eight (28) days after the close of the hearing on the petition, the Plan
Commission shall make written findings of fact and shall submit same together
with its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The Plan Commission's
findings shall be based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case
with respect to the following matters:
      1.   The eligibility requirements set forth in subsection (B) above;
      2.   Conformity of the anticipated future use of the disconnected
territory with the Village's Comprehensive Plan and, in particular, with the
Plan's goals for the planning area in which the territory is located and
adjacent planning areas within one thousand feet (1,000') of the boundary of
the territory;
      3.   The impact of the proposed disconnection and anticipated future use
of the territory on:
         a.   Adjacent land uses and zoning;
         b.   The character of that area of the Village and the Village as a
whole; and
         c.   Waterways, wetlands and drainage, wildlife, natural areas,
historic features, water supply, roadways and traffic circulation, utilities
and related easements and riding trails, each (i) on-site, (ii) off-site with
the inventoried area, and (iii) if relevant, outside of the inventoried area;
      4.   The impact of the proposed disconnection and anticipated future use
of the territory on the school district, the park district, the library
district and the fire protection district;
      5.   The suitability of the soils, geology and topography of the
territory for septic and other wastewater management systems;
      6.   The impact of the proposed disconnection and anticipated future use
of the territory on provision of police and emergency response services by the
Village; and
      7.   Such other matters as may be deemed relevant to a particular
application.
The Plan Commission shall not recommend the granting of a petition for
disconnection unless it finds that the disconnection and anticipated future use
of the territory is in the public interest and is not solely for the interest
of the petitioner. The Plan Commission may recommend the imposition of such
conditions and restrictions upon the territory to be disconnected as it may
deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the
Village residents, including, but not limited to, the requirement of
recordation of restrictive covenants regarding future use, density of
development, required yards and conservation easements.
   (J)   Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA); Findings of Fact and Recommendations:
Within twenty-eight (28) days after the close of the hearing on the petition,
the ZBA shall make written findings of fact and shall submit same together with
its recommendations to the Board of Trustees. The ZBA's findings shall be based
upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the
following matters:
      1.   The existing uses and zoning of the territory proposed for
disconnection and all other property within the inventoried area (as previously
defined);
      2.   The suitability of the territory, if disconnected, for the
anticipated use;
      3.   The length of time the territory has been vacant as zoned,
considered in the context of development in the Village as a whole and in the
vicinity of the territory (both within and outside the Village);
      4.   The trend of development in the Village as a whole and in the
general area of the territory proposed for disconnection;
      5.   The trend of development outside of the Village in the general area
of the territory proposed for disconnection;
      6.   The need for the anticipated use in Barrington Hills;
      7.   The extent to which property values in the Village may be diminished
by the disconnection and anticipated future use of the territory;
      8.   The extent to which such diminution of property values promotes the
public health, safety, morals or general welfare of the residents of the
Village;
      9.   The relative gain to the residents of Barrington Hills as compared
to any hardship to the property owner(s); and
      10.   Such other matters as may be deemed relevant to a particular
application.
The ZBA shall not recommend the granting of a petition for disconnection unless
it finds that such disconnection and anticipated future use of the territory is
in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the petitioner.
The ZBA may recommend the imposition of such conditions and restrictions upon
the territory to be disconnected as it may deem necessary to protect the public
health, safety, morals and welfare of the Village residents, including, but not
limited to, the requirement of recordation of restrictive covenants regarding
future use, density of development, required yards, and conservation easements.
   (K)   Action by the Board of Trustees:
      1.   The Board of Trustees shall not act upon a petition for
disconnection until it shall have received a written report and recommendation
from each of the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals on the
proposed disconnection.
      2.   In cases in which either the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of
Appeals recommends denial of a petition for disconnection, or in case of a
written protest against a proposed disconnection signed and acknowledged by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the property adjacent to the
territory proposed to be disconnected is filed with the Village Clerk, such
petition shall not be granted except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of all members of the Board of Trustees.
      3.   In granting a petition for disconnection, the Board of Trustees may
impose such conditions and restrictions upon the territory to be disconnected
as it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, morals and
welfare of its residents, including, but not limited to, the requirement of
recordation of restrictive covenants regarding future use, density of
development, required yards and conservation easements.
      4.   Action by the Board of Trustees on a petition for disconnection
shall be by resolution. Such resolution, by its terms, shall not take effect
until and unless all review fees incurred by the Village have been reimbursed
by the petitioner and all conditions to approval (such as recording of
restrictive covenants) have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the Village
Attorney or Special Counsel.
   (L)   Appeal to Circuit Court: Actions against the Village pertaining to the
validity of this Section or any part thereof, or any application thereof, shall
be brought in Cook County, as the county in which the Village's principal
office is located. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Title
6-2-2: Purpose
6-2-3: Applicability
6-2-4: Definitions
6-2-5: Amendments
6-2-1: TITLE:
Chapters 2 through 6 of this Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the
"Barrington Hills Subdivision Ordinance". (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-2-2: PURPOSE:
Is based on and is a part of the Official Plan of the Village, is adopted to
promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and
general welfare of the people, the ecological system and the environment; to
protect the character and maintain the stability of the Village and contiguous
unincorporated territory; to assure the orderly development of the Village; and
to establish reasonable standards of design and procedure for subdivision and
for resubdivision of land within the Village and surrounding unincorporated
territory. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-2-3: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   These subdivision regulations shall be applicable to:
      1.   All subdivision and resubdivisions of land within the corporate
limits of the Village;
      2.   Except as provided in subsections (A)3 and (A)4 of this Section, all
subdivisions and resubdivisions of land within one and one-half (11/2) miles
beyond the corporate limits of the Village as shown on the "Official Map of
Barrington Hills";
      3.   In the event another municipality's extraterritorial jurisdiction
overlaps the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village and there is a
boundary agreement between the Village and that municipality, these subdivision
regulations shall be applicable to the territory as described in the agreement;
      4.   In the event another municipality's extraterritorial jurisdiction
overlaps the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village and there is no
applicable boundary agreement, these subdivision regulations shall be
applicable to the territory from the corporate limits of the Village to a
median line equidistant from its boundary and the boundary of the other
corporate authority nearest to Barrington Hills at any given point on the land;
      5.   The subdivision of any lot or parcel of land by use of metes and
bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease for a period of
time exceeding five (5) years; and
      6.   The creation of any new street or easement of access, by grant,
reservation or otherwise.
   (B)   No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel before a final plat of
subdivision has been approved in accordance with the terms of these
regulations.
   (C)   These subdivision regulations shall not be applicable to:
      1.   The division or subdivision of land into not more than two (2)
parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in size which does not involve any
new streets or easements of access, provided that the parcels or tracts created
by the aforesaid division or subdivision abut an existing dedicated right of
way;
      2.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
      3.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for uses as
rights of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not
involve any new streets or easements of access;
      4.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      5.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
      6.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
   (D)   All improvements within the corporate limits of the Village or any
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be installed in accordance with the terms
of Chapter 4 of this Title. Prior to the installation of said improvements, a
final plat shall be approved in accordance with the terms of Chapter 3 of this
Title; provided however, that in the event a final plat is not required,
approval of the Plan Commission, upon recommendation of the Village Engineer,
must be obtained prior to the installation of said improvements. The owner of
the land on which the improvements are to be installed, or his authorized
representative, shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission
that the proposed improvements comply with the standards and specifications of
Chapter 4 hereof.
   (E)   No subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of
the effective date hereof shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of
the adoption of these subdivision regulations, and to the extent and in any
manner that said subdivision of land is in conflict with the requirements of
this Title, said subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder.
   (F)   Nothing contained in this Title shall be deemed to be a consent,
license or permit to use or subdivide land.
   (G)   The provisions of this Title are cumulative and additional limitations
upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may be passed
hereafter, covering any subject matter in this Title. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to the definitions in other sections of this Code, the following
definitions are applicable to this Subdivision Ordinance:
ABSORPTION AREA: The trench area required to adequately dissipate the liquid
waste water being discharged to a seepage field.
ALLEY: A public right of way primarily designed to serve as access to the side
or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street.
AREA SERVICE ROAD: A street which accommodates relatively high volumes of local
and nonlocal traffic over short to medium distances at slower speeds.
BEARING STRENGTH: The amount of weight an area is capable of supporting.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines,
waterways or the corporate limits of the Village.
CLAY: A fine soil that is highly plastic. It contains soil particles of less
than 0.002 mm in diameter.
CLAYEY SOILS: Those soils consisting predominantly of clay or soils having
properties similar to clay.
COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the Village of Barrington Hills, Illinois.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Collectively those documents and ordinances of the Village
relating plans for land use, community facilities, streets and land
development.
COMPRESSIBILITY: Pertains to the susceptibility of a supporting structure to
decrease in volume when subjected to loads.
CROSSWALK (PEDESTRIAN WAY): A public right of way within a block, twelve feet
(12') or more in width, intended for pedestrians but which may include
utilities where necessary, and from which motor propelled vehicles are
excluded.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local residential street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
CURB AND GUTTER: The Portland cement concrete section used to border the edge
of each side of the street section.
CURTAIN DRAIN: Pipes, ditches, mounds or other means which redirect surface or
ground water away from areas which better suit their proposed use when in a dry
state.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip or area of land by
the general public, a corporation or certain persons for a specific purpose or
purposes.
EASEMENT, SLOPE: An easement which allows the village or its agents to enter
one's property to construct a side slope from a roadway, shoulder or other
project, and restore the slope upon completion of the project with sod, grass
or other material, and to maintain the slope.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The person approved by the village board of trustees
designed to enforce the subdivision regulations of the village.
EQUESTRIAN: Of or relating to horse or pony riding.
EQUESTRIAN TRAIL: A right of way or easement across, within, or on the border
of a subdivision, for use by equestrian traffic whether designated as an
equestrian trail, crosswalk or however otherwise designated.
FINAL APPROVAL: As that term is used in section
6-5-5 of this title, is the approval statement required from the village
engineer prior to consideration by the village board of trustees of approval of
private improvements or of acceptance of public improvements.
FINAL PLAT: The map or plan of record of a subdivision, and any accompanying
material, as described in chapter 3 of this title.
FOUNDATION: The substructure, including masonry walls, piers, footings, piles,
grillage and similar construction, which is designed to transmit the load of
any superimposed structure to natural solid or bedrock.
FREEWAY: A street which carries high speed traffic in order to divert long
distance traffic around the BACOG area.
FRONTAGE: The length of the front property line of the lot, lots or tract of
land abutting a public street, road, highway or rural right of way.
FROST HEAVE: The raising of a surface due to the freezing of water in the
underlying soil structure.
GRADE: The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percent
(%) and shown on street profile plans as required herein.
GROUND WATER LEVEL: The free subsurface water lying along the water table which
is the upper limit of saturation within the soil structure. For purposes of
this title, only the upper twenty feet (20') of the soil structure need be
considered.
LAND APPLICATION WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM: A wastewater treatment system,
serving more than one single-family residence or one or more nonresidential
buildings with a combined floor area of greater than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, which involves the aerosol discharge of wastewater to land rather
than to either a subsurface seepage field or surface water.
LOAM: The textural class name for soil having a moderate amount of sand, silt
and clay.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer
of ownership or for building development.
LOT, BUTT OR KEY: A lot at the end of a block and located between two (2)
corner lots.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2)
substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
MINERAL SOIL: A soil consisting predominantly of, and having its properties
determined predominantly by, mineral matter; usually contains less than twenty
percent (20%) organic material.
ORGANIC SOILS: Soils that contain a high percentage (greater than 20 or 30
percent) of organic matter.
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations
or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to be
subdivided under this Title.
PARKWAY: An unpaved strip of land situated within the public right of way of a
street.
P.C.: A point of curvature.
PEAT: Unconsolidated soil material consisting largely of undecomposed or only
slightly decomposed, organic matter accumulated under conditions of excessive
moisture.
PEDESTRIAN WAY: (See CROSSWALK)
PERMEABILITY: The capacity for transmitting a fluid. It is measured by the rate
at which a fluid of standard viscosity can move through material in a given
interval of time under a given hydraulic gradient.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL: As that term is used in Section
6-5-5, is the approval statement required from the Village Engineer prior to
release of the damage and nuisance guarantee pursuant to Section
6-5-5.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The drawings and documents described in Chapter 2 of this
Title.
PRIVATE ACCESS: A means of ingress and egress for only one lot on, over and
across an easement or a portion of a lot of record that begins at the right-of-
way line of a public or private street and terminates at a location selected by
the user of said private access, and is not governed by the standards set forth
in Chapter 4 of this Title.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT: Includes streets and highways, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, landscaping, street lights,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage
collection and treatment facilities given final approval by the Village
Engineer and the Board of Trustees but maintained by a private landowner or
owners or a homeowners' association.
PRIVATE STREET: A street that is maintained by the party or parties using or
having a right to use it.
P.T.: Point of tangent.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Includes streets and highways, alleys, public grounds, ways
for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, landscaping, street
lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, storm water drainage, water supply
and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment
facilities given final approval by the Village Engineer and accepted by the
Board of Trustees for public maintenance.
PUBLIC STREET: A street that is maintained by a municipality, township, county
or the state.
P.V.C.: Point of vertical curvature.
REGIONAL HIGHWAY: A street, which carries, or that planning evidence indicates
will carry, a large volume of traffic in order to divert medium-distance
through traffic around individual villages.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road,
sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipe line, water
main, sanitary sewer or storm sewer or for other special uses. The usage of the
term "right of way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right of
way hereafter established and shown on a final record plat is to be separate
and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right of way and not
included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels, provided the
size of the lot for zoning purposes shall be determined by the zoning
regulations of the Village. Rights of way intended for streets, sidewalks,
water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers or any other uses involving future
maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of
the plat on which such right of way is established.
ROADWAY: (See STREET)
SERVICE DRIVE (ACCESS STREET): A public street, generally paralleling and
contiguous to a regional or area highway, primarily designed to promote safety
by reducing ingress and egress to the right of way and providing safe and
orderly points of access at fairly uniformly spaced intervals.
SHOULDER: That earthen portion of the street within the right of way parallel
to, but exclusive of, the surface width, which earthen portion is used for
lateral support of base and surface courses.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a public right of way paved or otherwise surfaced,
intended for pedestrian use only.
SOIL MAP: A map showing the distribution of soil types or other soil mapping
units in relation to the prominent physical and cultural features of the
earth's surface.
SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE MAP: The soils map prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture.
SOIL SURVEY: The systematic examination, description, classification and
mapping of soils in an area.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Public improvement construction standards as adopted
by the Village.
STREET: The paved portion of a public or private right of way, including curbs,
which affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties,
whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane,
throughway or however otherwise designated.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A public street which distributes local traffic between
local minor streets and area service roads, discourages use by through traffic,
does not extend across area service roads and serves not more than four hundred
(400) dwelling units.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to a
regional or area highway, and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
STREET, MINOR: A public or private street which carries local traffic to
collector streets, does not serve more than fifty (50) dwelling units and is
not contiguous with streets of adjacent areas.
SUBDIVIDER (DEVELOPER): Any person or corporation or duly authorized agent of
the landowner who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION: Shall mean:
   (A)   The division or redivision of a tract of land into two (2) or more
lots, tracts or parcels by means of platting, conveyance (including a
conveyance by metes and bounds), change or rearrangement of boundaries or
otherwise, for the purpose, either immediate or future, of sale or building
development; or
   (B)   The establishment of public streets, ways or other areas for the use
of the public, or private streets or easements for the use of persons entitled
to the use thereof.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The standards detailed in Chapter 4 of this Title
with which all subdivisions must comply.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: Any subdivision containing more than five (5) lots.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: Any subdivision containing not more than five (5) lots.
SURFACE WIDTH: The shortest distance between the faces of parallel curbs on
streets with curbs and gutters, or between the outer parallel limits of the
paved portion of streets without curbs and gutters, exclusive of shoulders.
USGS: The United States geological survey.
WET SOILS: Soils frequently or continuously water logged with subsurface water
conditions which produce excessive or abnormal hydrostatic pressures on
building foundations or other structures.
WETLAND: A transitional area between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the
water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow
water. Wetlands generally include, but are not limited to, areas with
hyrdophytes in hydric soils such as those commonly known as marshes, swamps,
bogs and fens.
ZONING ORDINANCE: Title 5 of this code, as amended. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993; amd.
Ord. 94-5, 4-25-1994; Ord. 04-19, 12-20-2004; Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
6-2-5: AMENDMENTS:
The plan commission shall, from time to time, initiate and conduct public
hearings to consider such changes or additions to the provisions and
regulations herein contained for subdivision control as it may deem necessary
or advisable.
The commission shall recommend, in writing, to the board of trustees such
changes or additions to the subdivision regulations upon conclusion of a public
hearing. Such changes or additions shall become effective after their adoption
by the board of trustees by the passage of an amendment to the subdivision
regulations of the village. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Duties Of Certain Offices
6-3-2: General Requirements And Procedures
6-3-3: Specific Requirements And Procedures
6-3-4: Increased Facilities
6-3-5: Variations
6-3-6: Vacation Of Plats And Public Streets
6-3-7: Resubdivisions
6-3-8: Acquisition Of Land For Public Use
6-3-9: Equestrian Trails
6-3-1: DUTIES OF CERTAIN OFFICES:
Eight (8) offices of the government of the village are concerned with the
administration of this title, as follows:
   (A)   Enforcing Officer: It shall be the duty of the enforcing officer to
enforce the provisions of the subdivision regulations. The enforcing officer
may call upon any department or official of the village to furnish him with
such information and assistance as he may deem necessary to effect the proper
enforcement of this title, and it shall be the duty of such department or
official to furnish such information and assistance whenever required.
   (B)   Village Clerk: The village clerk shall:
      1.   Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including
amendments thereto;
      2.   Receive, file and distribute all sketch plans, subdivision
applications, preliminary and final plats and supporting data;
      3.   Receive, file and record final plats with the proper county or
authority;
      4.   Make all other determinations required of him by the regulations
contained herein.
   (C)   Plan Commission: The plan commission shall be entrusted with the
following responsibilities:
      1.   Conduct a preapplication conference, if requested.
      2.   Review sketch plans and reports thereon by the village engineer and
village planner and approve, disapprove, conditionally approve, or refer such
sketch plans to the planned development review committee.
      3.   Review all preliminary subdivision plats and reports thereon by the
village engineer and village planner and recommend approval or disapproval, or
necessary modifications thereto to the board of trustees.
      4.   Review and recommend approval or disapproval of all final plats and
specifications for improvements.
      5.   Recommend the granting or denial of requests for variations.
      6.   Initiate and hold public hearings to recommend to the board of
trustees, from time to time, such amendments to the subdivision regulations as
the plan commission may deem necessary or advisable.
      7.   Make all other determinations required of them by the regulations
contained herein.
   (D)   Village Engineer: The village engineer is hereby vested with the duty
and responsibility of reviewing all engineering plans and specifications
concerning required public improvements, submitting recommendations thereon to
the plan commission, and appearing before the plan commission and board of
trustees as requested. He shall also make all other determinations required of
him by the regulations contained herein.
   (E)   Village Planner: The village planner is hereby vested with the duty
and responsibility of reviewing all sketch plans and plats, submitting
recommendations thereon to the plan commission, and appearing before the plan
commission and board of trustees as requested. He shall also make all other
determinations required by the regulations contained herein.
   (F)   Village Attorney or Special Counsel: The Village Attorney or Special
Counsel is hereby vested with the duty and responsibility of reviewing all
sketch plans and plats, submitting recommendations thereon to the Plan
Commission, and appearing before the Plan Commission and Board of Trustees as
requested. He shall also make all other determinations required by the
regulations contained herein.
   (G)   Board of Health: The Village Board of Health is hereby vested with the
duty and responsibility of reviewing and approving, where appropriate, all
final plats of subdivision with respect to sewage disposal systems, as set
forth in Section
4-2-7 of Title 4 and Section
6-4-6 of Title 6 of the Village Code, and submitting a report thereon to the
Board of Trustees. The Board of Health shall also make any and all other
determinations required by this Title.
   (H)   Board of Trustees: The Board of Trustees is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to subdivision control:
      1.   Approval or disapproval of all preliminary subdivision plats
referred to it by the Plan Commission;
      2.   Approval or disapproval of all final plats referred to it by the
Plan Commission;
      3.   Amend the regulations of this Title when found necessary and
desirable, as hereinafter provided;
      4.   Institute appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
Title;
      5.   Approve or disapprove intended dedications and, by ordinance,
declare public reservations of land;
      6.   Order the vacation of a street, alley or other public place and fix
compensation therefor;
      7.   Act upon variation recommendations referred to it by the Plan
Commission; and
      8.   Make all other determinations required of the Board by the
regulations contained herein. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-3-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Notice of Intent to Subdivide: All applicants for subdivision approval
shall notify the Village Clerk of their intention to subdivide land within the
Village jurisdiction.
   (B)   Pre-Application Conference: All applicants for subdivision are
encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the Plan Commission. No
more than one pre-application conference shall be held for any proposed
subdivision.
   (C)   Major Subdivisions: Major subdivisions, those involving more than five
(5) lots, shall be reviewed by the Village in the following steps:
      1.   Sketch plan approval, pursuant to the provisions of Section
6-3-3(A).
      2.   Preliminary plat approval, pursuant to the provisions of Section
6-3-3(B).
      3.   Final plat approval, pursuant to the provisions of Section
6-3-3(C).
   (D)   Minor Subdivisions: Minor subdivisions, those involving five (5) lots
or less, shall be reviewed by the Village in the following steps:
      1.   Sketch plan approval, pursuant to the provisions of Section
6-3-3(A).
      2.   Final plat approval, pursuant to the provisions of Section
6-3-3(C).
   (E)   Submission of Applications; Determination of Completeness of
Applications and Supporting Documentation: An application for sketch plan,
preliminary or final plat approval shall be submitted to the Village Clerk on a
form to be provided by the Village, accompanied by thirty (30) copies thereof
(plus two (2) dimensionally stabilized reproducible copies), thirty (30) copies
of all required documentation, and all required fees (together, "the
application") on or before the deadlines for submittal established annually by
the Village. Within five (5) days after receipt of an application for sketch
plan, preliminary or final plat approval, as the case may be, the Village
Engineer shall determine if the application is complete. If the application is
complete and the filing fee paid, it shall be referred to the staff for review
in accordance with the terms of the applicable sections. If the Village
Engineer determines that the application is incomplete, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the deficiencies of the application. For the purposes of
this Section completeness shall mean that all required documentation has been
submitted; it shall not mean that the application conforms to the standards of
Chapter 4 herein.
   (F)   Plan Commission Consideration: All applications for sketch plan,
preliminary or final plat approval, as the case may be, shall be considered by
the Plan Commission in accordance with the established submittal schedule,
except as such date may be extended by mutual consent.
   (G)   Waiver of Submission Requirements: In the event the Plan Commission
determines, at the request of an applicant, that any of the matters required to
be submitted as part of an application are not necessary to the proper review
of a particular proposal, the Commission may waive the requirement if it
determines that such waiver is consistent with the purposes of this Title and
if not required by State statutes.
   (H)   Filing Fee: A filing fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
the first two (2) lots in a proposed subdivision, plus an additional one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each proposed subdivision lot in excess of two
(2) shall be paid at the time a sketch plan is submitted to the Village Clerk
except that the maximum filing fee for a subdivision will not exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a tract one hundred (100) acres
or less in size and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for a tract over one
hundred (100) acres.
   (I)   Review Expenses:
      1.   The applicant shall reimburse the Village for the entire cost
incurred: in reviewing the sketch plan, the preliminary subdivision plat, the
final subdivision plat, and accompanying submittals; for reprinting any
documents submitted with the sketch plan or the preliminary or final
subdivision plats; in determining the suitability of the soil and applicable
flood conditions; and in publishing notice and recording the final plat. Review
expenses also shall include the fees and costs incurred by the Village
Engineer, the Village Attorney or Special Counsel, or any other expert deemed
necessary or desirable by the Chairman of the Plan Commission, in regard to the
proposed subdivision for every discussion or meeting after the pre-application
conference.
      2.   The Village Clerk shall bill the applicant monthly for the review
expenses incurred by the Village. The applicant shall pay such expenses within
ten (10) days after receipt of an invoice from the Village. No further
processing shall occur if an invoice remains unpaid for sixty (60) days or more
after the invoice date, and in no event shall a preliminary or final plat be
approved by the Village Board unless the applicant has paid all review expenses
which have been billed prior to the date of consideration of such preliminary
or final plat.
      3.   Upon approval of the applicant's final plat by the Board of
Trustees, the Village Clerk shall determine the balance of any unbilled review
expenses. Credit toward said balance of review expenses shall be given for the
filing fee paid pursuant to Section
6-3-2(H) of this Title. In the event the said balance exceeds the filing fee,
such excess cost shall be paid within ten (10) days of receipt of Village
invoice. No plat shall be recorded unless the subdivider has paid all the
review expenses owed the Village. In the event the filing fee exceeds the
balance owed at the time of final plat approval, such excess amount shall be
returned to the applicant. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-3-3: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Sketch Plan:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide the Village
with sufficient information to evaluate a proposed subdivision at an early
stage in the process in order to permit alterations in plans as may be required
prior to the developer incurring large expenditures in the preparation of
formal plats.
      2.   Application: In addition to the requirements of Section
6-3-2(E), applications for sketch plan approval shall contain the following:
         a.   Name for File Identification: The proposed development shall be
given a name for identification purposes, such name being unique to the Village
and the county in which the subdivision is located to avoid duplication and
confusion with previously recorded plats.
         b.   Location And Description Of Property: Location and legal
description of property by county, township, section number, subdivision (with
block and lot numbers), place or locality name as applicable shall be
specified, and in case of unsubdivided properties, location on roads by which
property is reached.
         c.   Information As To Ownership:
            (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the legal owner,
beneficial owner or owners and any persons enjoying options or rights to
acquire the property.
            (2)   Title insurance commitment or policy, including access
endorsement, dated within sixty (60) days of the date of the application
submittal, and a sworn statement of any changes to legal or beneficiary
ownership or any contracts, options, leases and/or easements, licenses or
covenants granted or reserved subsequent to the date of the title commitment or
policy.
            (3)   A copy of the recorded instrument(s) granting, conveying or
reserving any existing legal rights of way or easements affecting the property.
            (4)   A copy of the instrument(s) creating any covenant affecting
the property.
            (5)   The applicant shall have an affirmative obligation to
provide, without request from the village, updated information as any of the
above described information may change between the time of submittal and the
approval and execution of the final plat.
         d.   Applicant's Representatives: Name, address and telephone number
of engineer, surveyor and other professionals and technicians responsible for
surveys and for subdivision design, legal representation, and any other
representation of the applicant. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
         e.   Preliminary Analysis And Inventory: Preliminary inventory and
analysis of the site and surrounding properties, for a distance of not less
than one thousand feet (1,000') for major subdivisions or for a distance of not
less than five hundred feet (500') for minor subdivisions.
            (1)   To the extent that they relate to the site, such inventory
and analysis shall consider topography; soils and geology; waterways, wetlands
and drainage; wildlife; historic features; adjacent land uses and zoning;
utilities and related easements; riding trails, roadways and traffic
circulation; and other information critical to an understanding of the
capability of the site to accommodate the proposed development.
            (2)   Such inventory and analysis shall: describe the type of
vegetation on the site, including trees, shrubs and undergrowth; describe
whether the trees are deciduous or conifers; list the species of commonly known
trees; state whether any trees on site have a trunk diameter at five feet (5')
above ground level of twelve inches (12") or greater and, if so, the estimated
number and approximate location of such trees; and describe generally the
distribution, by type and location, of the vegetation on the site.
            (3)   An aerial photograph of the site shall be submitted by the
applicant. (Ord. 02-6, 6-24-2002)
         f.   Preliminary Subdivision Proposals: Preliminary subdivision
proposals prepared by a registered engineer or a professional land surveyor,
which shall include alternatives therefor, describing proposed uses and
densities; general lot and street layout; water supply, wastewater and storm
water management; conservation and landscaping; the widths and location of all
easements, drainageways and equestrian trails; ownership and maintenance
concepts; and other features that characterize the proposed subdivision. (Ord.
05-02, 6-17-2005)
         g.   Other Information: Such other information as may be required by
the plan commission or board of trustees.
      3.   Notification Of Neighboring Property Owners:
         a.   All property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') (not
including street rights of way) of the boundaries of the tract of land being
considered for subdivision shall be notified by the applicant in person or by
certified mail a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the plan commission
hearing on the proposed sketch plan.
         b.   In addition, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the plan
commission hearing, a two foot by three foot (2' x 3') notice thereof,
including such information as shall be described in the application form, shall
be posted by the applicant on the road or street frontage(s) of the property
for which the application has been filed.
         c.   Notice of the plan commission hearing shall be submitted by the
village clerk for publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village at least fifteen (15) days and no more than thirty (30) days prior to
the date of the plan commission hearing.
         d.   Prior to the opening of the plan commission public hearing, the
applicant shall present to the village attorney or special counsel a sworn
statement that notice as required herein was given by the applicant to the
persons at the addresses shown on a list to be attached to the sworn statement.
      4.   Staff Review: If an application for sketch plan approval is
determined to be complete, as provided in subsection
6-3-2(E) of this chapter, the application for sketch plan approval shall be
reviewed by the village engineer, the village planner and the village attorney
or special counsel (hereinafter "staff"). Staff shall submit a report or
reports thereon to the plan commission within fourteen (14) days after the
determination of completeness.
      5.   Plan Commission Review And Action: The plan commission shall review
the sketch plan at its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of
the report or reports from staff, unless such time is extended by mutual
consent, and shall approve, with or without conditions, or disapprove the
sketch plan.
   (B)   Preliminary Plat:
      1.   Purpose: Upon approval of the sketch plan, an application for
preliminary plat approval may be filed to more fully describe the proposed
subdivision, including preliminary engineering.
      2.   Application: In addition to the requirements of subsection
6-3-2(E) of this chapter, applications for preliminary plat approval shall
contain the following:
         a.   The date of sketch plan approval and any changes to the proposed
subdivision since said approval.
         b.   Basic facts and proposals pertaining to the property, including:
            (1)   Size of tract in acres or existing lots, if any, in square
feet.
            (2)   Existing zoning classification of property under the zoning
regulations of the village or the zoning ordinance of the county or counties in
which the property is located, and any rezoning proposed to be requested.
            (3)   Numbers of lots proposed in subdivision.
            (4)   Gross lot area, net lot area and zoning lot area for each
proposed lot, plus minimum, average and maximum gross lot area for the
subdivision as a whole.
            (5)   Areas to be preserved as public or private open space.
            (6)   Number and area of parcels of land intended to be dedicated,
conveyed or reserved for public use, and the conditions proposed for such
disposal and use. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
            (7)   Proposed easements for utilities, drainageways and
facilities, equestrian trails, landscape areas and other purposes. (Ord. 05-02,
6-17-2005)
         c.   The drawing of the preliminary plat shall be submitted in the
following manner:
            (1)   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale suitable to
the project involved. Unless otherwise determined by the village engineer, a
scale of one hundred feet to the inch (100' = 1") shall be used. Drawings shall
be oriented so that north is at the top of the sheet, with a north arrow shown.
The date of latest revision also shall be shown.
            (2)   Each separate sheet shall be entitled according to its
subject matter and identified with the development. Any other appropriate
identification of the land, scale, contour intervals, north arrow, date of
preparation, including the date of latest revision etc., shall be included.
            (3)   A vicinity sketch or small scale key map of the area
surrounding the property to be developed shall be included.
            (4)   Existing features:
               A.    Every preliminary plat shall show clearly the extent and
condition of the property which is proposed to be subdivided, together with
sufficient information with respect to existing conditions in adjoining
properties for a distance of not less than two hundred fifty feet (250') from
the proposed subdivision which will enable proper determinations to be made as
to the suitability of the proposed subdivision.
               B.    The boundary of the property shall be shown by bold lines.
The bearing and distance of each course in the boundary outline shall be
provided.
               C.    The true relationship between the boundary of the property
and the right of way of existing roads upon which it may border, together with
the location of existing improvements in such right of way shall also be
provided. Existing permanent buildings shall be shown.
               D.    The relationship between the property and the village
coordinate system.
            (5)   Additional information:
               A.    The location and name of all adjacent subdivisions, if
any, and names of owners of adjacent unsubdivided and subdivided property
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision.
               B.    The location, name and present width of right of way and
paving or improved surfacing for all adjacent roads, streets and alleys,
including those intersecting any road or street that bounds the property.
               C.    Identification by block and lot number of recorded lots or
parcels immediately adjoining the subject property.
               D.    The location, width and type of use of any existing roads,
rights of way, easements or other special purpose areas, including riding
trails, within the property, or immediately adjacent thereto, together with the
location of any towers, poles or other structures in connection with electric
transmission lines.
               E.    Approximate location of any existing underground
facilities, sewers, culverts, water mains, storm drains, gas or oil
transmission lines, etc., within the property or immediately adjacent thereto,
with pipe sizes and directions of slope.
               F.    Existing topography showing contours at two foot (2')
intervals for land that slopes more than two percent (2%) or one foot (1')
intervals for land that slopes less than two percent (2%), together with
drainage channels, streams, springs, swamps, rock out-crops, buildings, wooded
areas or other features likely to affect the plan. All contours shall be on
U.S.G.S. datum and shall be determined from current field data or aerial
photography. If any part of the proposed subdivision is subject to flooding, a
line indicating the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood shall be
shown on the drawing.
               G.    The Plan Commission may allow the omission of contours
from plans of those subdivisions or resubdivisions which do not involve the
opening of new streets; provided, however, that in any such case the Plan
Commission may require in lieu thereof spot elevations of each proposed lot;
provided, further, that each plan from which contours are omitted or for which
spot elevations of each proposed lot are the only contours given shall be
accompanied by a surveyor's certification that no part of the proposed
subdivision consists of flood hazard areas.
            (6)   A Preliminary Landscape Plan: A general depiction of proposed
landscaping required by Section
6-4-9 shall be provided. In addition, to assist in the overall planning
procedure and location of proposed improvements, existing tree growth and
ground cover within a proposed subdivision shall be identified and located in
accordance with the following categories:
               A.    Undisturbed Areas: Within areas which will not be
disturbed by construction of improvements required by Chapter 4 of this Title,
tree growth shall be designated only by an outline of the forested areas. The
various tree species within forested areas and free standing trees shall be
designated.
               B.    Disturbed Areas: Within areas to be disturbed by
construction of improvements required by Chapter 4 of this Title, a tree
inventory shall be made showing the location, size and species of all trees
over ten inches (10") in diameter as measured at a point two feet (2') above
natural ground. Existing ground cover in all areas to be disturbed by
construction shall be delineated.
The above required inventories shall be prepared by a practicing arborist or
landscape architect. All plants will be designated using their English names.
            (7)   The Proposed Plat of Subdivision: The preliminary plat shall
show, superimposed upon the drawing of the property outlines and its existing
features, a graphic representation of the subdivision, resubdivision or
development which is being proposed for approval. The items to be shown, as
applicable in each case, include the following:
               A.    Street Layout:
                  (i)   The right-of-way lines or easement lines of all
proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, equestrian trails or other rights of way,
including the widths thereof and the proposed use of special rights of way.
                  (ii)   Where the subdivision borders on an existing road or
street which will require widening, the same is to be indicated by a new right-
of-way line appropriately located to meet such requirement.
                  (iii)   Any existing streets which are proposed to be
abandoned shall be shown in shaded pattern, or otherwise distinctly indicated.
                  (iv)   Street names shall be shown for all proposed streets
within the subdivision.
               B.    Street Grades: Each preliminary plat which includes
proposed new streets, or new development along the existing road or street for
which there is no established grade shall show proposed grades in the streets.
               C.    Lot and Block Layout:
                  (i)   Layout showing proposed lot lines, scaled dimensions of
lots, area of lot, building restriction lines as required by the Zoning
Ordinance and any easement required. In resubdivisions the existing lot lines
shall be shown by dashed lines and dotted lot numbers.
                  (ii)   Lots and blocks shall be numbered so as to avoid
duplication. Consideration should be given to future use of lot numbers as
street addresses.
               D.    Sites for Public Uses: All sites proposed for schools,
parks, playgrounds, water reservoirs or other public uses, if any, shall be so
identified with scaled dimensions and approximate areas.
               E.    Sites for Other Than Single-Family Dwellings:
                  (i)   All sites proposed for uses other than single-family
dwellings, such as churches, public utilities, shopping centers, general
business or manufacturing, shall be so indicated with scaled dimensions and
area for each such site, provided that the proposed use is in accordance with
the use for which the property is actually zoned.
                  (ii)   When the property is included in more than one zoning
classification, the lines showing the limits of each zoning classification
shall be clearly indicated.
               F.    Stages of final platting and development with estimated
schedule.
         d.   A copy of a natural resource report as required by the Soil and
Water Conservation District or Districts in which the subject property is
located.
         e.   A soil classification and percolation test drawing shall be
provided at the same scale as the preliminary plat in accordance with the
requirements of Section
6-4-6 hereof. The drawing shall be prepared by a qualified soil scientist
trained and experienced in the soil classification system of the United States
Department of Agriculture and the percolation test results shall be prepared by
or under the direction of a registered professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Illinois. Percolation test results are to be furnished
in tabular form showing the drop in water level for the various clock times at
each hole. The following information shall appear on the drawing:
            (1)   The boundaries of the various soil types occurring within the
subdivision with each type indicated by soil identification number.
            (2)   The location of all holes used for percolation test.
            (3)   The location of all ground water test holes.
            (4)   The layout of the proposed subdivision as shown on the
preliminary plat.
            (5)   The existing topography within the area proposed for
subdivision.
Soil survey interpretation sheets shall be submitted for each soil type
encountered within the proposed subdivision. A certificate by the Engineer is
to be furnished stating that each lot within the subdivision has sufficient
suitable area within its boundary to accommodate a septic system sized in
accordance with the standards of Section
6-4-6.
         f.   Such other information as may be required by the Plan Commission
or Board of Trustees.
      3.   Staff Review: If an application for preliminary plat approval is
determined to be complete, as provided in Section
6-3-2(E), the application shall be reviewed by staff. Staff shall submit a
report or reports thereon to the Plan Commission within twenty one (21) days
after the determination of completeness.
      4.   Plan Commission Review and Action:
         a.   The Plan Commission shall review the preliminary plat at its next
regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the report or reports from
Staff, unless such time is extended by mutual consent, and shall recommend to
the Board of Trustees the approval, with or without conditions, or disapproval
of the preliminary plat.
         b.   The Plan Commission may permit any applicant to make any changes
or additions as may be required by the Plan Commission prior to submission of
its recommendation to the Board of Trustees.
         c.   The recommendation of the Plan Commission shall be in writing,
shall state the basis for the recommended action, and shall report on:
            (1)   The conformity of the preliminary plat of subdivision with
the Village's Comprehensive Plan;
            (2)   The conformity of the preliminary plat of subdivision with
the purposes, objectives, standards and criteria of Chapters 2 and 4 of this
Title, including specification of any variances requested;
            (3)   The Illinois Department of Conservation's Endangered and
Threatened Species Consultation;
            (4)   The report of the Soil Conservation District; and
            (5)   For unincorporated areas, the conformity of the preliminary
plat of subdivision with applicable laws and regulations, including zoning,
flood plains, erosion and sedimentation control regulations promulgated by the
County Health Department and the Soil Conservation District.
         d.   If the recommendation of the Plan Commission on the proposed plat
of subdivision is for disapproval, the Plan Commission shall furnish the
applicant with a written statement of the reasons for such disapproval,
forwarding a copy of said statement to the Board of Trustees. Such disapproval
does not constitute rejection.
         e.   After action on the preliminary plat by the Plan Commission, the
Plan Commission shall file with the Village Clerk one copy of the proposed
plat, together with the recommendation of the Commission. The Village Clerk
shall submit the plat and recommendation of the Commission to the Board of
Trustees.
      5.   Board of Trustees Review and Action:
         a.   At its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the
proposed preliminary plat and the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the
Board of Trustees shall consider the plat and the Commission's recommendation
in accordance with the purposes, objectives, standards and criteria in Chapters
2 and 4 of this Title. The Board of Trustees shall then approve the preliminary
plat, with or without conditions, or disapprove it.
         b.   Upon disapproval of the preliminary plat by the Board of
Trustees, the Board of Trustees shall return the plat to the applicant and the
Plan Commission with a written statement setting forth the reasons for said
disapproval. Once deficiencies are corrected, the applicant may resubmit the
preliminary plat to the Village Clerk for referral to Staff and the Plan
Commission, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Title, without
filing additional fees.
         c.   If the proposed preliminary plat of subdivision is approved by
the Board of Trustees, the original and one print or copy of the plat shall be
endorsed by the Board of Trustees as follows:
   This proposed plat of subdivision and accompanying documents has received
preliminary approval by Resolution ______ of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Barrington Hills, and the Plan Commission is now ready to receive
the final plat for consideration.
Dated ________
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF BARRINGTON HILLS
By ___________
President
ATTEST:
______________
Village Clerk
The original preliminary plat, so endorsed, shall remain on file with the Plan
Commission, and the Plan Commission shall return a print or copy of the plat,
so endorsed, to the applicant.
         d.   If the proposed subdivision should lie wholly or partly outside
the corporate limits of the Village, the Board of Trustees' action on the
preliminary plat shall not be final until the applicable agency in the county
or counties in which said subdivision is located has approved it.
      6.   Authority to Proceed With Final Plat: Receipt by the applicant of
the copy of the endorsed preliminary plat together with the approval of the
Board of Trustees and county (when required), shall constitute authority for
the subdivider to proceed with final plans and specifications for the
installation of the required improvements and preparation of the final plat.
      7.   Time Limit on Submission of Final Plat: After approval of the
preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees and county (when required), the
applicant shall, within twelve (12) months thereafter, submit an application
for final plat approval. If a phasing plan was approved as part of the
preliminary plat, the applicant may submit a final plat constituting only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and
develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms in all respects to the
preliminary plat. If final plats covering all portions of the preliminary plat
are not submitted within twenty four (24) months after the date of approval of
the preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees, the preliminary plat shall be
resubmitted according to the regulations of Section
6-3-3 of this Title.
   (C)   Final Plat:
      1.   Purpose: Upon approval of the preliminary plat, an application for
final plat approval may be filed to fully describe the proposed subdivision,
including final engineering.
      2.   Application: In addition to the requirements of Section
6-3-2(E), applications for final plat approval shall contain the following:
         a.   In addition to the requirements for final plat approval stated
hereinafter, minor subdivisions shall be required to submit with the
application for final plat approval the material required under Sections
6-3-3(B)2d and
6-3-3(B)2e, the Natural Resource Report and soil classification and percolation
test drawing, and may be required to submit the material required under
Sections
6-3-3(B)2c(6)F and
6-3-3(B)2c(6)G, existing topography and spot elevations.
         b.   If a major subdivision, the date of preliminary plat approval and
identification of any changes from said approved plat.
         c.   The Drawing: The final plat of subdivision shall be clearly and
legibly drawn in black ink upon tracing cloth or mylar to a scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger from an accurate survey. All
notations of distances, bearings and labels shall have a minimum height of one-
tenth inch (1/10"). It shall be drawn on one or more sheets whose maximum
dimensions shall not exceed twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x
36"). If more than two (2) sheets are required, an index sheet of the same
dimensions shall be filed showing the entire subdivision on one sheet and the
component areas shown on the other sheet or sheets. The drawing shall be
oriented so that north is at the top of the sheet. The final plat of the
subdivision shall show:
            (1)   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles or
bearings.
            (2)   Municipal, township or section lines accurately tied to lines
of the subdivision by distances and angles and the description of any section
corner monuments.
            (3)   The relationship between the property and the Village
coordinate system.
            (4)   Correct legal description of the land embraced in the plat,
showing the township and range in which such land is situated and the sections
and parts of sections platted, and in the case of replatting or resubdividing,
describe the part of, and the name of, the original plat which is replatted or
resubdivided, containing the name of the town, city, village or addition
platted, the name of the proprietor required to sign the plat and of the
surveyor making it. If there is any excepted parcel within the plat boundary,
it must be accurately described by metes, bounds and courses.
            (5)   Lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths
and names.
            (6)   Accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to
be dedicated or granted for public use.
            (7)   Line of departure of one street from another.
            (8)   Names and widths of adjoining streets and alleys.
            (9)   All lots designated by numbers so as to avoid duplication;
streets, avenues or other grounds designated by names, letters or numbers.
            (10)   Building setback lines.
            (11)   Location of all easements, labeled for their intended uses.
            (12)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for
locating the boundaries of the subdivisions, lots, streets, alleys, easements
and other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to
the nearest one one-hundredth of a foot (1/100').
            (13)   Radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency and central angles
for all curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners.
            (14)   Location of all required monuments and their descriptions.
            (15)   Name of the subdivision, scale of the plat, true north
point, the name of owner or owners, of subdividers and date of preparation,
including the date of the latest revision.
            (16)   Private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of
existence. Should these restrictions or trusteeships be of such length so as to
make their lettering on the plat impracticable and, thus necessitate the
preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be
made on the plat.
            (17)   Calculations showing the error of closure of the boundary of
the subdivision, which error shall in no case be greater than one in forty
thousand (40,000).
            (18)   If parks or open spaces are reserved for public use in
subdivisions located outside of the corporate limits of the Village, the owner
(s) of the subdivision will by covenant provide for the maintenance of the park
or open spaces until such time as the subdivision is annexed by the appropriate
agency.
         d.   A Final Landscape Plan: A landscape plan shall be prepared by a
practicing landscape architect in accordance with the standards in Section
6-4-9 and contain the following information:
            (1)   Plant name, both Latin and English.
            (2)   Planting location.
            (3)   Number of plants in any one location.
            (4)   Total number of plants to be provided.
         e.   Subdivision Improvement Plans: Subdivision improvement plans
showing street profiles for each new street and all drainage improvements in
the proposed subdivision shall be submitted in accordance with the standards of
Sections
6-4-3 and
6-4-4. However, in cases where grades of streets involved are already
established, or in cases of small subdivisions or resubdivisions, such
subdivision improvement plans may not be required as determined by the Village
Engineer. All plans shall be prepared under the supervision of a registered
professional engineer whose experience and educational background is civil
engineering. Plans submitted for the subdivision improvements shall contain the
following minimum information:
            (1)   Title or cover sheet.
            (2)   Large-scale location map showing the general area of the
subdivision.
            (3)   General notes as required.
            (4)   Typical street sections.
            (5)   Summary of quantities with a per-sheet breakdown.
            (6)   Layout plan, if required, for clarity.
            (7)   Plan and profile sheets, scale 1" = 50' H, 1" = 5' V or 1" =
20' H, 1" = 2' V.
            (8)   Landscape plan.
            (9)   Erosion control details.
            (10)   Special construction details, as required.
            (11)   Cross section sheets.
            (12)   Standard construction details as required.
Plans shall be prepared in ink on twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x
36") linen or mylar sheets conforming to Federal-Aid Standards.
         f.   Designation of existing or proposed streets to be used during
construction of the proposed subdivision.
         g.   A surface water drainage plan and topographical map (referred to
as "the topographic overlay") in accordance with chapter 765 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, formerly chapter 109 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
         h.   Notice to Purchaser: The following notice to purchaser shall
appear on the final plat:
   NOTICE TO PURCHASER
The lots depicted on this plat are not eligible for issuance of building
permits until the required improvements are installed by the subdivider and
approved by the Village Engineer.
         i.   Certifications: Certificates in substance as found on file with
the Village Clerk and conforming to the requirements of the county in which the
land in question is situated, together with any further certificate that may be
required by or applicable to the subdivision, including a State Highway Access
or County Highway Access Certificate, shall appear in the final plat. All
certificates except the Village Clerk Collector's Certificate, the Plan
Commission's Certificate, the Village Board of Health Certificate, the Board of
Trustees Certificate, and the County Clerk's Certificate shall be signed prior
to submitting the application for final plat approval.
      3.   Staff Review: If an application for final plat approval is
determined to be complete, as provided in Section
6-3-2(E), the application shall be reviewed by Staff. Staff shall submit a
report or reports thereon to the Plan Commission within twenty-eight (28) days
after the determination of completeness of the application, and the Village
Engineer shall determine the amount of each guarantee required, as provided in
Chapter 5 of this Title. The Village Engineer shall then return the plat to the
Plan Commission together with a report indicating that plans and specifications
and technical details have been checked and found satisfactory or his
recommendations for corrections.
      4.   Plan Commission Review and Action: The Plan Commission shall review
the final plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the
report or reports from Staff, unless such period is extended by mutual consent.
If the Plan Commission determines that the final plat conforms to the approved
preliminary plat and that the final plat meets all requirements of this Title,
the Commission shall recommend approval of the final plat, with or without
conditions, and the chairman and secretary shall sign the Plan Commission's
Certificate on the plat. If the Plan Commission determines that the final plat
does not conform to this Title, then the Commission shall recommend disapproval
to the Board of Trustees. The Plan Commission shall transmit the final plat and
all supporting documents to the Board of Health and the Board of Trustees for
consideration at their next regular meetings following Plan Commission action.
      5.   Board of Health Review and Action: At its next regularly scheduled
meeting after action by the Plan Commission, the Board of Health shall review
the final plat. The Board of Health shall determine if the plat is in
accordance with Sections
4-2-7 and
6-4-6 of the Village Code and shall approve or disapprove it as to conformance
with those sections, only. If the Board of Health approves the final plat, it
shall transmit the final plat, executed by it, to the Board of Trustees. If the
Board of Health fails to approve a final plat, it shall report the areas of
nonconformance to the Board of Trustees.
      6.   At least five (5) but not more than ten (10) days prior to the
meeting of the Board of Trustees at which the final plat is scheduled to be
considered, the applicant shall submit to the Village Clerk a sworn statement
that all ownership information submitted pursuant to Section
6-3-3(A)2c, above, remains true and correct or has been accurately updated, as
the case may be. In addition, and within the same time frame, the applicant
shall submit corporate resolutions authorizing the signator(s) to the owner's
certificate to so execute the final plat and any required declaration of
covenants, grant of easement, etc., on behalf of any corporation as owner of
the property which is the subject of the final plat.
      7.   Board of Trustees Review and Action: At its next regular meeting
following action on a final plat by the Plan Commission and the Board of
Health, the Board of Trustees shall consider the final plat of subdivision. If
the Board of Trustees finds that the final plat meets all the requirements of
this Title, it shall approve the final plat, with or without conditions. If the
final plat is approved, the Board shall authorize the President and Clerk to
sign the plat.
      8.   Recording of Final Plat: The final plat shall be recorded within
twelve (12) months after the date of approval by the Board of Trustees, or it
shall be re-submitted according to the requirements of Section
6-3-3 of this Title. The Village Clerk shall be designated in writing by the
applicant's surveyor as the person to cause the final plat to be recorded in
the office of the recorder of deeds or registrar of title of the county or
counties in which the subdivision is located. The Village Clerk shall so cause
the plat to be recorded, and shall retain a copy thereof, at such time as the
applicant has:
         a.   Submitted a title insurance policy or commitment dated within
thirty (30) days of the date of submittal thereof;
         b.   Satisfied all requirements of Chapter 5 of this Title;
         c.   Paid all review expenses, as provided in Section
6-3-2(I);
         d.   Deposited all inspection fees required by Section
6-3-3;
         e.   Deposited all recording fees and expenses; and
         f.   Complied with all other administrative details of statute or this
Title. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-3-4: INCREASED FACILITIES:
Where storm sewers, sanitary sewers or water facilities are made larger than is
immediately required to serve the land described in the final plat, due to the
necessity of serving adjacent and/or presently vacant property as it shall be
developed in the future by others, the subdivider shall be reimbursed for such
additional cost on the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   The Village Engineer shall determine the cost of such storm sewer,
sanitary sewer and/or water facilities as are required to serve only the
immediate needs of the property described in the plat. The Village Engineer
will also determine the cost of such facilities actually required to serve the
plat in question and the adjacent land when developed. The cost determined in
this Section shall be the cost at the time of installation.
   (B)   The difference in cost in the above determinations shall be paid to
the original developer by the developers of adjacent properties. At the time
the adjacent properties are submitted for subdivision, the Village Engineer
shall apportion the benefit received by the adjacent property developer by
reason of the increased facilities. The adjacent property developer shall pay
the sum of money equal to his proportionate share of the cost of the increased
facilities.
   (C)   The Village may, as determined by the Board of Trustees, act as the
collecting agent in regard to increased facility sharing. In such cases, an
administrative handling charge of five percent (5%) shall be applied to the
adjacent developer's share and retained by the Village. Upon receipt of such
proportionate share payment by the adjacent property developer, the Village
shall reimburse the developer who originally installed the increased
facilities. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-3-5: VARIATIONS:
   (A)   Where the Plan Commission finds that extra hardships or particular
difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, the Plan
Commission may recommend variations or exceptions to the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. Such
variations or exceptions shall not, however, have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of this Title. The Plan Commission shall not recommend
variations or exceptions to the regulations of this Title unless it shall make
findings based upon the evidence presented in each specific case that:
      1.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out;
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not
applicable, generally, to other property;
      3.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire
to make more money out of the property;
      4.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to public
health, safety or general welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
      5.   The special circumstances or conditions have not resulted from any
act of the applicant subsequent to the effective date hereof, whether or not in
violation of any portion thereof;
      6.   The variation granted is the minimum adjustment necessary for the
reasonable use of the land; and
      7.   The aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the strict
application of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of any
reasonable use of his land. Mere loss in value shall not justify a variation;
there must be deprivation of beneficial use of land.
   (B)   The plan commission shall submit a report to the board of trustees
regarding the basis and justification for any variations recommended.
   (C)   In accordance with the provisions and standards of this section, the
board of health shall recommend and the board of trustees shall grant, grant
subject to conditions, or deny requests for variations from strict compliance
with the provisions of section
4-2-7 of this code, "the private sewage disposal code"; provided, however, that
no variance shall be granted to subsection
4-2-7(D)3 of this code. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
6-3-6: VACATION OF PLATS AND PUBLIC STREETS:
   (A)   In cases where an application is made to the board of trustees to
vacate any subdivision, or part thereof, prior to the sale of any lot in the
subdivision, the board of trustees may, by ordinance, order the vacation of all
or part of the said subdivision. When lots have been sold, the plat may be
vacated, providing all the owners in said plat join in the execution of said
application.
   (B)   In cases where an application is made to the board of trustees to
vacate any street, alley or public place, or part thereof, within the
jurisdiction of said board of trustees, the board of trustees may in such cases
order the street, alley or public place, or part thereof, vacated and received
from the owner or owners of property abutting on such street, alley or public
place or part thereof so vacated, compensation in an amount which, in the
judgment of such board of trustees shall be equal to the benefits which will
accrue to the owner or owners of such abutting property by reason of such
vacation to the extent owned by the village, provided that such order of
vacation shall be passed by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3)
of the members of the board of trustees.
   (C)   In all cases where application for vacation of any subdivision or any
public street, or part thereof, is made to said board of trustees, such
application shall be referred to the village engineer, who shall make an
investigation of the premises described in such application. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-
1993)
6-3-7: RESUBDIVISIONS:
A resubdivision, following all procedures otherwise required herein for
approval of a subdivision, shall be required for any proposed change to a
previously recorded plat of subdivision or portion thereof (other than a
vacation of a previously recorded plat of subdivision or public street),
including, but not limited to, changes in lot lines, building lines, drainage
easements, conservation easements and utilities easements. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-
1993)
6-3-8: ACQUISITION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE:
Where a proposed public park, playground, school site or other public use area,
as determined by the plan commission and the board of trustees, is located on
the "official map" in whole or in part within a subdivision, the subdivider
shall set aside such lands for such public purposes to be purchased or
condemnation proceedings commenced by the appropriate public agency within a
period not to exceed one year from the date of approval of the final plan.
(Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
6-3-9: EQUESTRIAN TRAILS:
When the plan commission determines, in consultation with the equestrian
commission, that an equestrian trail(s) exists on property proposed for
subdivision, an easement for equestrian trails shall be provided along the
perimeter of the entire subdivision area or at such other locations on the
property as may be recommended by the plan commission to the village board.
Where there is no existing equestrian trail(s) on property proposed for
subdivision, the equestrian commission shall determine whether or not any
equestrian trail(s) should be created and shall make its recommendation on such
to the plan commission and the plan commission may require an easement for
equestrian trails be provided along the perimeter of the entire subdivision or
at such other locations as may be recommended by the plan commission to the
village board. The designs and specifications for such recommended equestrian
trail(s) will be determined by the plan commission in consultation with the
equestrian commission and village engineer based on the anticipated area and
subdivision site conditions. The dedication of easements for equestrian trails
shall require the approval of the village board upon recommendation by the plan
commission. The requirement of the dedication of easements for equestrian
trails as herein provided may be satisfied, at the recommendation of the plan
commission and approval by the village board, by easements granted to such
private, not for profit entities that operate and maintain equestrian trails
within the village, as may be approved by the village board. Should any
easements for an equestrian trail(s) be provided on the final plat, the
following certification shall appear on the final plat:
   A [BLANK] wide easement for an equestrian trail is hereby reserved for and
granted to the Village of Barrington Hills for use by the public. No buildings,
structures or obstacles shall be placed, constructed or maintained on, across,
over or through said easement, nor shall trees, shrubs, bushes or other
vegetation be planted or removed without the written authority of the Village
of Barrington Hills. Use of the equestrian trail is limited to equestrian
activities, and no vehicles of any kind shall be permitted to use the easement
except for maintenance.
(Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
CHAPTER 4
STANDARDS FOR THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
SECTION:
6-4-1: General
6-4-2: Lot Standards
6-4-3: Streets
6-4-4: Storm Water Management
6-4-5: Public Utilities
6-4-6: Private Sewage Treatment And Disposal Systems
6-4-7: Monuments
6-4-8: Site Grading
6-4-9: Restoration And Landscaping
6-4-10: Equestrian Trail Easements
6-4-1: GENERAL:
All subdivisions shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in this
chapter and all regulations set forth in this code. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
6-4-2: LOT STANDARDS:
   (A)   Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   (B)   Lot dimensions, area and setbacks shall comply with the requirements
of the zoning regulations of the village (title 5 of this code), as amended,
for the district in which the property is situated, or, in the case of property
situated in the unincorporated zone, with the dimensions and area requirements
for lots of the most similar zoning district within the village.
   (C)   Lots shall not block any street extensions which have been set forth
on the official map of the village. Size of lots or tracts laid out and
intended for business use shall be adequate to provide off street service and
parking facilities as required by the type of use and development contemplated
and in accordance with the zoning regulations of the village, as amended.
   (D)   All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street, private street or
private access.
   (E)   Double frontage or through lots are not permitted except where lots
back upon a primary street, or where topographic or other conditions render
subdividing otherwise unreasonable. Such double frontage lots shall have at
least twenty feet (20') of the setback for a protective screen planting on any
frontage on an area service road, collector street, freeway or regional
highway, if any. Vehicular and pedestrian access between double frontage lots
and a primary street is prohibited. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
6-4-3: STREETS:
   (A)   General Criteria And Standards: The current edition of "Transportation
And Land Development" by the Institute of Transportation Engineers is hereby
incorporated into this section and made part hereof by this reference in order
to provide direction as to the criteria which should enter into the selection
of the design standards for all improvements.
      1.   All improvements required by this section shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards herein and in accordance with the latest edition
of the following Illinois department of transportation specifications:
         a.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
         b.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items".
         c.   "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And
Highways".
         d.   "Highway Standards".
      2.   Convenient access to all property within the subdivision shall be
afforded by either a dedicated public street or a private street or private
access connecting with a public or private street. Public streets will usually
be required in all subdivisions over ten (10) lots in size. Private streets may
be considered by the plan commission depending on site suitability, provided
that a binding agreement contained in the plat or other recorded or registered
document shall assure the continued existence and maintenance of said street or
access.
      3.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the Barrington Hills Road Network Map and shall be
considered by the Plan Commission in relation to: existing and planned streets;
reasonable circulation of traffic within the development; topography; storm
water drainage; public convenience and safety; and their appropriate
relationship to uses in the area to be served.
         a.   The type of street cross-section selected for each improvement
required by this Section shall depend on the site conditions identified in the
preliminary analysis and inventory prepared by the applicant and shall conform
to Village approved design standards on file with the Village Clerk. A
residential street cross-section may be used to limit the extent of disturbance
on forested areas or where continuous ditches would be subject to erosion.
Either a residential or rural street cross-section may be used in areas that
can accommodate such improvements. Intermingling the two (2) types of street
cross-sections in a start-and-stop fashion is prohibited.
         b.   A residential street cross-section shall consist of a paved
surface with a curb and gutter section and a four foot (4') shoulder along each
side. The shoulder shall slope toward the curb in cut sections and away from
the curb in fill sections. Storm sewers shall be utilized to provide drainage.
         c.   A rural street cross-section shall consist of a paved surface
with two foot (2') shoulders and a drainage ditch along each side.
         d.   All curb and gutter systems required by this Section shall be
constructed in accordance with the residential street cross- section, rural
street cross-section and combination curb and gutter cross-section standards
adopted by the Board of Trustees and on file with the Village Clerk.
      4.   Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic
shall be discouraged.
      5.   Where, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, it is desirable to
provide for street access to adjoining property, the proposed streets shall be
extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
      6.   Where deemed necessary for the purpose of providing adequate
protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and
local traffic, the Plan Commission may recommend access streets be required to
service areas fronting on major streets.
      7.   Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment or continuation of
existing streets already named shall bear the name of such existing streets
whether in the Village or in unincorporated areas. In no case shall the names
for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use
of a suffix (such as street, road, boulevard, drive, place or court, etc.) or
an abbreviation thereof. Street names shall be approved by the Plan Commission
which shall keep a list of all street names in the Village.
      8.   No permanent building or structure or permanent improvement of any
type shall be erected within the extension of street rights of way indicated on
the Official Map of the Village.
   (B)   Right of Way:
      1.   The minimum width of right of way of any classification of street
shall be as follows:
Public                  
Regional highway       120'
Area highway           100'
Collector              80'
Minor                  66'
Min. cul-de-sac radius 70'
Private                 
Minor                  50 or 66'
Min. cul-de-sac radius 50', 60' or 70'
 
      2.   When any subdivision or part of a subdivision is adjacent to only
one side of an existing right of way, which is less than the required width,
the subdivider shall dedicate additional right of way to meet the requirement
in accordance with this regulation. Half-streets in new subdivisions are not
permitted.
   (C)   Block Standards:
      1.   Block lengths and widths shall be coordinated with the development
of the land and shall be provided in a manner that will allow proper traffic
flow including fire fighting equipment and pedestrian use; and pedestrian
accessways within the blocks to schools, parks or other destinations may be
required by the Plan Commission.
      2.   A subdivision containing interior open space, parks, playgrounds or
school sites, will be acceptable when such plans include adequate rights of way
for pedestrian access to the interior open space. Such developments shall
provide acceptable agreements as to development and maintenance of these areas.
   (D)   Public Street Design Standards:
      1.   Street Grades: The grades of collector streets shall not exceed six
percent (6%). The grades for minor streets shall not exceed ten percent (10%).
In no case shall the grade of any street be less than four-tenths of one
percent (0.4%).
      2.   Vertical Alignment: The vertical curves of collector and larger
streets shall not be less than two hundred feet (200') in length. The vertical
curves for minor streets shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') in
length. Exception to the above minimums may be made at intersections where the
length of vertical curves shall be no less than fifty feet (50'). In no case
shall stopping sight distance be less than required for a thirty (30) mile per
hour design speed.
      3.   Horizontal Alignment: The minimum radius of center line horizontal
curvature shall be as follows:
 
Collector streets 300'
Minor streets     150'
 
Angles on the center line of a street are not permitted. Reverse curves are
allowed provided a minimum of one hundred feet (100') of tangent is introduced
between the curves.
      4.   Intersections:
         a.   Center line: Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right
angles whenever possible. Two (2) streets shall not intersect at an angle of
less than seventy degrees (70o).
Streets with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet
(125') will not be permitted.
         b.   Pavement Radii: Pavement radii at intersections shall not be less
than the following when measured to the edge of street surface:
 
Residential 25'
Commercial  40'
 
         c.   Right-of-Way Radii: Right-of-way radii at intersections shall not
be less than the following:
 
Residential 30'
Commercial  40'
 
         d.   Sight Distance: All intersections shall provide a minimum of two
hundred feet (200') of horizontal sight distance on all quadrants. Banks and
natural growth shall be removed as necessary to meet this requirement.
      5.   Surface Widths: Streets shall be improved to the following surface
width according to classification:
 
Street Classification             Surface  Width
Regional highways                 *
Area highways                     *
Collector streets                 24'
Minor streets                     20'
Alleys                            16'
Commercial and industrial streets 36'
 
*As determined in conjunction with other government bodies and through the use
of projected traffic counts.
      6.   Surface Crown: The surface of all roadways shall have a uniform
slope from the center line to the edge of pavement of two one-hundredths feet
(0.02') per foot.
      7.   Surface Material: Streets shall be improved with a surface material
of Bituminous Concrete Surface Course Class I of the following minimum
thicknesses:
         on BAM base course - 2 inches
         on granular base course - 21/2 inches
      8.   Base Course Material: Base course material shall be either crushed
gravel, crushed stone or bituminous aggregate mixture (BAM). Minimum allowable
thickness for the aggregate base course will be ten inches (10") and for the
BAM six inches (6"). Minimum Marshall Stability for the BAM shall be fifteen
hundred (1,500) pounds. Base course material will be placed to a width two feet
(2') wider than the surface of the street.
In no instance may base course material be placed on a soft subgrade. If a soft
subgrade is encountered, it shall be removed to stable material. Backfill
material will consist of earthen material with an adequate supporting value or
of granular material.
      9.   Pavement Structure Design: All pavement structures shall be designed
in accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation "Manual of
Instructions for the Structural Design of Bituminous Pavements" except in those
instances where the minimum requirements of subsections (D)7 and (D)8 above
override.
The developer shall submit design traffic and structural design data to the
Village for review. Commercial and industrial traffic shall be based on
generations common to the establishments to be served. Residential traffic
shall be based on the following minimum traffic for lots five (5) acres or
greater in size:
      ADT per lot - 16 vehicle trips
      Traffic Classification
 
Passenger car       90%
Single unit truck   9%
Multiple unit truck 1%
 
Traffic generation will be considered on an individual basis for residential
developments of greater density than one lot per five (5) acres. Collector
streets will be designed to accommodate traffic for the area served projected
twenty (20) years into the future. Design traffic will be determined through a
coordinated effort by the Village and the developer with all required traffic
counts and field data being provided by the developer.
      10.   Accommodation of Construction Traffic: In those subdivisions where
a majority of construction traffic due to home building will be confined to one
road, additional structural strength will be provided in the road design as
required by the Village Engineer.
      11.   Shoulders: Earthen shoulders will be constructed on each side and
adjacent to the roadway surface. Shoulder widths to each side shall be four
feet (4') on collector streets and two feet (2') on minor streets. All
shoulders shall slope away from the surface edge at a rate of three-fourths
inch (3/4") per foot.
      12.   Cul-De-Sacs: Minimum radius for outside edge of pavement shall be
fifty feet (50'). Maximum length of cul-de-sac shall be two thousand feet
(2,000').
      13.   Curb and Gutters: After consideration of existing topography, storm
water drainage, and site conditions that may be disturbed by construction of
the street, the Plan Commission may recommend curbs and gutters instead of
ditches at selected locations or for the entire length of streets serving lots
of one acre or greater in area. Concrete curb and gutters shall be required on
all commercial and industrial streets and on all residential streets where lots
are less than one acre in area. The design of the curb and gutter shall comply
with the Village-approved standards on file with the Village Clerk.
   (E)   Private Street Design Standards: If private streets are approved by
the Plan Commission, the streets shall comply with the public street design
standards in Section
6-4-3(D) except as set forth below:
      1.   Streets serving two (2) through five (5) lots:
         a.   Surface Width: Minimum sixteen feet (16');
         b.   Surface Material: Minimum eight inch (8") thick aggregate surface
coarse material composed of crushed stone or crushed gravel;
         c.   Easement Width: Minimum fifty feet (50') for streets and minimum
fifty feet (50') cul-de-sac radii; and
         d.   Cul-De-Sac Radius: Minimum edge of pavement thirty-five feet
(35').
      2.   Streets serving six (6) through ten (10) lots:
         a.   Surface Width: Twenty feet (20');
         b.   Surface Material: An A-3 bituminous surface treatment shall be
applied to all streets;
         c.   Easement Width: Sixty-six feet (66') for streets and minimum
sixty feet (60') for cul-de-sac radii; and
         d.   Cul-De-Sac Radius: Minimum edge of pavement forty feet (40').
      3.   Streets serving eleven (11) or more lots:
         a.   Surface Width: Twenty feet (20');
         b.   Surface Material: A bituminous concrete surface course of the
following minimum thicknesses:
            (1)   On BAM Base Course - 2 inches.
            (2)   On Granular Basecourse - 21/2 inches.
         c.   Easement Width: Sixty-six feet (66') for streets and minimum
seventy feet (70') for cul-de-sac radii; and
         d.   Cul-De-Sac Radius: Minimum edge of pavement fifty feet (50').
   (F)   Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways: In residential areas, the Village, upon
recommendation of the Plan Commission, may require sidewalks at selected
locations on regional or area highways, collector and minor streets. Sidewalks
and pedestrian ways in residential areas shall be five feet (5') in width at a
distance of one foot (1') from the property line. Sidewalks for business areas
shall be at least ten feet (10') wide and may abut the curb line. Concrete
sidewalks shall be required on both sides of streets in commercial and
industrial areas. Sidewalks for industrial areas shall be at least five feet
(5') wide and may abut the curb line.
   (G)   Street Lighting: Upon recommendation of the Plan Commission, the
Village may require that street lighting shall be installed in accordance with
the Illuminating Engineering Society Standards.
   (H)   Landscaped Center Islands: Center islands generally shall not be used
in cul-de-sacs in public streets. Upon recommendation of the Plan Commission,
the Village may require that a landscaped center island be installed in any
cul-de-sac on a private street serving eleven (11) or more lots and that
appropriate maintenance provisions be incorporated into the subdivision's
declaration of covenants and restrictions or other homeowners' association
documents.
   (I)   Street Signs:
      1.   Street Name: Street name signs shall be erected at all intersections
created by the development. All signs shall be mounted on a minimum two inch
(2") I.D. galvanized steel post set in a poured concrete foundation extending a
minimum of three and one-half feet (31/2') below finished grade. One post with
double signs shall be required per intersection. Sign face material and design
shall be in accordance with current Village standards.
      2.   Traffic Control: Traffic control signs shall be erected throughout
the subdivision as required by the Village Engineer. All signs shall be mounted
on enameled steel posts driven in the ground to a minimum depth of three and
one-half feet (31/2') below finished grade.
Signs shall have a base of sheet aluminum with the sign face and legend being
of reflectorized materials.
All work and materials relative to signs shall be in conformance with the
current edition of the Illinois Department of Transportation "Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" and the "Standard
Specifications for Traffic Control Items".
   (J)   Special Soil Regulations for Streets:
      1.   Organic Soils: If the construction of proposed streets or roads in a
subdivision is through organic soils, all organic materials shall be removed to
solid subsoil in the area of the proposed street or road and replaced with fill
materials that allow movement of ground water in its natural state through the
fill and provide the required structural support for the roadway. All such
streets shall be elevated above the expected high water in the area, as
determined by the Soils Map, so as to provide a minimum of two feet (2')
between the pavement surface and the water. In no instance shall the pavement
base course be constructed within six inches (6") of the expected high water,
as determined by the Soils Map.
      2.   Wet Soils: If the construction of proposed streets and roads in a
subdivision are to go through wet soils, positive ground water control must be
achieved. The surface of all roads shall be constructed at an elevation so as
to provide a minimum of two feet (2') between the pavement surface and expected
high ground water or free water surface. In no instance shall the pavement base
course be constructed within six inches (6") of expected high water, as
determined by the Soils Map. All designs shall insure that natural drainage is
maintained. In no instance shall movement of ground water be impeded so as to
promote build-up of hydrostatic pressure on one side or the other of a proposed
roadway. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-4-4: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Storm water management for all subdivisions shall comply with the following
standards. Special attention shall be given to avoiding changes in storm water
runoff onto adjacent properties. Final storm water management design shall not
increase the runoff or peak discharge or decrease the time of concentration of
storm water leaving the development.
   (A)   Runoff Calculations:
      1.   For areas, including all tributary areas, less than twenty- five
(25) acres or less in size, the Rational Method may be used to calculate
discharges but may not be used for determining detention storage requirements.
      2.   For areas, including all tributary areas, over twenty-five (25)
acres in size and for areas less than twenty-five (25) acres but which require
the determination of detention storage requirements, the TR-55 Method shall be
used for determining discharges and detention storage requirements.
      3.   The determination of design rainfall shall use the "Frequency
Distribution and Hydroclimatic Characteristics of Heavy Rainstorms in
Illinois," Bulletin 70, 1989, prepared by the Illinois State Water Survey.
      4.   Runoff calculations for tributary areas shall be based on
anticipated future land use conditions or existing land use conditions,
whichever yields the greater runoff. Anticipated future land use of undeveloped
areas shall be based on development of the area using the current zoning.
      5.   All existing or natural detention basins will be maintained within a
development and their area specifically preserved for that use. The volume of
detention storage required for the development shall be in addition to the
existing storage.
   (B)   Release Rates and Discharges:
      1.   The release rates for the developed site shall be the lesser of the
following:
         a.   Ninety percent (90%) of the storm water runoff for the site in
its existing condition for storms of all durations;
         b.   The downstream storm water transport rate; or
         c.   The proportionate share for the site of the available downstream
storm water transport rate based on the total tributary area.
      2.   All storm water discharges leaving a site must be conveyed into a
well-defined receiving channel with adequate downstream capacity.
      3.   All areas of the development must be provided an emergency overflow
path that will pass the 100-year flow without damage to structures or property.
   (C)   Detention Basins:
      1.   All detention basins shall be provided with an emergency overflow
structure capable of passing the 100-year inflow rate without damage to
structures or property.
      2.   All detention basins shall be developed to fit the site and provide
a natural appearance. Restoration of the detention basin shall include the
planting of trees and bushes and be in accordance with Section
6-4-9 of this Chapter.
      3.   Single pipe outlets shall have a minimum inside diameter of ten
(10") inches. If design release rates require smaller outlets, structures such
as perforated risers or flow control orifices shall be used.
   (D)   Ditches: Ditches shall be constructed on both sides of the roadway
outside of the shoulder line. Ditches shall have a minimum depth of two feet
(2') below the edge of the roadway surface with maximum side slopes of four to
one (4:1) on the roadway side and two to one (2:1) on the property side.
Maximum ditch gradient without erosion protection shall be two percent (2%). If
a ditch gradient exceeds two percent (2%), the ditch shall be protected from
erosion by means of sodding, ditch checks, storm sewers or combinations
thereof, as deemed necessary by the Village Engineer. Other creative means of
erosion control will be considered on an individual basis. Minimum ditch
gradient shall be three-tenths of one percent (0.3%). If this gradient cannot
be maintained, storm sewers shall be installed.
   (E)   Driveway Culverts: Prior to acceptance of the street improvement or
the issuance of any building permits, the applicant shall submit to the Village
an overall map of the subdivision showing the proper size culvert for each lot,
as determined from hydraulic calculations.
   (F)   Storm Sewers and Culverts:
      1.   Storm sewers shall be installed to drain all roads with curbs and
gutters and on slopes where continuous ditches would be subject to erosion. The
minimum internal diameter of a storm sewer shall be ten inches (10"). All storm
sewers shall be concrete.
      2.   Minimum culvert sizes shall be twelve inches (12") for driveways and
fifteen inches (15") for roadway crossings. At roadway crossings, a minimum
depth of six inches (6") shall be maintained between the top of the pipe and
the finished roadway subgrade.
      3.   All storm sewers and roadway culverts shall be fitted with end
sections or headwalls and shall extend a sufficient distance beyond the
shoulder line to fit the ditch side slope.
      4.   Special consideration shall be given to the end treatment of storm
sewers and culverts thirty-six inches (36") in diameter or larger to assure
compatibility with the surrounding environment.
      5.   Storm sewers, culverts and related structures shall be designed in
accordance with current standards of the Illinois Department of Transportation
for such drainage structures using the following design storms:
         a.   For developments of twenty-five (25) acres or less, including all
tributary areas, a ten (10) year storm frequency shall be used.
         b.   For developments of more than twenty-five (25) acres but less
than one hundred (100) acres, including all tributary areas, a twenty-five (25)
year storm frequency shall be used.
         c.   For developments of one hundred (100) acres or more, including
all tributary areas, a fifty (50) year storm frequency shall be used.
   (G)   Positive Drainage: All streets shall be designed so as to provide
positive drainage that will alleviate any flooding in excess of six inches (6")
over the street crown.
   (H)   Drainage Calculations: The applicant's engineer shall provide the
Village Engineer with copies of all calculations required to design the storm
drainage system for the proposed subdivision. The computations shall include
data for the entire area tributary to the development. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-4-5: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   (A)   All telephone, cable television, electric and gas service lines shall
be placed underground throughout the entire subdivision area. All conduits or
cables shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner
which will not conflict with other underground service. All such telephone,
electric and gas service lines shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. Above ground structures identified with said
underground service facilities shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public and shall be landscaped.
   (B)   Where no alleys are provided, there shall be dedicated appropriate
utility easements of not less than ten feet (10') in width, where necessary to
provide a proper continuity for such utilities from lot to lot and from block
to block. No structures shall be constructed upon the easements. Additional
easements shall be provided for utilities, drainage and other public services
and requirements in order to provide proper operation and maintenance of said
facilities. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-4-6: PRIVATE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   (A)   Private Sewage Treatment And Disposal Systems:
      1.   General: The village board may, when it deems necessary for the
health, comfort, safety and general welfare of the present or future population
of the area and necessary to the conservation of water supplies and drainage
sources, prohibit the subdivision of land requiring the use of septic tank and
effluent disposal systems for the disposal of sanitary wastes. If a septic tank
system is permitted, every lot in a subdivision shall have a suitable area of
sufficient size to accommodate a septic system equivalent to two (2) times the
disposal requirements of a five (5) bedroom home, as provided in section
4-2-7-1, appendix G, exhibits A and B of this code.
      2.   Soil Investigation: A minimum of one observation pit at each
intersection of a two hundred foot (200') grid is required with intermediate
observations at critical soil boundaries so as to allow intensive mapping of
soil characteristics applicable to the design of private sewage disposal
systems. At least one observation point shall be located on each proposed lot.
      3.   Groundwater Table: The anticipated groundwater and seasonal high
water table as interpreted from soil classifications shall be indicated for all
lots within the subdivision. Special engineering solutions will be required on
those lots where a seepage field does not clear the groundwater level by four
feet (4') and the limiting layer by two feet (2') when normal cut and cover
construction methods are used.
      4.   Unsuitable Lots: Those lots which contain soil types with very
severe limitations as to their use for the installation of subsurface seepage
fields as described in chapter 7, exhibits A, B, C, and D of this title will be
considered unsuitable for installation of said systems. An engineering solution
for upgrading each lot to a usable level shall be submitted to the village for
approval and record. Engineering solutions shall not violate any laws or
ordinances relative to natural drainage or floodplains and must meet the
requirements of section
4-2-7 of this code.
If a proposed lot cannot be upgraded sufficiently for installation of
subsurface disposal system, the lot shall be dropped from the plat and the area
distributed among adjacent suitable lots.
All lots containing unsuitable soils or water problems for installation of
subsurface seepage fields shall be recorded on the final plat of subdivision as
such.
   (B)   Special Soil Regulations For Private Sewage Treatment And Disposal
Systems:
      1.   Wet Soils:
         a.   The installation of subsurface sewage waste disposal systems in
wet soils shall be permitted only if assured groundwater control is achieved.
         b.   The water table in the area of the filter field shall be
maintained at an elevation four feet (4') below the bottom of the filter field
lines.
         c.   The size of the seepage field for all subsurface sewage waste
disposal systems shall be based on soil investigations conducted in the soil in
which the field is to be installed, in accordance with section
4-2-7-1, appendix G, exhibits A and B of this code.
         d.   No on site subsurface sewage waste disposal system will be
allowed in peotone type soils, symbol 330.
      2.   Clayey Soils:
         a.   The installation of subsurface sewage waste disposal systems
shall be permitted in clayey soils, only when properly conducted soil
investigations in the natural soil show the loading rate to be greater than or
equal to 0.20 gallons per square foot per day.
         b.   Any septic system permitted in clayey soils will be installed
only in natural or undisturbed soils. No importation of soil for the
construction of a septic system will be allowed.
         c.   Any septic system designed for installation in clayey soils shall
provide for the diversion of the maximum amount of rain or storm water which
would flow across the site. In addition, interceptor tile drainage lines shall
be installed upslope from the filter field to assist in moving runoff around
the field area.
         d.   The size of the seepage field for all subsurface sewage waste
disposal systems shall be based on soil investigations conducted in the soil in
which the field is to be installed, in accordance with section
4-2-7-1, appendix G, exhibits A and B of this code.
   (C)   Land Application Treatment Systems Not Permitted: A land application
wastewater treatment system shall not be permitted within the corporate limits
of the village.
   (D)   Land Application Treatment Systems Allowed With Approval: Any land
application wastewater treatment system on unincorporated territory to which
these subdivision regulations apply pursuant to subsections
6-2-3(A)2, (A)3 and (A)4 of this title shall be operated and maintained by the
county or sanitary district in which the system is located. Proof of acceptance
by the county or sanitary district of responsibility for operation and
maintenance of the system shall be a condition to approval by the village of
the final plat of subdivision. (Ord. 13-16, 10-28-2013)
6-4-7: MONUMENTS:
   (A)   Permanent reference monuments shall be placed by the subdivider at
each corner or angle on the peripheral boundary of the subdivision. Such
permanent reference monuments shall be stone or concrete at least three feet
(3') in length and six inches (6") square with suitable center point and shall
be set flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be
removed by frost.
   (B)   Metal monuments of three-fourths of an inch (3/4") diameter pipe or
five-eighths of an inch (5/8") diameter solid steel rods and two feet (2') in
length shall be placed in the ground at all lot corners, intersections of
streets, intersections of streets and alleys and platted boundary lines where
there is a change in direction or curvature. All federal, state, county, local
or other bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the
development shall be presumed in precise position. All monuments shall be
properly set in the ground before the streets and alleys are accepted by the
village. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
6-4-8: SITE GRADING:
When site grading other than roadway excavation is proposed within a
subdivision, a contour map shall be prepared showing the confines of the area
to be graded and the proposed and existing contours within the area.
All regraded areas shall be covered with a minimum of three inches (3") of
topsoil and reseeded upon completion of the grading. All seeding shall meet the
minimum requirements set forth under section
6-4-9 of this chapter.
Prior to starting any site or roadway grading operations, an erosion control
plan prepared in accordance with title 4, chapter 3, "Erosion And Sedimentation
Control Regulations", of this code must be on file and approved by the village.
(Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993)
6-4-9: RESTORATION AND LANDSCAPING:
   (A)   Purpose: The intent of this section is to provide a procedure by which
new developments will preserve the natural atmosphere which is prevalent
throughout the village.
   (B)   General: The requirements set forth herein are minimal in scope and
are not to be assumed as a restriction on landscaping efforts nor a limit on
quantities of trees or shrubs. Innovative ideas to naturalize disturbed
landscapes are encouraged as long as they meet the overall objective of this
section and the approval of the plan commission and board of trustees.
Restorative and landscaping measures set forth herein are intended to cover
only those areas of the subdivision disturbed in the course of making the
improvements required by this section. The applicant is encouraged to provide
additional landscaping throughout the subdivision that will complement the
existing features and the developed site. Of particular importance is the
matter of noise abatement along high noise generators such as regional and area
highways, collector streets and railroads.
   (C)   Seeding: All disturbed areas within the subdivision shall be restored
by placing a minimum of three inches (3") of topsoil and seeding with a class
II mixture per the requirements of subsection (F) of this section.
Consideration shall also be given to restoring select areas with natural
growths of wildflowers, ground cover or similar material.
   (D)   Trees And Shrubs:
      1.   Shrubs and trees utilized in the landscaping plan shall be selected
from the village approved listing of landscape materials on file with the
village clerk. Not less than three (3) species of shrubs and three (3) species
of trees will be utilized in developing a plan for a proposed subdivision.
      2.   All plantings shall be furnished balled and burlapped except as
noted in the village approved listing of materials, which is maintained on file
with the village clerk.
      3.   Trees and shrubs within a subdivision shall be located as follows:
         a.   Forested Areas: In those areas where existing trees and
undergrowth occur, trees shall be replaced on a one for one basis for all trees
removed that are ten inches (10") and larger in diameter, measured at a point
two feet (2') above natural ground. Replacement trees shall not be less than
four inches (4") in diameter, measured at a point twelve inches (12") above
natural ground.
         b.   Shrubs: Shrubs shall be planted at such density as to blend with
the existing growth and to soften the impact through the cleared area. Without
limiting the foregoing, a minimum of ten (10) shrubs shall be planted on each
side of a proposed street for every eighty (80) linear feet of right of way.
         c.   Open Areas: In those areas of the right of way where no growth
exists, two (2) trees and ten (10) shrubs shall be planted on each side of the
proposed street for every eighty (80) linear feet of right of way.
      4.   Trees shall not be planted closer than fifteen feet (15') to the
paved edge of road or three feet (3') to the bottom edge of ditch. Shrubs shall
not be planted closer than eight feet (8') to the paved edge of road or two
feet (2') to the bottom edge of ditch. At intersections, plantings exceeding
twelve inches (12") at mature height will not be placed closer to the edge of
pavement than indicated below for the various street classifications:
 
Minor street 35 feet
All others   50 feet
 
      5.   Tree sizes shall not be less than four inches (4") in diameter as
measured at a point twelve inches (12") above natural ground. Shrubs provided
shall have a minimum height of twenty four inches (24") above natural ground.
   (E)   Steep Slopes: All slopes greater than three to one (3:1) shall be
restored by means of sod or suitable ground cover.
   (F)   Specifications: All restoration and landscaping work shall be in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction" of the Illinois department of transportation and American
Association Of Nurserymen, "American Standard For Nursery Stock" (ANSI Z60.1-
1990).
   (G)   Scheduling Of Planting: All required planting shall be undertaken and
completed on a schedule as specified by the plan commission. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-
1993)
6-4-10: EQUESTRIAN TRAIL EASEMENTS:
Easements for equestrian trails shall be provided when and where deemed
appropriate by the plan commission and the village board approves their
creation. Such easements shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width and shall
be located so as to avoid any aboveground utility equipment and such easements
shall be located so as to be reasonably passable by a horse and rider in all
four (4) seasons. Such easements shall not be located in any drainage easements
unless approved in writing by the village engineer. (Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
CHAPTER 5
GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION
SECTION:
6-5-1: Guarantee of Improvement Completion
6-5-2: Default
6-5-3: Guarantee Amount
6-5-4: Maintenance Guarantee
6-5-5: Damage and Nuisance Guarantee
6-5-1: GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION:
   (A)   General: In order to assure that growth in the Village will be orderly
and to further provide for the installation of all required improvements,
public or private, in newly developed areas, no final plat shall be recorded
until the requirements of this Section have been met.
   (B)   Performance Guarantee for Subdivision Within the Village Limits:
Before recording of an approved final plat, a performance guarantee acceptable
to the Village must be provided as required herein. One of the following
options for guarantee of improvement completion shall be utilized:
      1.   Cash Escrow:
         a.   Establishing Account: An escrow account in the amount required
shall be established with a financial institution located in Illinois
(hereinafter referred to as the escrowee) which meets the approval of the Board
of Trustees. The account shall be administered by the escrowee in accordance
with the provisions of the escrow agreement to be negotiated by the Board of
Trustees and the owner, developer and/or subdivider and approved by the Village
Attorney or Special Counsel. Such agreement shall contain provisions for
specific application of such funds; partial contract payouts; contract
retention percentages until completion; prorate reduction of deposit excess;
final escrow settlement; and other pertinent administrative matters as may be
required.
         b.   Fund Disbursement: The escrowee shall disburse funds from time to
time for the purposes provided upon presentation of, and in accordance with,
payout orders issued by the owner's engineer and approved by the Village
Engineer. Such disbursements shall not be subject to approval or disapproval by
the owner or escrowee or their agents other than said owner's engineer;
however, for accounting purposes, the Village shall send to the owner a copy of
the approved engineer's estimate for payment at time of Village approval. Each
payout order shall be accompanied by all appropriate sworn statements,
affidavits and supporting waivers of lien in full compliance with the Illinois
Mechanics Lien Law.
         c.   Excess Fund Balance: If, at any time, the Village Engineer shall
notify escrowee in writing that the balance of funds then remaining undisbursed
under said escrow account is more than sufficient to cover the cost of
construction fees and maintenance hereinabove provided, which said notice shall
specify the reduced balance then deemed sufficient, and if escrowee shall
concur in such determination, escrowee shall pay over to the owner any excess
of funds over such reduced balance then remaining undisbursed under said escrow
account.
      2.   Letter of Credit: The applicant or owner may file a straight,
commercial letter of credit from any financial institution located in Illinois
acceptable to the Board of Trustees and the Village Attorney or Special Counsel
in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney or Special Counsel. The letter of
credit shall be in an amount, determined by the Village Engineer, sufficient to
pay for the cost of construction of the improvements and all engineering costs
including the engineering and inspection fees of the Village. The letter of
credit must provide that the issuing financial institution shall pay to the
Village, or as the Village directs, such amounts as may be required to complete
the improvements according to the approved plans and specifications. The letter
of credit should provide that its amount will be reduced from time to time as
payments for improvements approved by the Village Engineer are made; however,
no such reduction shall be approved by the Village Engineer unless the request
is in writing and accompanied by lien waivers deemed adequate by the Village
Engineer. The letter of credit shall be irrevocable for at least six (6) months
and must provide that if any balance remains at the expiration of any time
limit placed on it, said balance shall be deposited with the Village in a cash
escrow or a new letter of credit in the amount of the unpaid balance will be
issued or a surety bond as prescribed in subsection
6-5-1(B)3 will be provided. The letter of credit shall also provide that ten
percent (10%) of the amount shall be retained until the Village Engineer has
approved the improvements required by this Title.
      3.   Surety Bond:
         a.   Form: The bond shall be in a form and with a bonding company
meeting with the approval of the Village Attorney or Special Counsel.
         b.   Time Limit: The bond shall be payable to the Village and be
enforceable by same on or beyond a date thirty-six (36) months from the date of
final plat approval.
         c.   Release of any bond required herein shall be conditioned on final
approval or acceptance of the improvements by the Board of Trustees of the
Village.
      4.   Insufficient Fund Balance: If, at any time before the construction
of all required improvements has been completed, the balance of funds remaining
undisbursed under said escrow account or letter of credit is not sufficient, in
the sole judgment of the Village Engineer, to cover the cost of construction of
said improvements and all engineering costs including the engineering and
inspection fees of the Village or if by reason of any order, decree or writ of
any court, or for any other reason, the said undisbursed balance of funds shall
be withheld, diminished or otherwise unavailable for the purposes provided
herein, the owner agrees to cause the balance to be increased to such amount as
shall be required by the Village for such purposes, in the exercise of its
judgment, or shall provide such other guarantee of performance as may be
required by the Village.
   (C)   Performance Guarantee for Subdivisions Outside the Village Limits:
Option 1, 2 or 3 above will not be required by the Village for a subdivision or
that part of a subdivision which is located outside of the corporate limits of
the Village, if one of the above options has been filed with the county or
counties in which said subdivision is located.
   (D)   Time Limit: All performance guarantees shall provide that if required
improvements are not installed within two (2) years of the date of recording of
the final plat, the Village may deem the subdivider in default and proceed in
accordance with the provisions of Section
6-5-2. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-5-2: DEFAULT:
In the event the Village Engineer determines, in the sole exercise of his
judgment, that the applicant has failed to install proposed improvements in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications or has failed to comply
with the terms of the guarantees hereinabove set forth, the Board of Trustees
may take the following actions:
   (A)   Cash Escrow and Letter of Credit: Advise the applicant of failure in
writing, giving the thirty (30) days to cure such default. If applicant fails
to cure said default, it is agreed that the Village may, at its option, declare
applicant in default and, upon written notification to escrowee of such
declaration of default, all monies on deposit pursuant to the escrow agreement
shall and may be disbursed by escrowee solely upon authorization of the Village
Engineer and escrowee shall be released by the said applicant as to such
payment or payments.
   (B)   Surety Bond: Inform the bonding company of default by the applicant
and request they take necessary actions to complete the required subdivision
improvement. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-5-3: GUARANTEE AMOUNT:
The amount of the performance guarantee shall cover all construction costs, the
applicant's engineering and platting costs, and the Village's engineering and
inspection costs. The guarantees shall be in the following minimum amounts
unless the applicant can show that certain of the costs have already been paid:
   (A)   Construction Cost:
      1.   One hundred thirty percent (130%) of the estimated construction cost
approved by the Village Engineer, or
      2.   One hundred ten percent (110%) of a binding contract with a
contractor who has qualified for the proposed work and who has provided a
performance bond.
   (B)   Owner's Engineering and Platting Cost: At a cost verified by the
engineer and surveyor.
   (C)   Village Engineering and Inspection Costs:
      1.   The minimum amount as required by Section
6-6-3(D). (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-5-4: MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE:
The applicant shall guarantee all improvements required by Chapter 4 of this
Title against defects in materials and workmanship for a period of two (2)
years from the date of acceptance of public improvements or approval of private
improvements by the Village. The applicant agrees to repair or replace any of
said improvements which, during said two (2) year period after acceptance,
shall become damaged or deficient due to defective materials or workmanship or
otherwise.
   (A)   Conditions of Guarantee: The applicant shall establish a cash escrow
account or provide a letter of credit in the amount of five percent (5%) of the
final construction costs of the improvements to guarantee cost of replacement
of defective materials within the limits of the improvements. Said escrow
account or letter of credit shall remain in force for the aforesaid two (2)
year maintenance period and shall be for use by the Village to effect such
repairs deemed necessary for public safety and which the applicant has
neglected to repair for a forty-eight (48) hour period after notification.
Disbursements from the cash escrow account or pursuant to the letter of credit
shall be made solely upon the direction of the Village and shall not be subject
to approval or disapproval by the applicant or escrowee or the financial
institution issuing the letter of credit or their agents.
   (B)   Return of Funds: Within forty-five (45) days following the two (2)
year maintenance period, the escrowee or the financial institution issuing the
letter of credit shall pay over to the applicant, without further demand or
notice, any balance of funds then remaining undisbursed under said letter of
credit or escrow account. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-5-5: DAMAGE AND NUISANCE GUARANTEE:
The guarantee of completion of improvements, to be executed prior to recording
of a final plat of subdivision, shall also provide for repair of damages and
abatement of nuisances with respect to existing and subsequently installed
landscaping, streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, lighting, parkways, water
and sanitary sewerage facilities, culverts, catch basins and/or storm sewers.
The damage and nuisance guarantee shall be in the total of five percent (5%) of
the construction cost of the new improvements and shall be provided by cash
escrow agreement, letter of credit or surety bond, as provided in Section
6-5-1 herein, upon commencement of land development. Upon completion of all
required subdivision improvements, the applicant's engineer shall prepare a
certified statement that the improvements comply with the plans and
specifications approved by the Village authorities, and shall forward same to
the Village Clerk, together with a request for preliminary approval of
improvements. The Village Engineer shall verify whether the improvements comply
with the approved plans and specifications, and shall prepare a statement of
preliminary approval for the Village Board. Upon acceptance of that statement
of preliminary approval, the Village Board then shall direct the Village Clerk
to direct the escrowee or the financial institution issuing the letter of
credit to pay over to the owner, without further demand or notice, any balance
of funds then remaining undisbursed under said escrow agreement, letter of
credit or surety bond. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
CHAPTER 6
CONTROL OF CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
6-6-1: Construction Control
6-6-2: Construction Contract Requirements
6-6-3: Inspection of Improvements
6-6-4: Time Limit for Completion of Construction of Improvements
6-6-5: Acceptance or Approval of Improvements
6-6-1: CONSTRUCTION CONTROL:
   (A)   Time of Construction Improvements: All public and private improvements
required in this Title shall be installed after recording of the final plat. No
work shall start prior to said recording.
   (B)   Time of Construction of Buildings: No building permits shall be issued
for the construction of any building or structure unless a final plat has been
approved and recorded and unless all required improvements have been provided
as required by the final plat approval. However, permits may be issued if the
following items are completed or installed and approved by the Village
Engineer:
      1.   Grading operations;
      2.   Drainage improvements;
      3.   Bituminous concrete binder course or required seal coating;
      4.   Survey monuments; and
      5.   Street signs and traffic control signs.
   (C)   Use of Existing Streets: Only those streets designated by the Plan
Commission during the approval of the final plat may be used for access to the
subdivision by all equipment and trucks engaged in the construction of all
improvements, utility services and buildings.
   (D)   Sequence of Construction: All underground public utilities, water
mains, sanitary sewers or storm sewers installed in streets, alleys, service
roads or highways shall be installed prior to the surfacing of such streets.
Service connections to such underground utilities and sewers shall be extended
to the property line of each lot so as to prevent disturbing the surface
improvements in such public ways when service connections are later made. Where
underground utilities are located in the parkway adjacent to the paved roadway,
service connections to properties across such roads shall only be made by
drilling under the pavement in such a way that the surfacing is not disturbed
or weakened.
   (E)   Maintenance During Construction: The subdivider shall clean and
maintain all streets, sewers and drains free from snow, mud, debris and trash
or other extraneous material prior to acceptance or approval of the street by
the Village and at such other times during construction as the Village Road
Commissioner or Village Engineer or Enforcing Officer may deem necessary in
accordance with Section
7-2-2 of the Village Code.
   (F)   Construction Noise: The subdivider shall take every precaution to
assure that undue noise from construction operations is kept at a minimum. To
assure that contractors are aware of this requirement, the following
construction noise standards shall be made a part of all contracts entered into
for construction of proposed improvements:
      1.   Any engine or engine-driven equipment used for hauling or
construction activities shall be equipped with an adequate muffler in constant
operation and properly maintained to prevent excessive or unusual noise.
Furthermore, any machine or device or part thereof which is subject to Federal
or State of Illinois Standards shall conform to those standards.
      2.   All construction operations shall be confined to weekdays and to
available daylight hours during the time period between seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. No work shall take place on weekends or
holidays. Exceptions to the above time restrictions shall be allowed for
maintenance operations, for maintenance and operation of public safety and
traffic control devices, or for construction of any emergency route.
      3.   The following terms which are used herein shall, for the purpose of
this standard, be defined as follows:
         a.   Adequate Muffler: An "adequate muffler" is one which is equal to
or quieter than the original muffler provided with the engine. If an engine was
originally provided without a muffler, a muffler complying with the
recommendations of the engine manufacturer shall be installed. Mufflers
recommended by other than the engine manufacturer shall not be used.
         b.   In Constant Operation: The exhaust system shall not have a
cutout, bypass or similar device as part of the operational system.
         c.   Properly Maintained: The various components of the engine exhaust
system shall be maintained at all times. Such items as leaks, holes or improper
operation shall be remedied by sealing, patching or replacing as necessary to
insure proper operation of the system.
      4.   Requests to modify or deviate from these requirements shall be
submitted in writing by the contractor and must be approved in writing by the
Village Engineer.
   (G)   Liability During Construction: During the construction of the
improvements and until the Village Board has accepted said improvements in
accordance with Section
6-6-5 hereof, the Village shall not be responsible for any liability or
property damage insurance to cover any liability incurred during the course of
construction of the public street. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-6-2: CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Qualifications of Contractors: The applicant shall file with the
Village a list of all contractors and subcontractors who are to participate in
the construction of the improvements, their addresses, telephone numbers and
names of persons in charge.
   (B)   Contractor Insurance Requirements: During the life of the construction
contract, the contractor shall effect and maintain with companies satisfactory
to the Village Attorney or Special Counsel, public liability and property
damage insurance protecting the Village, the developer, their agents and the
contractor against loss from liability for damages, on account of injury or
death suffered by any person or persons by reason of the performance of the
work. In addition, the policy shall provide for legal defense against any and
all claims on the policy. In the event the Village cannot be covered by
endorsement on the contractor's policies, separate policies covering the
Village shall be provided. Minimum limits of insurance coverage shall be as
follows:
      1.   Public liability including personal injury and accidental death:
         Each occurrence   $1,000,000.00
      2.   Property damage liability:
         Each accident      $ 500,000.00
         Aggregate       1,000,000.00 (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-6-3: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Required: All improvements requirements to be installed by the terms
of the final plat approval shall be inspected at the applicant's expense. The
applicant's licensed engineer, as agent for the applicant shall provide an
inspector on the job during the process of construction. The duties of the
inspector shall be as outlined in the Village of Barrington Hills Consultant
Engineer's Inspection and Supervisory Responsibilities Manual, which is
available from the Village Engineer. When the work has been completed, the
applicant's engineer shall certify that the improvements comply in all respects
with the approved plans and specifications. All work shall be at all times
subject to inspection by the Village Enforcing Officer, the Village Engineer,
other Village officials and their representatives.
   (B)   Notification: Before starting the construction of any improvements,
the subdivider shall ascertain from the Village Engineer what inspections are
required and the amount of notification desired in each case. In no event shall
notice to the Village Engineer be less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to a
desired inspection.
   (C)   Subdivider's Responsibility: Regardless of contracts, agreements or
inspections performed, final responsibility for the installation of all
improvements in accordance with the applicable standards rests with the
subdivider.
   (D)   Inspection Fee: The cost of the Village's inspection shall be one and
one-half percent (11/2%) of actual construction cost for improvements costing
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, one percent (1%) for improvements
over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00) and three-fourths of one percent (.75%) for
improvements over two hundred fifty thousand ($250,000.00). One-half (1/2) of
the cost of inspection shall be paid at the time of execution of the final
subdivision plat by the Village President. The remaining one-half (1/2) of the
inspection cost is to be paid prior to the final release from the subdivider's
guarantee of improvement completion.
In the event the actual cost of engineering services to the Village shall
exceed the amounts computed as aforesaid, such excess shall be paid by the
subdivider to the Village upon final inspection for acceptance and release of
subdivider's completion guarantee. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-6-4: TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
All improvements required under the provisions of this Title shall be completed
within two (2) years of the date of recording of a final plat or the applicant
shall be considered in default and subject to the provisions of Section
6-5-2. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-93)
6-6-5: ACCEPTANCE OR APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Acceptance of Public Improvements:
      1.   If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or easements or
other improvements which are dedicated thereon as such, whether located within
the corporate limits of the Village or in part outside thereof, or which
contains existing streets located outside of said corporate limits, approval of
the final plat by the Board of Trustees, approval of payouts under the terms of
a guarantee of improvement, or subsequent annexation of the property to the
Village shall not constitute an acceptance by the Village of such streets or
easements, nor of the public improvements constructed or installed thereon or
therein irrespective of any act by any officer, agent or employee of the
Village with respect to such streets or improvements. The acceptance of all
public improvements shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the
Board of Trustees after there has been filed with the Village Clerk a
certification by the Village Engineer stating that all public improvements
required to be constructed or installed have been fully, or individually,
completed, and that the construction or installation thereof has been approved
by him.
      2.   After completion of all public improvements and prior to final
acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made
"record" plans showing the actual location of all improvements. The plan shall
be in black (ink) on tracing cloth or materials of equal permanence and
durability and shall bear the seal and signature of the subdivider's engineer.
The plans consisting of the original drawings and three (3) sets of blue line
prints shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for permanent record.
Presentation of the plans to the Village Engineer shall be a condition of final
acceptance of the subdivision improvements.
      3.   No public street or roadway shall be accepted by the Village until
forty percent (40%) of all lots in the subdivision in which said street is
located shall have been fully improved with buildings as authorized thereon and
certificates of occupancy have been issued. The surface course of a street,
thoroughfare, alley or parking area shall be collectively considered as a
single, or individual, improvement and such construction shall constitute
release of the application portion of the performance surety. No public street
or roadway shall be accepted by the Village during the months of November,
December, January, February, March and April.
   (B)   Approval of Private Improvements:
      1.   For any plat of subdivision that contains a private street or
easement, the approval of the private improvement shall be made only by the
adoption of a resolution by the Board of Trustees after the filing, with the
Village Clerk, of a certification by the Village Engineer stating that all
private improvements required to be constructed or installed have been fully
completed and that the construction or installation thereof has been approved
by him.
      2.   After completion of all private improvements and prior to final
approval of said improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made
"record" plans showing the actual location of all improvements. The plan shall
be in black (ink) on tracing cloth or materials of equal permanence and
durability and shall bear the seal and signature of the subdivider's engineer.
The plans consisting of the original drawings and three (3) sets of blue line
prints shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for permanent record.
Presentation of the plans to the Village Engineer shall be a condition of final
approval of the subdivision improvements.
      3.   No private street or easement shall be approved by the Village
during the months of December, January, February and March. (Ord. 93-5, 5-24-
93)
CHAPTER 7
SOIL EXHIBITS
SECTION:
6-7-1:Exhibit A; Table Of Wet Soils
6-7-2:Exhibit B; Table Of Wet, Organic Soils
6-7-3:Exhibit C; Table Of Wet, Clayey Soils
6-7-4:Exhibit D; Table Of Clayey Soils
6-7-1:EXHIBIT A; TABLE OF WET SOILS:
          Cook   Kane   Lake   McHenry Septic Depth To
          County County County County  Filter High     Roadway    Housing
Soil Name Map    Map    Map    Map     Field  Seasonal Use Rating Foundation
          Symbol Symbol Symbol Symbol  Use    Water               Use Rating
                                       Rating Table
           Cook   Kane   Lake   McHenry   Septic Depth To
           County County County County    Filter High      Roadway  Housing
Soil Name  Map    Map    Map    Map       Field  Seasonal  Use      Foundation
           Symbol Symbol Symbol Symbol    Use    Water     Rating   Use Rating
                                          Rating Table
Blount     23     -      -      23B       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt
Watseka
loamy fine 49     -      -      -         Severe 1' to 3'  Moderate Severe
sand
Lisbon     59     59     -      59        Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Herbert    -      62     -      62        Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Harpster                                  Very   Less than
silty clay 67     67     67     67, W67   severe 2'        Severe   Severe
loam
Milford                                   Very   Less than
silty clay -      -      -      69        severe 2'        Severe   Severe
loam
Otter loam -      76     -      76, W76   Very   Less than Severe   Severe
                                          severe 2'
Millington -      82     -      82, W82   Very   Less than Severe   Severe
loam                                      severe 2'
LaHogue    -      -      -      102       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
loam
Virgil     -      104    -      104       Very   1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam                                 severe
Sawmill                                   Very   Less than
silty clay 107    -      107    107       severe 2'        Severe   Severe
loam
Selma loam 125    125    -      125, W125 Very   Less than Severe   Severe
                                          severe 2'
Starks     -      -      -      132       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Elliott    146    146    146A,  146B,     Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam                146B   146C
Brenton    -      149    -      149       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Drummer                                   Very   Less than
silty clay 152    152    -      152, W152 severe 2'        Severe   Severe
loam
Pella                                     Very   Less than
silty clay -      -      153    -         severe 2'        Severe   Severe
loam
Flanagan   -      154    -      -         Severe 1.5' to   Severe   Severe
silt loam                                        3.5'
Ridgeville -      -      -      156       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
sandy loam
Hoopeston
fine sandy 172    -      -      -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
loam
Martinton  189    -      189A,  189       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam                189B
Knight     -      -      -      191, W191 Very   Less than Severe   Severe
silt loam                                 severe 2'
Troxel     197    -      -      197       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Elburn     -      198    -      198       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Gilford                                   Very   Less than
fine sandy 201    -      -      -         severe 1'        Severe   Severe
loam
Thorp silt 206    206    -      206, W206 Very   Less than Severe   Severe
loam                                      severe 2'
Millbrook  -      219    -      219       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Ashkum                                    Very   Less than
silty clay 232    -      232    232, W232 severe 2'        Severe   Severe
loam
Sabina     -      236    -      -         Severe 1.5' to   Severe   Severe
silt loam                                        3.5'
Andres     -      -      -      293       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Mokena     295    -      -      -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Washtenaw  -      -      -      296, W296 Very   Less than Severe   Severe
silt loam                                 severe 2'
Beecher    298    298    298A,  298B      Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam                298B
Romeo silt 316    -      -      -         Very   Less than Severe   Severe
loam                                      severe 1'
Will silty 329    329    -      329, W329 Very   Less than Severe   Severe
clay loam                                 severe 2'
Peotone                  330,             Very   Less than
silty clay 330    330    W330   330, W330 severe 2'        Severe   Severe
loam
Matherton  -      -      -      342       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Kane silt  343    343    -      343       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
loam
Canisteo   -      347    -      347, W347 Very   Less than Severe   Severe
loam                                      severe 2'
Toronto    -      -      -      353       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Orion silt -      -      -      364       Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
loam
Aptakisic  -      -      365    -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Mundelein  442    442    442A,  -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam                442B
Odell silt -      -      490A,  -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
loam                     490B
Granby                                    Very   Less than
loamy fine -      -      513    -         severe 1'        Severe   Severe
sand
Wauconda   697    697    697A   -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
silt loam
Wauconda
and        -      -      978A   -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
Beecher
silt loams
Mundelein
and        -      -      989A   -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
Elliott
silt loams
Faxon-                                    Very   Less than
Ripon      -      921B   -      -         severe 1'        Severe   Severe
complex
Urbanland-
Martinton- 924    -      -      -         Very   Less than Severe   Severe
Milford                                   severe 2'
complex
Urbanland-
Drummer-   926B   -      -      -         Very   Less than Severe   Severe
Barrington                                severe 2'
complex
Urbanland-
Watseka    2049   -      -      -         Severe 1' to 3'  Severe   Severe
complex
Urbanland-                                Very   Less than
Sawmill    2107   -      -      -         severe 2'        Severe   Severe
complex
Urbanland-
Hoopeston- 2927   -      -      -         Very   Less than Severe   Severe
Selma                                     severe 2'
complex
 
(Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993; amd. Ord. 13-16, 10-28-2013)
6-7-2:EXHIBIT B; TABLE OF WET, ORGANIC SOILS:
          Cook   Kane   Lake   McHenry Septic Depth To
          County County County County  Filter High     Roadway    Housing
Soil Name Map    Map    Map    Map     Field  Seasonal Use Rating Foundation
          Symbol Symbol Symbol Symbol  Use    Water               Use Rating
                                       Rating Table
          Cook   Kane   Lake      McHenry   Septic Depth To
          County County County    County    Filter High      Roadway Housing
Soil Name Map    Map    Map       Map       Field  Seasonal  Use     Foundation
          Symbol Symbol Symbol    Symbol    Use    Water     Rating  Use Rating
                                            Rating Table
Houghton  -      -      97, W97   -         Very   Less than Very    Very
peat                                        severe 1'        severe  severe
Houghton  -      103    103, W103 103, W103 Very   Less than Very    Very
muck                                        severe 1'        severe  severe
Lena muck -      210    -         210, W210 Very   Less than Very    Very
                                            severe 1'        severe  severe
Wallkill  -      -      -         292, W292 Very   Less than Very    Very
silt loam                                   severe 1'        severe  severe
Loamy                                       Very   Less than Very    Very
burned    -      -      -         358, W358 severe 1'        severe  severe
muck
Muskego
and       903    -      -         -         Very   Less than Very    Very
Houghton                                    severe 1'        severe  severe
mucks
Muskego
and       904    -      -         -         Very   Less than Very    Very
Peotone                                     severe 1'        severe  severe
soils
Houghton  -      1103   -         -         Very   Less than Very    Very
muck, wet                                   severe 1'        severe  severe
Muskego
and                                         Very   Less than Very    Very
Houghton  1903   -      -         -         severe 1'        severe  severe
mucks,
wet
 
(Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993; amd. Ord. 13-16, 10-28-2013)
6-7-3:EXHIBIT C; TABLE OF WET, CLAYEY SOILS:
          Cook   Kane   Lake   McHenry Septic Depth To
          County County County County  Filter High     Roadway    Housing
Soil Name Map    Map    Map    Map     Field  Seasonal Use Rating Foundation
          Symbol Symbol Symbol Symbol  Use    Water               Use Rating
                                       Rating Table
           Cook   Kane   Lake   McHenry Septic Depth To
           County County County County  Filter High      Roadway    Housing
Soil Name  Map    Map    Map    Map     Field  Seasonal  Use Rating Foundation
           Symbol Symbol Symbol Symbol  Use    Water                Use Rating
                                        Rating Table
Swygert                                 Very
silty clay 91     -      -      -       severe 1' to 3'  Severe     Severe
loam
Del Rey    192    -      192A,  -       Very   1' to 3'  Severe     Severe
silt loam                192B           severe
           228B   -      228A,  228B,   Very   1' to 2'  Severe     Severe
                         228B,  228C2,  severe
Nappanee               228C2  228C3,  Very   1' to 2'  Severe     Severe
silt loam                       228D2,  severe
                             228D3   Very   1' to 2'  Severe     Severe
                                        severe
Bryce      235    -      -      -       Very   Less than Severe     Severe
silty clay                              severe 1'
           320B,  -      320A,  -       Very   1' to 3'  Severe     Severe
Frankfort  320C2,        320B           severe
silt loam  320C3                     Very   1' to 3'  Severe     Severe
                                        severe
Montgomery -      -      465    -       Very   Less than Severe     Severe
silty clay                              severe 1'
Urbanland-
Markham-   923B   -      -      -       Very   Less than Severe     Severe
Ashkum                                  severe 2'
complex
Urbanland-
Frankfort- 925B   -      -      -       Very   Less than Severe     Severe
Bryce                                   severe 1'
complex
Wauconda
and        -      -      981A,  -       Very   1' to 3'  Severe     Severe
Frankfort                981B           severe
silt loams
Aptakisic
and        -      -      982A,  -       Very   1' to 3'  Severe     Severe
Nappanee                 982B           severe
silt loams
Zurich and                              Very
Nappanee   -      -      983B   -       severe 1' to 3'  Severe     Severe
silt loams
 
(Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993; amd. Ord. 13-16, 10-28-2013)
6-7-4:EXHIBIT D; TABLE OF CLAYEY SOILS:
          Cook   Kane   Lake   McHenry Septic Depth To
          County County County County  Filter High     Roadway    Housing
Soil Name Map    Map    Map    Map     Field  Seasonal Use Rating Foundation
          Symbol Symbol Symbol Symbol  Use    Water               Use Rating
                                       Rating Table
            Cook   Kane   Lake   McHenry Septic Depth To
            County County County County  Filter High      Roadway    Housing
Soil Name   Map    Map    Map    Map     Field  Seasonal  Use Rating Foundation
            Symbol Symbol Symbol Symbol  Use    Water                Use Rating
                                         Rating Table
            194B,  194B,  194B,  194B,   Severe More than Severe     Moderate
            194C2, 194C,  194B2, 194C2,         3'
            194D,  194D,  194C,  194D2,  Severe More than Severe     Moderate
Morley silt 194D3, 194E   194C2, 194D3          3'
loam        194F         194D,         Severe More than Severe     Moderate
                          194D2,                3'
                        194E,         Severe More than Severe     Moderate
                          194E2                 3'
            223B   223B,  -      223B,   Severe More than Severe     Moderate
Varna silt         223C2         223C2,         3'
loam                          223C2,  Severe More than Severe     Moderate
                                 223D2          3'
Chatsworth  241D3  -      -      241D3   Very   More than Severe     Severe
silt loam                                severe 6'
Saylesville               370B,  -       Severe 3' to 6'  Poor       Severe
silty loam  -      -      370C,
                          370C2  -       Severe 3' to 6'  Poor       Severe
            531B,  531B,  531B,  -       Severe More than Severe     Moderate
            531C2  532C2  531B2,                3'
Markham                 531C,  -       Severe More than Severe     Moderate
silt loam                 531C2,                3'
                        531D2  -       Severe More than Severe     Moderate
                                                3'
Grays and                                       More than            Moderate
Markham     -      -      979B   -       Severe 3'        Severe     to severe
silt loams
Zurich and                980B,                 More than
Morley silt -      -      980C2  -       Severe 3'        Severe     Moderate
loams
Barrington                                      More than
and Varna   -      -      984B   -       Severe 3'        Severe     Moderate
silt loams
Urbanland-                                      More than
Morley      2194B  -      -      -       Severe 3'        Severe     Severe
complex
 
(Ord. 93-5, 5-24-1993; amd. Ord. 13-16, 10-28-2013)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-1-1: Acts Endangering Health
7-1-2: Cesspools, Sewer Drains
7-1-3: Obstructing Watercourses
7-1-4: Offensive Premises
7-1-5: Lighting
7-1-6: Abatement
7-1-1: ACTS ENDANGERING HEALTH:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the
public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the open burning of landscape
waste, firewood, lumber or scrap wood or similar substances gathered in the
course of maintaining a property, or placed in such a condition or location
that it can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered or cause clouds of
sparks, embers and similar airborne enflamed particulates to leave the property
on which the fire has been started or to endanger persons or property.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to permit the escape of soot, ashes or other
solid products or byproducts of combustion to be windblown or scattered so as
to leave the property on which the fire has been started or endanger persons or
property. (Ord. 08-10, 5-19-2008)
7-1-2: CESSPOOLS, SEWER DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, permit, cause, create or
contribute to, in any way, an open sewer drain or cesspool, and it shall also
be unlawful for any person to permit, create, cause or contribute to any
unsightly, nauseous or unhealthful condition by failing to properly dispose of
sewage or refuse. (Ord. 67-3, 7-24-1967)
7-1-3: OBSTRUCTING WATERCOURSES:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any
watercourse or source of water supply in the village. (Ord. 67-3, 7-24-1967)
7-1-4: OFFENSIVE PREMISES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to
remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way.
Any such structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 67-3, 7-24-1967)
   (B)   No premises used for agriculture shall be or become a public nuisance
solely because of changed conditions in the surrounding area occurring after
the premises has been used for agriculture continuously for more than one year,
provided such premises was not a nuisance at the time the agricultural use was
established. (Ord. 84-30, 9-24-1984)
7-1-5: LIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit or cause any
outdoor luminary or lighting system to create excessive glare or light levels
as to be dangerous to the public or result in annoyance or discomfort to the
public or adjacent land uses. Such nuisances shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
   (A)   Flickering, flashing, blinking and rotating lights, except if such
lights are part of a security system that shuts off automatically no longer
than twenty (20) minutes after such system is activated.
   (B)   Lasers and searchlights.
   (C)   The illumination of any outdoor recreational areas, including, but not
limited to, private tennis courts, sports fields and basketball courts, except
for basketball courts that are located immediately adjacent to the principal
residence and are illuminated by lighting attached to such residence.
   (D)   Outdoor luminaries or lighting systems that direct illumination or
rays of light beyond any lot line. (Ord. 03-11, 5-19-2003)
7-1-6: ABATEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any
nuisance on any property under his control. The chief of police and the
building and zoning enforcement officer are hereby authorized to abate any such
nuisance existing in the village whether such nuisance is specifically
recognized by ordinance or not. (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-1992; amd. Ord. 03-11, 5-19-
2003)
CHAPTER 2
DEPOSITS OF REFUSE
SECTION:
7-2-1: Littering
7-2-2: Roadway Debris
7-2-3: Abandoned Vehicles
7-2-4: Refuse Piles
7-2-5: Manure Piles
7-2-6: Compost Piles
7-2-1: LITTERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, throw, discard or place any
cartons, containers, wrappers, bags, facial tissues, paper napkins, cloth,
clothing, waste paper or waste material, cans or bottles, food or garbage, junk
or other discarded items of personal property upon any public way, the floor of
any public conveyance or building, the surface of any road or parcel of ground,
the roof of any building, or in any light or air shaft, court or areaway of any
building or place within the Village limits. (Ord. 67-3, 7-24-1967)
7-2-2: ROADWAY DEBRIS:
It shall be unlawful for the contractor, including the general contractor, for
any building or construction project or any land excavation or landfill
project, and for the owner of the land on which said project is in progress, to
permit mud, earth, stones, rubbish or building materials from said project to
accumulate or remain on the pavement or right of way of any public street or
road or platted private street or road; mud and earth shall be presumed to have
unlawfully accumulated on the pavement when allowed to remain more than twelve
(12) hours; stones, rubbish and building materials shall be presumed to have
unlawfully accumulated on the pavement when allowed to remain more than four
(4) hours; said presumption shall not be deemed to authorize unreasonable
accumulations within other periods of time. (Ord. 78-7, 6-26-1978)
7-2-3: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or place any abandoned vehicle
upon any public way or the surface of any road or parcel of ground, or in any
building, within the Village limits 1 . (Ord. 67-3, 7-24-1967)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 9, Chapter 4 of this Code.
7-2-4: REFUSE PILES:
   (A)   Unlawful Disposals: Except as otherwise permitted in this Section, it
shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or dispose by burial anywhere in
the Village any garbage, rubbish, refuse, offal or carcasses of dead animals.
The burial of or any uncovered pile of garbage, rubbish, refuse, offal or
carcasses of dead animals is hereby declared a nuisance, except as provided in
this Section. (Ord. 91-23, 9-23-1991)
   (B)   Burning Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of
garbage, rubbish, refuse, construction debris, treated or painted wood, offal
or the carcasses of dead animals by means of open burning or any other means of
incineration. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the open burning of
landscape waste, firewood, or untreated or unpainted lumber or scrap wood which
is produced or obtained for use on the premises where the materials are burned
1 . (Ord. 95-10, 10-23-1995)
   (C)   Landscape Waste: Landscape waste is defined as all accumulations of
grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, cuttings, and other materials accumulated
as the result of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.
   (D)   Burial Permitted: Carcasses of dead animals may be disposed of by
means of burial at least two feet (2') below the surface of the ground. (Ord.
91-23, 9-23-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 4, Chapter 2 of this Code.
7-2-5: MANURE PILES:
It shall be unlawful to:
   (A)   Pile manure from horses or ponies, or permit it to accumulate, closer
than one hundred feet (100') from the property line of the property on which a
horse is kept.
   (B)   Permit a pile or accumulation of manure for more than one week except
in the months of December through March inclusive at any location within three
hundred fifty feet (350') of the nearest dwelling house of another.
   (C)   Pile manure or permit it to accumulate within one hundred feet (100')
of a watercourse, lake or pond if surface drainage is from the point or area of
accumulation to said body of water; this provision shall not authorize or
legalize the piling or accumulation of manure at any closer location in
violation of any other law, ordinance or regulation of the Village. (Ord. 75-
11, 11-24-1975)
7-2-6: COMPOST PILES:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the following
definitions shall apply:
COMPOST PILE: The location on the property where composting occurs in a heap,
bin or container. A refuse or manure pile shall not be construed to be a
compost pile.
COMPOSTING: The process of turning organic waste materials into humus.
Temperature, moisture, ventilation and quantity of organic materials are
factors necessary to the process. Domestic sewage or septage shall not be used
in the process of composting.
HUMUS: The finished product of composting to be used for enhancing or
renovating the soil on the property on which it was produced.
   (B)   Composting Conditions: It shall be unlawful to maintain a compost pile
which:
      1.   Emits a putrid or rancid odor and attracts or harbors flies, rats or
vectors; or
      2.   Attracts or harbors flies, rats or vectors; or
      3.   Consists of domestic sewage or septage, animal carcasses, cooking
greases or petroleum products; or
      4.   Is located within fifty feet (50') of any lot line or dedicated or
platted right of way, whichever is more restrictive; or
      5.   Is located within one hundred feet (100') of a water course,
drainage way, flood plain, lake or pond; this provision shall not authorize a
compost pile to leach or drain in the direction of said surface waters. (Ord.
90-13, 5-21-1990)
CHAPTER 3
SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
7-3-1: License Required, Fee
7-3-2: Application For License
7-3-3: Condition Of Vehicles
7-3-4: Collection Of Recyclable Material
7-3-5: Placement Of Refuse To Be Collected
7-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger or
the collection or removal of garbage or offal without first securing a license
therefor, as herein provided. The annual fee for such license shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 57-1, 4-25-1957)
7-3-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a scavenger license shall make application therefor to the
Village Clerk. Upon the receipt of such application, the Village Clerk shall
make or cause to be made, an investigation into the character of the applicant.
Licenses shall be issued only to persons of good moral character, and only to
corporations whose officers are persons of good moral character. (Ord. 57-1, 4-
25-1957)
7-3-3: CONDITION OF VEHICLES:
All vehicles used for such purposes must be kept in a sanitary condition. The
body of such vehicle must be watertight, and each vehicle must be equipped with
a metal or canvas cover. (Ord. 57-1, 4-25-1957)
7-3-4: COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a licensed scavenger, to remove
any recyclable material such as, but not limited to, glass, paper, plastic or
metal from a container that has been positioned for the scavenger under
contract to empty and remove its contents. (Ord. 90-19, 8-27-1990)
7-3-5: PLACEMENT OF REFUSE TO BE COLLECTED:
Effective October 1, 2017:
   (A)   Time Allowed: Any refuse, debris, waste or containers thereof or
household furnishings or any other articles set out for disposal, whether
roadside or behind the lot line, shall be set out no earlier than the day
before a pickup and such containers shall remain set out only one day after
collection of its contents.
   (B)   Coverings: All refuse-filled containers set out for collection shall
be securely covered to prevent their contents being strewn by wind or other
means into the surrounding area.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall be fined fifty
dollars ($50.00). Each day shall be a separate occurrence and fined
accordingly. (Ord. 17-8, 4-24-2017)
CHAPTER 4
WEEDS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Nuisance Declared
7-4-2: Removal, Notice
7-4-3: Abatement
7-4-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any weeds, such as ragweed or other noxious weeds, found growing in any lot or
tract of land in the village are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall
be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in such place. (Ord. 82-
5, 4-26-1982)
7-4-2: REMOVAL, NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the building and zoning enforcement officer to serve or
cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any such premises on
which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days.
(Ord. 92-8, 4-27-1992)
7-4-3: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served a notice to remove weeds or plants does not abate the
nuisance within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, the building and
zoning enforcement officer may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an
account of the expense thereof. Such expense shall be charged to and paid by
the owner or occupant of the property. (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-1992)
CHAPTER 5
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
SECTION:
7-5-1: Nuisance Declared
7-5-2: Enforcement
7-5-3: Removal of Public Nuisances, Notice
7-5-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   (A)   Diseased Trees: Trees of all species and varieties of elm, zelkova and
planera affected with the fungus Ceratostomella Ulmi, as determined by
laboratory analysis, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be
removed and burned within ten (10) days following notification of the discovery
of such infection. It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner of the
property whereon such a tree is situated, to possess or keep such a tree after
the expiration of ten (10) days following notification of the discovery of said
infection.
   (B)   Elm Bark Beetle Breeding Places: Trees or parts thereof of elm,
zelkova or planera in a dead or dying condition that may serve as a breeding
place for the European elm bark beetle, Scolytus Multistriatus, are hereby
declared to be public nuisances, and it shall be unlawful for the person owning
property whereon the same is situated to possess or keep the same. (Ord. 58-27,
9-2-58)
7-5-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer is charged with enforcement of this
Chapter, and to that end may enter upon private property at all reasonable
hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereon, and may remove such specimens
as are required for purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the same
are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer from entering onto private property for purposes of
carrying out his duties hereunder, or to interfere with him in the lawful
performance of his duties under the provisions of this Chapter.
7-5-3: REMOVAL OF PUBLIC NUISANCES, NOTICE:
   (A)   Notice to Owner: The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
give to the owner of the premises where the public nuisances described in
Section
7-5-1 of this Chapter are found, a written notice advising of the existence of
such nuisance, and requiring the removal and burning of the same within ten
(10) days following such notice. That notice shall apprise the owner of said
premises that such removal and burning shall be done under the direction and
supervision of the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, and that unless
such nuisance is removed and burned in compliance with the terms thereof within
ten (10) days, the Building and Zoning Officer will proceed with the removal
and burning of such nuisance, and assess the cost thereof against the said
property owner. (Ord. 92-8, 4-27-92)
   (B)   Service of Notice: Service of such notice shall be by personal service
where the owner of said premises is a resident of the Village. Where the owner
is a nonresident of the Village, said notice shall be served by registered
mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address. (Ord. 58-27, 9-2-58;
amd. 1977 Code)
   (C)   Duty of Owner: It shall thereupon become the duty of the owner of said
premises to cause such tree or breeding place to be removed and burned, under
the direction and supervision of the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
In lieu thereof, the person charged with such removal and burning may request
that the same be done by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. If the
Village shall remove and burn any tree or breeding place, all expenses incurred
in connection therewith shall be assessed against the property owner. (Ord. 92-
8, 4-27-92)
   (D)   Village to Remove Its Trees: Trees on Village-owned property shall be
removed at the expense of the Village. (Ord. 58-27, 9-2-58; amd. 1977 Code)
CHAPTER 6
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Notification And Permit Requirements
7-6-3: Prohibitions
7-6-4: Restrictions
7-6-5: Enforcement
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the
meanings set forth herein.
 
LANDSCAPE BURN:  The open burning of accumulated landscape waste.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of excess landscape materials including
                 leaves, branches and similar materials.
                 The burning of material permitted by this code in an outdoor
OPEN BURNING:    fire wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into
                 the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney
                 from an enclosed chamber.
                 The planned application of fire to naturally occurring
                 vegetative fuels under specified environmental conditions and
PRESCRIBED BURN: following appropriate precautionary measures, which causes the
                 fire to be confined to a predetermined area and accomplish the
                 planned land management or ecological objectives.
                 Natural wood to which is added glue and other adhesives,
                 paint, polyurethane, stain, varnish and/or other such
PROCESSED WOOD:  materials, or which is treated with chemicals or other
                 substances to change the character of the wood. Processed wood
                 includes, but is not limited to, furniture, particleboard,
                 plywood and pressure-treated lumber and wood materials.
 
                             An outdoor fire burning materials other than
                             refuse or landscape waste where the fuel being
RECREATIONAL FIRE (BONFIRE): burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor
                             fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, or similar
                             device.
                             Unwanted waste substances and matter, excluding
REFUSE:                      landscape waste and unprocessed, untreated or
                             unpainted wood/lumber, intended for disposal.
                             The burning of collected woody invasive debris
                             managed by conservation staff or professional
RESTORATION- WORKDAY BURN:   consultants with field experience and certified as
                             having completed the Chicago Wilderness "Midwest
                             Ecological Prescription Burn Crew Member Training"
                             course. (Ord. 20-12, 7-21-2020)
 
7-6-2: NOTIFICATION AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Recreational and Landscape Burns: Recreational and landscape burns may
be conducted without prior notification to the Village or a permit.
   (B)   Prescribed Burns: Prescribed burns may be conducted subject to the
following:
      1.   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) permit is required.
      2.   Written notification to the Police Department is required and shall
occur at least one week in advance. Notification shall contain burn plan
information including, at a minimum, the purpose of the proposed burning, the
nature and quantities of material to be burned, the date and time when such
burning shall take place, the location of the burning site, and the person who
shall supervise the burning and their contact information.
      3.   Written notification and approval of the applicable fire protection
district no less than one week in advance.
      4.   Notification to adjacent property owners and those that could be
potentially impacted by the burn at least one week in advance.
      5.   Telephone notification to the Police Department Dispatch Center
(QuadCom) the day of the burn, prior to ignition.
   (C)   Restoration-Workday Burns: Restoration-workday burns may be conducted
subject to the following:
      1.   Written notification to the Police Department is required and shall
occur at least one week in advance. Notification shall contain burn plan
information including, at a minimum, the purpose of the proposed burning, the
nature and quantities of material to be burned, the date and time when such
burning shall take place, the location of the burning site, and the person who
shall supervise the burning and their contact information.
      2.   Written notification and approval of the applicable fire protection
district no less than one week in advance.
      3.   Notification to adjacent property owners and those that could be
potentially impacted by the burn at least one week in advance.
      4.   Telephone notification to the Police Department Dispatch Center
(QuadCom) the day of the burn, prior to ignition. (Ord. 20-12, 7-21-2020)
7-6-3: PROHIBITIONS:
No person shall cause or allow open burning inconsistent with the following
provisions:
   (A)   Open burning shall not be utilized for refuse disposal purposes.
   (B)   Open burning which creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable
situation is prohibited and a member of the Police Department shall order any
such burn extinguished by the property owner, attending adult or the fire
department.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit open burning in a manner which
clouds of sparks, embers or similar airborne enflamed particulates leave the
property on which the burn has been started or to endanger persons or property.
   (D)   Open burning shall be prohibited when the wind is in excess of twelve
(12) miles per hour based on the wind speed reported for the area by the
Weather Channel. (Ord. 20-12, 7-21-2020; amd. Ord. 20-14, 8-24-2020)
7-6-4: RESTRICTIONS:
Open burning shall be subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   Location: The location for any open burning shall not be less than one
hundred feet (100') from any structure and provisions shall be made to prevent
the fire from spreading to within one hundred feet (100') of any structure.
Only one open burn on any property shall occur at any one time.
   (B)   Attendance: Any open burn shall be constantly attended by an
individual at least eighteen (18) years of age until the fire is completely
extinguished. A garden hose attached to a water barrel, water truck or other
source of water supply or other extinguishing method shall be available for
immediate utilization.
   (C)   Size: No open burn shall be more than ten feet by ten feet by ten feet
(10' x 10' x 10') in dimension.
   (D)   Duration And Times: No open burn shall burn in excess of six (6) hours
in any calendar day. Landscape burns shall be limited to the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) A.M. to nine o’clock (9:00) P.M.
   (E.)   Material: Fuel for any open burn shall consist only of seasoned dry
firewood, landscape waste, untreated, unpainted or unprocessed wood/lumber
which is produced or obtained for use on the premises where the materials are
burned.
   (F)   Exemptions: The restrictions set forth herein on open burning shall
not apply to prescribed or restoration-workday burns associated with ecologic
restoration or natural landscape management. (Ord. 20-12, 7-21-2020)
7-6-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The Village Police Department shall be primarily responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 20-12, 7-21-2020)
TITLE 8
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
8-1-1: Department Created; Composition
8-1-2: Duties And Powers Of Members Generally
8-1-3: Rank Structure
8-1-4: Public Safety Employee Benefits Act
8-1-4-1: Purpose
8-1-4-2: Application Procedure
8-1-4-3: Application Review By Police Chief And Notification
8-1-4-4: Administrative Hearing/Hearing Officer
8-1-4-5: Administrative Hearing
8-1-4-6: Health Insurance Benefits
8-1-4-7: Other Health Insurance Benefits
8-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a Police Department for the Village. The department
shall consist of a Chief of Police and such number of other members as may be
authorized by resolution of the Board of Trustees. (1977 Code)
8-1-2: DUTIES AND POWERS OF MEMBERS GENERALLY:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the
enforcement of all of the regulations of the Village, and to preserve order and
prevent infractions of the law and to arrest violators thereof. Every member of
the Police Department is hereby declared to be a conservator of the peace. Any
member of the Police Department may serve any process, or serve any notice that
any Village officer is authorized to make under this Code or any ordinance
passed in pursuance thereof. (Ord. 07-04, 1-22-2007)
8-1-3: RANK STRUCTURE:
In addition to the Office of Chief of Police, there shall exist within the
department the ranks of patrolman, Sergeant, Lieutenant and Deputy Chief. The
number of members at each rank, the salary level for each rank, the promotion
of members from one rank to another, and all other matters so relating shall be
determined as provided by related ordinances of the Village and any specific
rules or regulations established by the Village Board of Trustees not in
conflict therewith. (Ord. 11-07, 5-23-2011)
8-1-4: PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT:
8-1-4-1: PURPOSE:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method
of determining the eligibility of a full-time Village of Barrington Hills
police officer to the benefits enumerated under the Public Safety Employee
Benefits Act ("PSEBA") through an administrative process, including if
necessary, an administrative hearing. All benefits provided employees pursuant
to PSEBA must be consistent with the PSEBA.
   (B)   The administrative procedure established herein is intended to
determine eligibility to receive certain health insurance benefits from the
Village. This administrative procedure is not a contract that bestows a benefit
or entitlement on any particular individual, and may be modified by the Village
at any time without notice.
   (C)   Any full-time police officer, who after November 14, 1997, suffers a
catastrophic injury in the line of duty, may apply for health insurance
benefits under the Act as set forth below. The same benefits may be extended to
the spouse and eligible dependent children of the catastrophically injured
public safety employee or police officer killed in the line of duty, provided
the conditions as established by the Act are met. (Ord. 17-3, 2-23-2017)
8-1-4-2: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Application Required: To seek benefits under the Act, a full- time
police officer, or in the event of the death or incapacity of the police
officer, a family member of the injured or deceased police officer, must file
with the Police Chief a fully completed PSEBA application, in writing, within
thirty (30) calendar days of the granting of a line-of-duty disability pension,
or within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the adoption of this section
8-1-4 in the event that the employee has filed a pension claim prior to the
date of adoption of this section
8-1-4, whichever is later.
The application must include the name of employee, date of hire, detailed
information regarding the incident (including date, time, place, nature of
injury, any other factual circumstances surrounding said incident giving rise
to said claim), witnesses to the incident, witnesses the applicant intends to
call at the PSEBA hearing, information and supporting documentation filed with
the Pension Board by the applicant or identified as exhibits by the Pension
Board and any Pension Board determination or ruling, documents/information
supporting the PSEBA eligibility requirements. Failure to timely file the fully
completed application along with submittal of other required information shall
result in a forfeiture of the benefits under PSEBA.
Upon request, the Police Chief, or his designee, shall furnish a Public Safety
Employee Benefit Act application to the applicant.
   (B)   Sworn Statement Required: The PSEBA application shall include a sworn
and notarized statement explaining how the disabling injury or death directly
resulted from:
      1.   A police officer's response to fresh pursuit;
      2.   A police officer's response to what is reasonably believed to be an
emergency;
      3.   A police officer's response to an unlawful act perpetrated by
another; or
      4.   A police officer's participation during the investigation of a
criminal act.
   (C)   Medical Release Required: A signed PSEBA medical release authorizing
the collection of medical information related to the incident including, but
not limited to, the disability pension proceedings, worker's compensation
records and medical records, must be submitted with the PSEBA application. The
PSEBA medical information release must specify the name, address, e-mail and
phone information for pertinent healthcare provider(s) and hospital(s), along
with employee's signature and a witness signature. A review of the PSEBA
application will not occur until the PSEBA medical authorization release is
submitted.
   (D)   General Information Release Required: A signed PSEBA general
information release authorizing the collection of general information related
to the incident, including, but not limited to, disability pension proceedings,
worker's compensation records and medical records, must be submitted with the
application. The PSEBA general information release must specify the name and
signature of the employee along with the name and signature of a witness
authorizing the collection of information pertinent to the incident review
process. A review of the PSEBA application will not occur until the PSEBA
general information release is submitted.
   (E)   Other Information: The Police Chief may require other information
necessary to make a determination as to whether an administrative hearing is
required, including, but not limited to, health insurance benefits the employee
is currently receiving or is eligible to receive; or, any other health
insurance benefits the employee or family members are otherwise entitled. The
applicant has an ongoing obligation to update information provided. Failure to
do so may result in the denial of benefits. (Ord. 17-3, 2-23-2017)
8-1-4-3: APPLICATION REVIEW BY POLICE CHIEF AND NOTIFICATION:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a fully completed application for PSEBA benefits
timely filed, the Police Chief shall review the application and supporting
documents to make an initial determination regarding the application for
benefits. That determination may be:
      1.   A determination to grant benefits based upon the preliminary record.
      2.   A determination to deny benefits.
      3.   The making of such other finding as is consistent with the evidence
or by agreement of the applicant and the Village.
   (B)   If the Police Chief grants the benefit based on the preliminary record
and subject to any necessary authorization by the Village Board, the applicant
will be notified and required to make further contact with the Police Chief
within thirty (30) calendar days for benefit explanation and processing.
   (C)   If the Police Chief denies the benefit based on the preliminary
record, the applicant will receive written notice of such denial and the
applicant shall have the right to request an administrative hearing which must
be served in writing to the Police Chief not later than thirty (30) calendar
days after being served with written notice of the denial. Upon receipt of a
timely notice from the applicant, the Police Chief shall schedule an
administrative hearing and serve the applicant with notice of the
administrative hearing along with a date for the scheduled administrative
hearing.
   (D)   Failure to request an administrative hearing within thirty (30)
calendar days after being served with written notice of the denial of PSEBA
benefits by the Police Chief shall result in the forfeiture of benefits under
the PSEBA.
   (E)   If the applicant or Village, upon receiving written notice of the
administrative hearing date, cannot attend said date as indicated in the notice
of administrative hearing, the applicant or the Village, as the case may be,
must contact the Hearing Officer within seven (7) calendar days after being
served with notice of the administrative hearing, communicating alternative
hearing date(s) which are within close proximity of the original hearing date
indicated by the Hearing Officer. Continuances will be granted for good cause
only. Failure to appear and/or cooperate in the hearing process may result in
denial of benefits. (Ord. 17-3, 2-23-2017)
8-1-4-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING/HEARING OFFICER:
   (A)   Power Of The Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall have all of
the powers granted to him under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
      1.   Preside over all Village hearings involving PSEBA;
      2.   Administer oaths;
      3.   Hear testimony taken under oath and affirmation and accept evidence
that is relevant to the issue of eligibility under PSEBA;
      4.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
      5.   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence and other
motions;
      6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing;
      7.   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, after entertaining arguments in either oral or written format, at the
discretion of the Hearing Officer, the determination of which shall be in
writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision and order.
   (B)   Appointment Of Hearing Officer: The Village President, with the
consent of the Board of Trustees, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to
hold the position of a Hearing Officer for any hearing that shall be scheduled
by the Village. In making said selection, the Village President shall consider
all pertinent information including, at a minimum:
      1.   The candidate's ability to competently perform the services; and
      2.   The candidate's service record and performance data made available
to the Village President on file with the Village or otherwise obtained by the
Village.
      3.   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
State of Illinois for at least three (3) years prior to appointment and have
knowledge of and experience in employment and labor law, general civil
procedure, the rules of evidence, and administrative practice. (Ord. 17-3, 2-
23-2017)
8-1-4-5: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   (A)   An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine
whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If the applicant is
found eligible, the benefits shall be consistent with the Act.
      1.   Time And Date: Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place as
established by the Village with appropriate notice served upon the applicant.
      2.   Record: The applicant, at applicant's expense, shall ensure that all
hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter and a transcript of
all proceedings shall be made by said certified court reporter and a copy be
provided to the Village at applicant's expense within fourteen (14) days of the
date of the PSEBA hearing.
      3.   Procedures: The Village and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at said hearing and may present witnesses, may
present testimony and documents, may cross examine opposing witnesses, and may
request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant
witnesses or the production of relevant documents. Each party shall bear the
costs of its own counsel and witnesses.
      4.   Evidence: Insofar as is practical, the rules of evidence as set
forth in the Illinois Code of Evidence shall apply.
      5.   Final Determination: The determination by the Hearing Officer of
whether the applicant is eligible for the benefits under the Public Safety
Employee Benefits Act 1  shall constitute a final administrative determination
for the purpose of judicial review.
      6.   Burden Of Proof: At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
qualified to receive the benefits.
      7.   Administrative Records: All records pertaining to the administrative
process will be held in a separate file in the employee's name maintained by
the Village. (Ord. 17-3, 2-23-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
8-1-4-6: HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS:
   (A)   If the Police Chief or Hearing Officer awards PSEBA benefits, the
Village's basic level insurance plan, as designated by the Village in the event
the Village offers more than one insurance plan will be the plan offered. The
Village's basic level insurance plan may change from time to time. If the
applicant chooses to enroll in a plan available in the Village other than the
designated basic level insurance plan, then the applicant must pay any
difference in insurance premiums between the Village's basic plan and that of
another plan on a monthly basis, due by the 15th of each month in which
coverage is effective. Failure to pay said premiums by the 15th of the month in
which coverage is effective, may result in cancellation of the health insurance
plan.
   (B)   Individuals receiving benefits under PSEBA will only be able to change
from one plan to another during the Village's open enrollment period. (Ord. 17-
3, 2-23-2017)
8-1-4-7: OTHER HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS:
   (A)   Health insurance benefits payable from any other source will reduce
the benefits payable, from the Village. Each applicant will be required to sign
an affidavit attesting to the fact that he/she is not eligible for insurance
benefits from any other source.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the benefit recipient to notify the
Village within thirty (30) days of any changes to other sources of health
insurance benefits. Receipt of benefits in violation of this provision will
require reimbursement to the Village of any benefits received. The Village
reserves the right on an annual basis to have the benefit recipient provide
another affidavit affirming whether other health insurance is available or
payable to the applicant, his/her spouse and/or his/her qualifying dependent
children.
The applicant is also required to notify the Village when the applicant becomes
Medicare eligible so the Village can assist with the transition to Medicare
coverage and/or adjust health insurance benefits accordingly. (Ord. 17-3, 2-23-
2017)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Short Title
8-2-2: Tumultuous Conduct
8-2-3: Assault (Rep. by Ord. 86-3, 2-24-1986)
8-2-4: Intoxication
8-2-5: Weapons
8-2-6: Burglar, Holdup, Emergency And Other Alarm Systems; Automatic Voice
Dialing Alarms Prohibited; Alarm Use Restricted; False Alarms
8-2-6-1: Monitoring Fee For Alarm Interconnection
8-2-7: Vagrancy
8-2-8: Unlawful Possession, Use And Transfer Of Cannabis
8-2-9: Vandalism
8-2-10: Curfew
8-2-11: Garage And Similar Sales
8-2-12: Injuring Property
8-2-13: Fireworks
8-2-14: Assault
8-2-15: Battery
8-2-16: Drug Paraphernalia
8-2-17: Tobacco Accessories And Smoking Herbs Control Act Adopted By Reference
8-2-18: Disorderly Conduct
8-2-19: Reckless Conduct
8-2-20: Theft
8-2-21: Criminal Damage To Property
8-2-22: Criminal Trespass To Vehicles
8-2-23: Criminal Trespass To Land
8-2-24: Resisting Or Obstructing A Peace Officer
8-2-25: Transmission Of Harassing And Obscene Messages
8-2-26: Contributing To The Delinquency Of A Minor
8-2-27: Disturbance Of Meetings And Administrative Hearings
8-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the OFFENSES ORDINANCE OF THE
VILLAGE OF BARRINGTON HILLS. (Ord. 63-3, 5-27-1963)
8-2-2: TUMULTUOUS CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, tend to disturb or aid in
disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous offenses or obstreperous
conduct, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises
owned or possessed by him or under his control. (Ord. 63-3, 5-27-1963)
8-2-3: ASSAULT:
(Rep. by Ord. 86-3, 2-24-1986)
8-2-4: INTOXICATION:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear or be on any public
highway, street or other public place while in an intoxicated condition. (Ord.
63-3, 5-27-1963)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located
within the village to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic
liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this code or any
state law. (Ord. 84-25, 9-24-1984)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to purchase, receive, accept, have in his possession or control, or
consume any alcoholic liquor, provided, however, nothing contained herein shall
be applicable to persons under the age of twenty one (21) participating in a
bona fide religious ceremony. (Ord. 07-17, 9-24-2007)
8-2-5: WEAPONS:
   (A)   Definitions:
   FIREARMS: Any weapon which will or is designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive, including, but
not limited to, shotguns, rifles, and pistols.
    INSTITUTIONAL USE: For the purposes of this section, institutional use
shall be the operation of a range for the firing of weapons at inanimate
targets operated and supervised by the village police department or established
on a parcel of land in excess of twenty (20) acres and either zoned for
nonresidential purposes, having a special use permit, as defined under section
5-10-7 of this code, allowing nonresidential uses of the subject property or
being used for nonresidential purposes and being a nonconforming use under
section
5-9-2 of this code.
   MISSILES: For the purposes of this section, missiles shall be any object
fired or discharged from a weapon, including, but not be limited to, any
bullet, shot, pellet, arrow or dart.
   WEAPONS: For the purposes of this section, weapons shall be any firearms,
air guns, or any bow, crossbow, compound bow or similar device intended to
project a missile or similar projectile.
   (B)   Discharge Of Weapons:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any weapon,
except for the purpose of shooting at an inanimate target or targets as
hereinafter permitted.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any weapon
such that the missile therefrom shall cross or fall upon the land of another.
   (C)   Target Shooting, Rules And Regulations: Permits for the firing or
discharging of any weapon for the purpose of shooting at an inanimate target or
targets within the village may be obtained and issued under the following rules
and regulations:
      1.   The target or targets shall be placed or arranged at least one
hundred feet (100') from any adjoining property or any "equestrian trail" (as
defined in section 6-2-4 of this code) for targets used for firearms and
otherwise so that the missiles fired at it shall not be hazardous to property
or endanger the safety of any person, animal, or the community as determined by
the chief of police, or his designee;
      2.   Applications for permits shall be made in writing to the chief of
police on a designated form;
      3.   Action upon an application shall be made in writing within ten (10)
business days after application is made and the permit issued may contain such
conditions as the chief of police deems necessary to carry out the intent of
this section;
      4.   An applicant shall provide evidence of general liability insurance
in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00);
      5.   A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid at the time of
application for a new permit and a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid
at the time of application for a renewal of an existing permit;
      6.   The permit must be displayed within fifty feet (50') of the location
of the activity at all times the permit holder is acting under the permit
issued hereunder;
      7.   The permit issued hereunder shall expire one year after the date of
issuance unless sooner revoked;
      8.   Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the chief of police,
or his designee, for a violation of this section or the terms of such permit;
      9.   No permit issued hereunder shall be transferred;
      10.   No firearms may be discharged within the village limits other than
during the following times and days:
         a.   Any permit issued hereunder for institutional uses shall restrict
the discharge of any firearms to the hours of between ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on Saturdays, Sundays, federal holidays and the
day after Thanksgiving during the period of November 1 through March 31;
         b.   Any permit issued hereunder for noninstitutional uses shall
restrict the discharge of any firearms to the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Saturdays and Sundays during the periods of
May 1 through June 30 and September 1 through November 30; and
      11.   No permit shall be issued for the discharge of any weapon unless
the applicant has under its ownership or control a parcel of land zoned R1.
   (D)   Operational Requirements: No firearm shall be discharged pursuant to
any permit without prior notice to the village police department dispatch
center (QuadCom) on the day of permit usage. No person shall fire or discharge
a weapon while under the influence of alcohol, cannabis, drugs, or intoxicating
compounds.
   (E)   Carrying Weapons And Missiles In Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for
any person, except persons permitted by law, to have or carry any weapon in, on
or under any vehicle unless such firearm is taken apart to render it incapable
of being fired, or unloaded and enclosed in a case; or unless such bow,
crossbow, compound bow or similar device is unstrung or enclosed in a case. Any
and all missiles shall be boxed and encased.
   (F)   Appeal: The revocation of any permit issued hereunder may be appealed
to the board of trustees by filing a notice of appeal with the village clerk
within thirty (30) days after the date of revocation. (Ord. 07-19, 11-19-2007;
amd. Ord. 20-10, 6-29-2020)
8-2-6: BURGLAR, HOLDUP, EMERGENCY AND OTHER ALARM SYSTEMS; AUTOMATIC VOICE
DIALING ALARMS PROHIBITED; ALARM USE RESTRICTED; FALSE ALARMS:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
    ALARM BUSINESS: Shall include any business engaged in the activity of
altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing,
selling, or servicing an alarm system or which causes any of these activities
to take place.
   ALARM SYSTEM: Shall include an assembly of equipment arranged to signal the
presence of a life or property threatening hazard requiring urgent attention
and to which the police department or fire district is expected to respond.
   ALARM USER OR USER: Shall include any person or business on whose premises
an alarm system is maintained.
   AUTOMATIC DIGITAL DIALING ALARM EQUIPMENT: Shall include any alarm system
that has the capability of transmitting digital coded signals over existing
telephone lines to a communications console in the police department.
   AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALING ALARM EQUIPMENT: Shall include any alarm system that
automatically sends any prerecorded verbal message over existing telephone
lines to the police department.
   COMMUNICATIONS CONSOLE: Shall include any terminal which receives visual or
audible signals from an activated alarm system at some remote location.
   FALSE ALARMS: Shall include the activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or negligence of the
alarm user or alarm business requiring, requesting, or resulting in a response
on the part of the police department or fire district when in fact there has
been no hazard requiring urgent attention, but shall not include alarm
activation caused by or through power outages, telephone line malfunctions,
severe thunderstorms, tornadoes, earthquakes, or similar conditions beyond the
control of the alarm user or alarm business.
   INTERCONNECTION: Shall include any connection of an alarm system to a
telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a
telephone, for the purpose of transmitting a signal upon activation of the
alarm system to another telephone or communications console.
   POLICE CHIEF: The chief of police of the village or his designated
representative.
   POLICE OR POLICE DEPARTMENT: The village police department, or any duly
authorized agent thereof.
   PREMISES: The area bounded by the user's property lines or boundaries.
   VILLAGE: The village of Barrington Hills.
   (B)   Interconnection Of Alarm Systems To Police Department:
      1.   All alarm systems must be approved by the police chief prior to
being interconnected to the communication console in the police department.
      2.   No automatic voice dialing alarm equipment shall be interconnected
to any telephone number at the police department after December 31, 1984.
      3.   Within ninety (90) days after December 31, 1984, all automatic voice
dialing alarm equipment interconnected to any telephone number at the police
department shall be disconnected therefrom. The alarm user of each such alarm
system shall be responsible for having the system disconnected. (Ord. 84-40,
11-26-1984)
      4.   Automatic digital dialing alarm equipment as required by the
provisions of title 4 of this code shall be interconnected to the
communications console in the police department subject to the approval
required in subsection (B)1 of this section. (Ord. 03-17, 8-25-2003)
      5.   The alarm user or alarm business shall be responsible for obtaining
the leased telephone line or automatic digital dialing alarm equipment between
the alarm user's premises and the communications console at the police
department and for furnishing, if required, any additional equipment in order
to provide a signal which is compatible with the operation of the
communications console at the police department.
   (C)   Control And Curtailment Of Signals Emitted By Alarm Systems:
      1.   Every alarm user or, if applicable, alarm business shall submit to
the police chief the names and telephone numbers of at least two (2) other
persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to
respond to an activated alarm system, and who may enter the premises wherein
the alarm system is installed. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of
the responders shall be kept current at all times by the alarm user or alarm
business.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for the user to suffer or permit operation of
any alarm system which emits sound beyond the user's premises, unless it is
controlled by a timing device effective to cut off the alarm or sound emanated
therefrom within a period not exceeding twenty (20) minutes after triggering
thereof.
   (D)   Testing Of Alarm Systems: No alarm system capable of resulting in a
response from the police department or fire district shall be tested or
demonstrated without notification to and permission from the police department.
Such a test or demonstration, without such notification and permission, shall
constitute a false alarm.
   (E)   False Alarm:
      1.   The police chief shall take such action as may be appropriate under
subsections (E)2, (E)3, and (E)4 of this section to eliminate false alarms, and
when so required by the terms of the aforementioned subsections, order the use
of such alarm system be discontinued.
      2.   After the police department has recorded three (3) separate false
alarms from an alarm system within a calendar year, the police chief shall
notify the alarm user by certified mail of such fact and require the user to
submit, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of such notice, a report
describing efforts to discover and eliminate the cause or causes of the false
alarms. If said user, on the basis of absence from the village, or any other
reasonable basis, requests an extension of time for filing the report, the
police chief may extend the fifteen (15) day period for a reasonable period. If
the said user fails to submit such a report within fifteen (15) days or within
any such extended period, the police chief may order that use of the alarm
system be discontinued, effective fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt by
the user of the police chief's order.
      3.   In the event the police chief determines that a report submitted in
accordance with subsection (B)2 of this section is unsatisfactory, or that the
alarm user has failed to show by the report that he has taken or will take
reasonable steps to eliminate false alarms, then the police chief may order
that use of the alarm system be discontinued, effective fifteen (15) days from
the date of receipt by the user of the police chief's order.
      4.   In the event that the police department records five (5) false
alarms within a calendar year from an alarm system, the police chief may order
that the user of the alarm system discontinue use of the alarm system for up to
six (6) months from the date the alarm is disconnected. In the event that the
police department records eight (8) false alarms within a calendar year from an
alarm system, the police chief shall order that the user of the alarm system
discontinue use of the alarm system for at least six (6) months, but not more
than one year, from the date the alarm is disconnected.
      5.   Any alarm user who has, in accordance with this subsection, been
ordered by the police chief to discontinue use of an alarm system may appeal
the order of discontinuance to the public safety committee of the board of
trustees. Notice of appeal shall be sent to the village clerk within fifteen
(15) days after the date of the order of discontinuance. Thereafter, the
committee shall consider the merits of the appeal, and in connection therewith,
shall hear evidence presented by all interested parties. After hearing such
evidence, the committee shall recommend that the board affirm, vacate or modify
the order of discontinuance. Thereafter, the board shall act on the committee's
recommendation.
   (F)   Penalties: The following acts and omissions shall constitute
violations of this section punishable by fines of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00):
      1.   Failure to disconnect an automatic voice dialing device from any
telephone number at the Police Department within ninety (90) days after
December 31, 1984;
      2.   Interconnection of an automatic voice dialing device to any
telephone number at the Police Department after December 31, 1984;
      3.   Failure to comply with the requirements of subsection (C) 2 (control
and curtailment of signals emitted by alarm systems);
      4.   Failure to obey an order of the Police Chief to discontinue use of
an alarm system, after exhaustion of the right of appeal.
Each day during which any of the aforesaid violations continue shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ord. 84-40, 11-26-84)
8-2-6-1: MONITORING FEE FOR ALARM INTERCONNECTION:
   (A)   Fee: There is established and shall be assessed a fee for monitoring
alarm interconnections to the Village Police Department. This fee shall be in
the amount of five dollars ($5.00) per month for every subscriber
interconnector.
   (B)   Collection: The fee shall be collected by the alarm monitoring panel
contractor along with the contractor's monthly subscription charge. The amounts
collected by the contractor on behalf of the Village shall be remitted to the
Village quarterly for deposit in the general fund. (Ord. 84-41, 11-26-84)
8-2-7: VAGRANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have the status of a "vagrant". The
following persons shall be deemed vagrants:
   (A)   No Lawful Means of Support: Any person having no lawful means of
employment and having no lawful means of support realized solely from lawful
occupations or sources; or, any person who lives idly and without visible means
of support.
   (B)   Loitering: Any person found loitering or strolling in, about or upon
any public highway, street or public place, or any public gathering or
assembly, or in or around any business or commercial establishment, or on any
private property or place without lawful business; or conducting himself in a
lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior.
   (C)   Burglars' Tools: Any person upon whose person or in whose possession
shall be found any instrument, tool or other implement for picking locks or
pockets, or any implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be
inferred to have been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony,
misdemeanor or the violation of any Village ordinance, and who shall fail to
account satisfactorily for the possession of the same.
   (D)   Unlawful Occupancy: Any person wandering abroad and occupying, lodging
or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop or other
building or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car or other
vehicle, without owning the same or without permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during
the hours of darkness and not giving a satisfactory account of himself.
   (E)   Abroad at Unusual Hours: Any person who wanders about the streets,
alleys or other public ways or places, or who is found abroad at late or
unusual hours in the night without any visible or lawful business and not
giving a satisfactory account of himself. (Ord. 63-3, 5-27-63)
8-2-8: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION, USE AND TRANSFER OF CANNABIS:
   (A)   Definitions.
   1.   a.   "Cannabis" shall mean marijuana, hashish, and other substances
that are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and
including derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of
cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from
any part of the plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other naturally produced cannabinol
derivatives, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction; however,
“cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from
the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, and any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature
stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber, oil or cake, or the
sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination as defined in the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.) as amended from time
to time.
      b.   “Cannabis” also means cannabis flower, concentrate, and cannabis-
infused products.
      c.   “Cannabis” does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act.
   2.   “Public place” shall mean any place where a person could reasonably be
expected to be observed by others. “Public place” includes all parts of
buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the State or a unit of local
government. “Public place” does not include a private residence unless the
private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other
similar social service care on the premises.
   (B)   Cannabis possession is prohibited as follows:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person who is twenty-one (21) years of
age or older to knowingly possess cannabis, in excess of the following
quantities:
         a.   More than thirty (30) grams of cannabis flower; or
         b.   More than five hundred (500) milligrams of THC contained in
cannabis infused product; or
         c.   More than five (5) grams of cannabis concentrate.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any
quantity of any substance containing cannabis while:
         a.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act; or
         b.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act; or
         c.   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
         d.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to possess any amount of cannabis and any person under the age of twenty-
one (21) with cannabis in his or her possession is guilty of a civil law
violation except when otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   Cannabis use is prohibited as follows:
      1.   In any public place; or
      2.   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under twenty-one
(21) years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act; or
      3.   Smoking cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited under the
Smoke Free Illinois Act; or
      4.   While operating, navigating, or while physically controlling any
motor vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat or being under the influence of cannabis
in violation of Section 11-501 or 11-502.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; or
      5.   Facilitating the use of cannabis by any person who is not allowed to
use cannabis under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use
of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
   (D)   The transfer of cannabis to any person contrary to the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act
is strictly prohibited.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit
his or her residence, any other private property under his or her control, or
any vehicle, conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be used by
an invitee of the parent’s child or the guardian’s ward, if the invitee is
under the age of twenty-one (21), in a manner that constitutes a violation of
this section. A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted his or
her residence, any other private property under his or her control, or any
vehicle, conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be used in
violation of this section if he or she knowingly authorizes or permits
consumption of cannabis by underage invitees. (Ord. 84-26, 9-24-84; amd. Ord.
21-03, 3-29-2021)
8-2-9: VANDALISM:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the following
definitions shall apply:
      PERSON shall include any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
      PROPERTY shall include any real estate including improvements thereon,
and tangible personalty.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN shall include a person appointed guardian, or given
custody, of a minor by a circuit court of this State, but does not include a
person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois
Juvenile Court Act.
      MINOR shall be a person who has attained eleven (11) years of age but who
has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
   (B)   Offenses: Within the corporate limits of the Village no person shall:
      1.   Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person
without his consent; or
      2.   Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over
any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or water craft or any part thereof of
another person without his consent.
   (C)   Liability of Parent or Legal Guardian of Minor Offender: The parent or
legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal
guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation
imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of this Section, provided that
said minor has not paid said fine or made restitution or reparation within the
time ordered by the court, and further provided that said parent or legal
guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause
and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law.
   (D)   Penalty: Every person found guilty of an offense under this Section
shall be subject to either or both of the following penalties:
      1.   A fine as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Village Code;
      2.   A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one year.
         a.   The conditions of a conditional discharge shall include that the
defendant:
            (1)   Not violate any criminal Statute or quasi-criminal ordinance
of any jurisdiction; and
            (2)   Report to and appear in person before such person or agency
as directed by the court.
         b.   The conditions of conditional discharge may, in addition, require
that the defendant:
            (1)   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
            (2)   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for
drug addiction or alcoholism;
            (3)   Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed
actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; and
            (4)   If a minor, to reside with his parent or in a foster home;
attend school; attend a nonresidential program for youth; or contribute to his
own support at home or in a foster home.
         c.   When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for
a conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of
payment. Where the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at
any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of conditional
discharge may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only
the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional
period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence,
including the authority to modify or enlarge the original conditions and to
revoke the penalty of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are
violated during such additional period.
         d.   When a petition is filed charging a violation of a condition
imposed for conditional discharge, the court:
            (1)   May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a
warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the
jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to
answer a summons.
The issuance of such warrant or summons shall toll the sentence of conditional
discharge until the final determination of the charge, and the term of
conditional discharge shall not run so long as the offender has not answered
the summons or warrant.
            (2)   Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court
may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing.
            (3)   Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of
confrontation, cross-examination and representation by counsel. The Village has
the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the
preponderance of the evidence.
            (4)   Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to
comply with the conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations
upon the offender unless such failure is due to his wilful refusal to pay.
            (5)   May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on
motion of the Village or on its own motion or at the request of the offender
after notice to all parties and a hearing.
         e.   If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at
any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue
the offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the
conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of
the initial imposition of penalty.
         f.   A judgment revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final
appealable order. (Ord. 77-5, 2-28-77)
8-2-10: CURFEW:
   (A)   No person less than seventeen (17) years of age shall be present at or
upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following
times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by a parent
or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws
of this State authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to
perform:
      1.   Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday; and
      3.   Between 11:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M.
on the following day.
   (B)   No parent, legal guardian or other person shall knowingly permit a
person in his custody or control to violate subparagraph (A) of this Section.
8-2-11: GARAGE AND SIMILAR SALES:
No person shall conduct a garage sale or other similar sale on more than two
(2) consecutive days. It shall also be unlawful to have more than two (2)
garage sales or similar sales at the same address per year while the land is
vested in the same ownership. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-86)
8-2-12: INJURING PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously, wantonly,
negligently or otherwise, tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove real
property or improvements thereto or any sign, notice, marker, topographical
survey monument, or any other personal property belonging to the Village. (Ord.
62-4, 6-25-62)
8-2-13: FIREWORKS:
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, co-partnership, corporation, club, group, association or organization to
offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any
fireworks.
   (B)   Permits for “pyrotechnic displays” of fireworks, as defined in the
Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act, 425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq. and in the Illinois
“Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act”, 225 ILCS 227/1, et seq.
(the “Acts”), as amended from time to time, to be conducted by a State licensed
“pyrotechnic distributor”, “production company”, or “lead pyrotechnic
operator”, as defined under the Acts, within the Village, may be issued by the
Village President under the following conditions, rules and regulations:
      1.   A permit application for a pyrotechnic display of fireworks shall be
submitted to the Village Clerk, together with a permit fee as provided in the
Village’s Fee and Penalties Schedule.
      2.   A separate permit shall be obtained from the applicable Chief Fire
Official of the Fire Protection District providing service for the location of
the proposed pyrotechnic display of fireworks, pursuant to all mandatory and
applicable Fire Protection District and State rules and regulations, including
but not limited to the Acts, as such rules and regulations are amended from
time to time, and shall be subject to any further safety terms and conditions,
as required by the Chief Fire Official. A copy of the permit issued by the
Chief Fire Official of the Fire Protection District providing service for the
location of the proposed pyrotechnic fireworks display shall be provided to the
Village Clerk.
      3.   An Illinois State license issued to the “pyrotechnic distributor”,
“production company”, or “lead pyrotechnic operator” shall be required and a
copy provided to the Village Clerk.
      4.   A certificate of insurance naming the Village as an additional
insured shall be presented to the Village in the amount of no less than five
million dollars ($5,000,000.00) and a hold harmless clause in favor of the
Village shall be presented prior to the issuance of any permit.
      5.   Applications for permits shall be made in writing at least fifteen
(15) days in advance of the date of the display.
      6.   No permits required and granted hereunder shall be transferable.
      7.   It shall be unlawful to conduct any permitted pyrotechnic fireworks
display in a manner inconsistent with the approved pyrotechnic fireworks
display permit application(s) and/or issued pyrotechnic fireworks display
permit(s).
   (C)   All terms provided herein shall be subject to the definitions set
forth in the Acts, as amended from time to time, including but not limited to
the term “fireworks”.
   (D)   Violations. Any violation of this section shall be subject to the
Village’s general penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of the Village Code. The owner of record of the premises upon which any
unlawful conduct occurs and any individual or entity engaged in any unlawful
conduct, as provided in this section, shall be jointly and severally liable for
violations of this section. (Ord. 78-19, 12-18-78; amd. Ord. 24-07, 7-22-2024;
Ord. 25-08, 4-28-2025)
8-2-14: ASSAULT:
A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in
conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
8-2-15: BATTERY:
A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal
justification and by means,
      1.   Causes bodily harm to an individual or
      2.   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual. (Ord. 79-16, 8-27-79)
8-2-16: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   (A)   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: Except as otherwise provided in the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.) or the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), it shall be
unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
   (B)   Manufacture, Sale Or Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia: Except as
otherwise provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (41 ILCS 705/1-1 et
seq.) or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/
1 et seq.), it is unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, offer for sale,
display, furnish, deliver, possess with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia,
knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will
be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and 720 ILCS
570/100 et seq.
   (C)   Advertisement Of Drug Paraphernalia: Except as otherwise provided in
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.) or the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), it
is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or
other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in
part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia. (Ord. 84-27, 9-24-84; amd. Ord. 21-03, 3-29-2021)
8-2-17: TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS CONTROL ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 685/1 et seq., prohibiting the sale or delivery
of tobacco accessories or smoking herbs to minors, is adopted by reference,
subject to such deletions and additions as may be provided hereinafter. (Ord.
84-28, 9-24-84)
8-2-18: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provide a breach of peace; or
   (B)   Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town,
village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such
fire exists; or
   (C)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb explosive is
concealed in such place; or
   (D)   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing
that such an offense has been committed; or
   (E)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-86)
   (F)   Permits any animal under his ownership or control to become a Stray
Animal (as such term is defined in Section
8-4-1 of this Title). (Ord. 93-9, 9-27-93)
8-2-19: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an
individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he performs recklessly the
acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they otherwise are lawful
or unlawful.
8-2-20: THEFT:
A person commits a theft when he knowingly:
   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   (B)   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
   (C)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
   (D)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen; or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe
that the property was stolen, and
      1.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property, or
      2.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      3.   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-86)
   (E)   Definitions: The provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-
1 entitled "definitions", and any amendments, deletions or additions thereto,
are adopted by reference herein as though fully set forth.
   PROPERTY: Shall include among other things such recyclable material as
glass, paper, plastic and metal deposited for collection by a licensed
scavenger who is authorized by the owners of the material to collect same.
   SCAVENGER, LICENSED: A person licensed by the village to collect or remove
recyclable material or refuse. (Ord. 90-19, 8-27-1990)
8-2-21: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A person commits the offense of criminal damage to property when he:
   (A)   Knowingly damages any property of another without his consent; or
   (B)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive, damages property of
another; or
   (C)   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
   (D)   Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
   (E)   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another, without
his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or building.
   (F)   Knowingly damages the property of another without his consent by
defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint or
any other similar substance. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-1986)
8-2-22: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLES:
No person shall knowingly and without authority enter any part of or operate
any vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or snowmobile of another person. (Ord. 86-3,
2-24-1986)
8-2-23: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND:
   (A)   No person shall enter upon the land or any part thereof of another,
after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or
occupant that such entry is forbidden, or shall remain upon the land of another
after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart.
   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of subsection (A) of this section if he has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such
entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such
land or the forbidden part thereof.
   (C)   A "No Solicitation" or "No Trespass" sign posted in accordance with
subsection
5-5-11(A)1d of this code shall constitute notice for purposes of subsections
(A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   No person shall enter upon the off-road or off-drive portion of the
land of another, with any motorized vehicle, including but not limited to all-
terrain vehicles (ATVs), off-highway motorcycles (dirt bikes) and snowmobiles,
without the express written or verbal consent from the owner or occupant. Such
trespass is strictly prohibited with or without prior notice from the owner or
occupant that such entry is forbidden. (Ord. 88-1, 1-25-1988; amd. Ord. 25-07,
4-28-2025)
8-2-24: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER:
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to
the person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his official
capacity. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-1986)
8-2-25: TRANSMISSION OF HARASSING AND OBSCENE MESSAGES:
   (A)   No person shall send messages or use language or terms which are
obscene, lewd or immoral with intent to offend by means of or while using a
telephone or telegraph facilities, equipment or wires of any person, firm or
corporation engaged in the transmission of news or messages between states or
within the state of Illinois. The use of language or terms which are obscene,
lewd or immoral is prima facie evidence of the intent to offend.
   (B)   A person commits the offense of harassment by telephone when he uses a
telephone communication for any of the following purposes:
      1.   Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is
obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent with an intent to offend; or
      2.   Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with
intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number; or
      3.   Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with
intent to harass any person at the called number; or
      4.   Making repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues,
solely to harass any person at the called number; or
      5.   Knowingly permitting any telephone under one's control to be used
for any of the purposes mentioned herein.
   (C)   A person commits harassment through electronic communications when he
or she uses electronic communication for any of the following purposes:
      1.   Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene
with an intent to offend; or
      2.   Interrupting, with the intent to harass, the telephone service or
the electronic communication service of any person; or
      3.   Transmitting to any person, with the intent to harass and regardless
of whether the communication is read in its entirety or at all, any file,
document, or other communication which prevents that person from using his or
her telephone service or electronic communications device; or
      4.   Transmitting an electronic communication or knowingly inducing a
person to transmit an electronic communication for the purpose of harassing
another person who is under thirteen (13) years of age, regardless of whether
the person under thirteen (13) years of age consents to the harassment, if the
defendant is at least sixteen (16) years of age at the time of the commission
of the offense; or
      5.   Threatening injury to the person or to the property of the person to
whom an electronic communication is directed or to any of his or her family or
household members; or
      6.   Knowingly permitting any electronic communications device to be used
for any of the purposes mentioned in this subsection (C). (Ord. 14-13, 8-26-
2014)
8-2-26: CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR:
No person shall knowingly or wilfully cause, aid or encourage any minor to be
or to become a delinquent minor, or shall knowingly or wilfully act in a manner
which directly tends to render any such minor so delinquent. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-
1986)
8-2-27: DISTURBANCE OF MEETINGS AND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, disrupt, obstruct,
interrupt or interfere with any meeting of the Board of Trustees or any and all
Committees, Commissions, Boards, subsidiary bodies of the village, or
administrative hearings including, but not limited to, any disruptive conduct
that offends established rules of procedure and decorum of such meetings or
reasonable rules as to public comment or orders and directives of the hearing
officer in administrative hearings.
   (B)   Any person, who unlawfully disturbs, disrupts, obstructs, interrupts
or interferes with any meeting of the Board of Trustees or any and all
Committees, Commissions, Boards, subsidiary bodies of the village, or
administrative hearings is subject to immediate removal by order of the
chairperson or hearing officer and is subject to the general penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of the village code. (Ord. 21-05, 5-24-2021; amd. Ord. 23-05, 9-26-2023)
CHAPTER 3
HUNTING AND FISHING
SECTION:
8-3-1: Hunting, Trapping and Fishing
8-3-2: Injuring Property
8-3-1: HUNTING, TRAPPING AND FISHING:
   (A)   (Reserved)
   (B)   (Reserved)
   (C)   (Reserved) (Ord. 94-10, 11-21-94)
   (D)   Fishing, Consent Required: It shall be unlawful to take fish by means
of any device within the waters flowing or standing on the land of another
without first having obtained permission in writing from the owner or occupant
of the premises where such fishing is done. Any written consent shall be dated
and specify with particularity the date or dates for which such permission is
given, and provided further, that such fishing shall not be carried on so as to
cause wanton or careless injury to or destruction of any real or personal
property on such premises. (Ord. 88-12, 8-22-88)
   (E)   Fishing, Prohibited Locations: It shall be unlawful to engage in the
activity of fishing while on any portion of a public right of way, road, street
or bridge. (Ord. 91-15, 6-24-91)
8-3-2: INJURING PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly or carelessly injure or
destroy, in any manner whatsoever, any real or personal property on the land of
another while engaged in fishing thereon. (Ord. 88-12, 8-22-88)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Animal Control Officer
8-4-3: Animal Control Facility
8-4-4: Impoundment And Redemption
8-4-5: Abandonment
8-4-6: Inoculation Against Rabies
8-4-7: Signs of Rabies
8-4-8: Report of Bites
8-4-9: Prevention of Spread of Rabies
8-4-10: Rules and Regulations
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL: Any living vertebrate, except a human being.
BITE: A seizure of a person with the jaws or teeth of any animal capable of
transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has been wounded or pierced
and further includes contact of the saliva of such animal with any break or
abrasion of the skin.
CONFINED: The restriction of the animal at all times by the owner in a manner
that will isolate the animal from the public or other animals.
CONTROL: The securing of any animal by a leash, lead, electrical/mechanical
device or voice control, or within or about the premises of its owner or the
premises owned by another person with the consent of that person, or confined
with any crate or cage or confined within a vehicle.
OWNER: Any person having the right of property of an animal, who keeps or
harbors an animal, who has an animal in his care, acts as its custodian or who
knowingly permits an animal on or about any premises occupied by him.
STRAY ANIMAL: Any animal that is not under control, is molesting persons by
chasing, menacing or biting, is chasing vehicles, is attacking another animal
or is damaging property other than the property of the owner of the animal.
VOICE CONTROL: The immediate recall of an animal at the sound of the voice of
the owner. (Ord. 93-8, 7-26-93)
8-4-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
The Police Chief of the Village is hereby appointed as the Animal Control
Officer for the Village and is given authority:
   (A)   To apprehend a stray animal;
   (B)   To dispose of any stray or infected animal of any kind when necessary
for the protection of any person or animal after making reasonable efforts to
determine the owner of the animal;
   (C)   To take such other actions as authorized by this Chapter.
The Police Chief of the Village may designate any member of the Police
Department to carry out any of the functions of the Animal Control Officer.
(Ord. 93-8, 7-26-93)
8-4-3: ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY:
The Animal Control Officer is empowered to designate an animal control facility
for the temporary housing of seized, stray, or abandoned animals. (Ord. 93-8,
7-26-93; amd. Ord. 24-05, 4-25-2024)
8-4-4: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION:
   (A)   Any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter may be
redeemed upon payment of the required redemption fee, fines, and vaccinations
as provided herein. The animal shall be returned to the owner, provided the
owner:
      1.   Shows satisfactory proof of ownership; and
      2.   Pays a fifty-dollar ($50.00) administrative redemption fee for the
apprehension, notification, transportation, and impoundment of an animal; and
         a.   May be collected by the animal control facility on behalf of the
Village: or,
         b.   If paid directly to the Village, present evidence of payment to
the animal control facility.
      3.   Presents proof of current rabies inoculation to, or secures rabies
vaccination from, the animal control facility, if applicable and due; and
      4.   Pays all costs associated with the boarding and necessary veterinary
treatment of the animal to the animal control facility.
   (B)   All animals impounded pursuant to this Chapter shall be held for a
minimum of seven (7) days following notification of the owner. The animal
control facility will determine the appropriate disposition for all unclaimed
animals.
   (C)   If ownership of the animal is established and the owner refuses to
redeem the same, the owner shall remain obligated to pay all fines and
impoundment expenses. (Ord. 93-8, 7-26-1993; amd. Ord. 24-05, 4-25-2024)
8-4-5: ABANDONMENT:
   (A)   No owner may abandon any animal where it may become a public charge or
may suffer injury, hunger or exposure. (Ord. 95-9, 9-25-1995)
   (B)   No owner of a dog shall permit it to disturb the peace of others by
permitting it to bark incessantly. This section shall be enforced by the police
department for the village of Barrington Hills twenty four (24) hours per day,
seven (7) days per week, provided, however, this section shall not apply to
instances of incessant barking that occur as part of an organized search team
involving the use of dogs. "Incessantly" as used in this section means a period
of time of more than twenty (20) continuous minutes. (Ord. 06-10, 6-26-2006)
8-4-6: INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES:
Every owner of a dog four (4) months or more of age not confined at all times
to an enclosed area shall cause such dog to be inoculated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian. Such rabies inoculation shall be evidenced with a
certificate signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccine, and
a rabies inoculation tag. The rabies inoculation tag shall be attached to a
collar or harness and worn at all times by the dog for which the tag has been
issued, except when such dog is confined to the property of the owner. (Ord.
93-8, 7-26-1993)
8-4-7: SIGNS OF RABIES:
The owner of any animal which exhibits clinical signs of rabies, whether or not
such animal has been inoculated against rabies, shall immediately notify the
animal control officer, and shall promptly confine such animal, or have it
confined, under suitable observation for a period of at least ten (10) days,
unless authorized by the animal control officer, in writing, to release it
sooner. Any animal in direct contact with such animal, whether or not the
exposed animal or other animal has been inoculated against rabies, shall be
confined as recommended by the animal control officer. (Ord. 93-8, 7-26-1993)
8-4-8: REPORT OF BITES:
When the animal control officer receives information that any person has been
bitten by an animal, the animal control officer shall have such animal confined
under the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days.
Such veterinarian shall immediately by telephone or in person report the
clinical condition of the animal, and provide written confirmation to the
animal control officer within twenty four (24) hours after the animal is
presented for examination, giving the owner's name and address, the date of
confinement, and the breed, description, age and sex of such animal. The animal
control officer shall notify the attending physician or responsible health
agency. At the end of the confinement period, the veterinarian shall submit a
written report to the animal control officer advising him of the final
disposition of such animal. When evidence is presented that such animal was
inoculated against rabies, it may be confined to the house of its owner or in a
manner which will prohibit it from biting any person for a period of ten (10)
days, if the animal control officer adjudges such confinement satisfactory. At
the end of the confinement period, such animal shall again be examined by a
licensed veterinarian. Any expenses incurred in the handling of any animal
under this section shall be borne by the owner and shall be paid prior to the
redemption of the animal. (Ord. 93-8, 7-26-1993)
8-4-9: PREVENTION OF SPREAD OF RABIES:
Whenever a case of rabies has occurred in the village or when the animal
control officer is apprehensive of the spread of rabies, the animal control
officer shall act to prevent its spread among animals. The animal control
officer may order:
   (A)   That all dogs in the village be kept confined within an enclosure or
kept muzzled and restrained by leash; and
   (B)   That all owners or keepers of animals take such measures as the animal
control officer deems necessary to prevent the spread of rabies. (Ord. 93-8, 7-
26-1993)
8-4-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The animal control officer may establish rules and regulations, consistent with
the provisions of this chapter, for the administration of this chapter, and may
procure forms which shall be used in connection with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 93-8, 7-26-1993)
CHAPTER 5
EQUESTRIAN TRAIL LICENSE
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: License Required
8-5-2-1: Application For License
8-5-2-2: License Fees
8-5-2-3: License Year
8-5-2-4: License Tag
8-5-2-5: Loss Or Transfer Of License
8-5-2-6: Exemptions
8-5-2-7: Use Of Funds
8-5-3: Penalty
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined and shall be
construed as hereinafter set out unless it shall be apparent from the context
that a different meaning is intended:
CLERK: The village clerk.
EQUESTRIAN TRAIL: The equestrian trails established pursuant to title 6 of this
code in favor of the village.
HORSE: An animal of the genus Equus.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in a horse or who keeps or harbors
a horse or who has a horse in his or her care or custody. (Ord. 05-02, 6-17-
2005)
8-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Prior to taking any horse on an equestrian trail, the owner thereof shall
obtain an equestrian trail license issued by the village upon payment of the
fee specified herein. (Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
8-5-2-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
As a condition to his or her use of the equestrian trails located in the
village, every owner of a horse shall file an application with the village
clerk or his designee, setting forth the name and address of the applicant and
a description of the horse for which the license is desired. Upon payment of
the fee herein provided, the village clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a
license which shall be attested by the village clerk authorizing the owner to
ride the horse over and across the equestrian trails within the village until
the expiration of the license. (Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
8-5-2-2: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee to be paid for an equestrian trail license is ten dollars
($10.00). (Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
8-5-2-3: LICENSE YEAR:
All such licenses issued under this section
8-5-2 shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance. (Ord. 05-02, 6-
17-2005)
8-5-2-4: LICENSE TAG:
Each applicant, upon payment of the fee, shall be given a tag to be affixed to
the bridle of the licensed horse at all times while in use of the equestrian
trails. (Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
8-5-2-5: LOSS OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
In the event that any person to whom an equestrian trail license has been
issued loses the tag issued by the village, or in the event that such tag is
destroyed or mutilated, such person may apply for a new tag upon providing to
the clerk satisfactory evidence of the loss or destruction of such tag and upon
paying a fee of one dollar ($1.00). In the event that any person to whom an
equestrian trail license has been issued transfers title to the horse to which
such tag is issued and wishes to substitute a different horse, such person may
apply for a new tag upon providing to the clerk satisfactory evidence of the
transfer of title to such horse and the destruction of such tag as was
originally issued and upon paying a fee of one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. 05-02, 6-
17-2005)
8-5-2-6: EXEMPTIONS:
No fee shall be required for any horse owned by the village or a park district.
Owners of a horse so exempt from payment of fees shall, however, apply for and
obtain a license as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
8-5-2-7: USE OF FUNDS:
All fees derived from such licenses shall be deposited in the general fund.
(Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
8-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense. (Ord. 05-02, 6-17-2005)
TITLE 9
VEHICLE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted By Reference; Exceptions; Additions
9-1-2: Definitions
9-1-3: Police Administration
9-1-4: Authority To Direct Traffic
9-1-5: Designation Of Crosswalks, Safety Zones
9-1-6: Use Of Coasters, Roller Skates, Toy Vehicles
9-1-7: Traffic Laws Apply To Persons Riding Animals Or Driving Animal-Drawn
Vehicles
9-1-8: Unauthorized Use Of Public Way For Sale Of Vehicle
9-1-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; EXCEPTIONS; ADDITIONS:
   (A)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as it may
hereafter be amended, is hereby adopted by reference as the comprehensive
regulations applicable to the Village, subject to such deletions and additions
of sections as are hereafter provided in this Title. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
   (B)   Citation To Illinois Vehicle Code: Any citation to the above and
foregoing provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be designated as set
forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code and prefixed by reference to Chapter 9 of
this Code. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-1986)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   The definition of "commercial vehicle" found in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-107 shall be deleted for purposes of this Title.
   (B)   In addition to the definitions found in chapter 1 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, adopted by reference pursuant to Section
9-1-1 of this Chapter, whenever in this Title the following words and phrases
are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
Section:
    COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise or
other nonpersonal use, for hire, not including commuter van, a vehicle used in
a ride-sharing arrangement, or a recreational vehicle not being used
commercially.
   MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: The Illinois Department of
Transportation document of specifications regarding all official signs,
markers, buttons, and other indicators; may be referred to as "the Manual".
   OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   PUBLIC UTILITY, EMERGENCY REPAIR: Actions taken immediately in response to
the imminent or actual cessation of service.
   PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, roadway, alley or other public thoroughfare open
to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of travel.
   SUPERVISION: A disposition of conditional and revocable release without
probationary supervision, but under such conditions and reporting requirements
as are imposed by the court, at the successful conclusion of which disposition
the defendant is discharged and a judgment dismissing the charges is entered.
   THROUGH TRAFFIC: A vehicle taking a route over any road or highway, or
portion thereof, under the maintenance jurisdiction of the Village, as listed
in subsection
9-2-6-2(D), without trip origination or destination within the Village or to or
from a location whose only means of ingress and egress is along said road or
highway. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985; amd. Ord. 91-21, 8-26-1991)
9-1-3: POLICE ADMINISTRATION:
The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this Title, and have the
following powers and duties:
   (A)   Records And Violations: The Police Department shall keep an
appropriate record of all citations issued for violations of the traffic
provisions of this Title or of the Illinois Vehicle Code with which any person
has been charged, together with an appropriate record of the final disposition
of such citations.
   (B)   Investigate Accidents: It shall be the duty of the Police Department
to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and to assist in the prosecution
of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such
accidents.
   (C)   Overweight Permits: It shall be the duty of the Police Department to
process and issue overweight permits as provided for in Section
9-2-6-4 of this Title. The Police Chief shall report the number and nature of
all permits issued each month to the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
9-1-4: AUTHORITY TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
   (A)   Officers of the Police Department or such other authorized officers or
crossing guards as are assigned or authorized by the Chief of Police, are
hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in
conformance with traffic laws and ordinances, provided that in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of traffic laws and ordinances.
   (B)   Officers of any Fire District, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
   (C)   On construction projects, contractors must provide flagmen to direct
traffic through and around construction areas, subject to prior notification of
the Village Police Department and compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any other person not authorized by the Chief
of Police to direct or attempt to direct traffic. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
9-1-5: DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES:
The Roads and Bridges Committee of the Village Board of Trustees is hereby
authorized, upon resolution of the Board of Trustees:
   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in its opinion
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such
other places as it may deem necessary.
   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as they may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (Ord. 85-
1, 1-28-1985)
9-1-6: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, TOY VEHICLES:
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device, but not including a bicycle, shall go upon any
roadway except while crossing a street in a crosswalk and when so crossing,
such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to the duties
applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
9-1-7: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES:
Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway within the Village shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this
Title, except those provisions of this Title which by their very nature can
have no such application. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
9-1-8: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC WAY FOR SALE OF VEHICLE:
It is hereby determined that no person shall stop or park a vehicle on a public
way for the purpose of selling, offering to sell or displaying such vehicle.
(Ord. 96-6, 5-20-1996)
CHAPTER 2
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Applicability
9-2-2: Marking, Use Of Traffic Lanes
9-2-3: Decrease Of State Law Maximum Speed
9-2-4: Authority To Place, Obedience To Turning Markers
9-2-5: Through, Stop, One-Way Streets
9-2-5-1: Through Street
9-2-5-2: Stop Streets
9-2-5-3: One-Way Streets
9-2-6: Vehicle Length And Weight Regulations
9-2-6-1: Exceptions To Length Regulations
9-2-6-2: Axle Loads And Maximum Weights
9-2-6-3: Temporary Prohibition Of Certain Classes Of Vehicles
9-2-6-4: Overweight Permits; Fees
9-2-7: Prohibition Of Through Traffic On Village Highways
9-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
In addition to the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code adopted by reference
pursuant to section
9-1-1 of this title, the following regulations shall apply. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-
1985)
9-2-2: MARKING, USE OF TRAFFIC LANES:
The roads and bridges committee of the village board of trustees is hereby
authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway whenever in its opinion a
regular alignment of traffic is necessary. Whenever any roadway has been
divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following
rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply:
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and which
provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the
center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the
same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe
distance, or in preparation for making a left turn, or where such center lane
is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction
that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official
traffic control devices.
   (C)   Official traffic control devices may be erected directing specific
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the
roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
   (D)   Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such device. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
9-2-3: DECREASE OF STATE LAW MAXIMUM SPEED:
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that the speed permitted by state law, as applicable upon the
following streets and areas, is greater than is reasonable or safe under the
conditions found to exist upon such streets and in such areas, and it is hereby
declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be twenty five (25) miles per
hour at all times on those streets or parts of streets herein designated when
signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Aberdeen Drive (east and west) off Crabapple Drive
Barrington Hills Road from Donlea Road north and west to terminus
Braeburn Road from north village limits south to Spring Creek Road
Buckley Road from Cuba Road south to Oak Knoll Road
Butternut Road from Donlea Road south to terminus
Caesar Drive from Lake-Cook Road south to terminus
Chapel Road from Haeger's Bend east to Church Road
Church Road from Chapel Road north to Algonquin/River Road
Country Oaks Drive from Lake-Cook Road north to terminus
Country Oaks Lane from Country Oaks Drive west to terminus
Crabapple Drive from Donlea Road south to terminus
Creekside Lane from Sutton Road east to terminus
Cross Timber Road from Braeburn Road east to terminus
Cuba Road from Plum Tree Road southeast and south to Merri-Oaks Road and east
to Chicago and Northwestern Railroad
Dana Lane from Caesar Drive west to terminus
Dundee Lane from Dundee Road (Route 68) to Hawthorne Road (Route 59)
Haeger's Bend Road from Lake-Cook Road north to village limits
Hawley Woods Road from Otis Road southwest to Old Dundee Road
Hawthorne Lane from Otis Road southeast to Hawthorne Road (Route 59)
Healy Road from Dundee Road (Route 68) southwest to Penny Road
Healy Road from Penny Road south to village limits
Helm Road from Algonquin Road (Route 62) west to village limits
Hills and Dales Road from Brinker Road east and north to Otis Road
Honeycut Road from Hills and Dales Road south to terminus
Lake View Lane from Dundee Road (Route 68) north to terminus
Leeds Drive from Crabapple Drive west to terminus
Little Bend Road from Spring Lane to terminus
Longmeadow Court from Longmeadow Drive north to end
Longmeadow Drive from Bateman Road west to Rolling Hills
Meadow Hill Road from Lake-Cook Road north to Spring Creek Road
Merri-Oaks Road from Ridge Road east to Cuba Road
Oak Knoll Road from Ridge Road east to Old Hart Road
Old Dundee Road from Routes 59/68 at Algonquin Road (Route 62) to terminus
Old Hart Road from Lake-Cook Road north to terminus
Plum Tree Road from Union Pacific Railroad west to village limits
Rebecca Drive from Sutton Road west to terminus
Ridge Road from Lake-Cook Road north to Plum Tree Road
River Road within village limits
Rock Ridge Road from Plum Tree Road south to terminus
Rolling Hills Drive from Bateman Road from west to terminus
Round Barn Road between Hawley Woods Road east to terminus
Spring Creek Road from Ridge Road west to village limits
Spring Lane from Spring Creek Road to terminus
Springwood Lane from Algonquin Road (Route 62) to terminus
Steeplechase Road on circle route from Lake-Cook Road to Lake-Cook Road
Surrey Lane (east and west) from Plum Tree Road north
Tamarack Lane from Sutton Road west to terminus
Three Lakes Road from Lake-Cook Road south to terminus
Tricia Lane from Sutton Road east to terminus
Wagon Wheel Lane between east and west Surrey Lane
Woodcreek Road from Dundee Road (Route 68) south to terminus (Ord. 06-22, 12-
18-2006)
9-2-4: AUTHORITY TO PLACE, OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS:
   (A)   The roads and bridges committee of the village board of trustees shall
direct the installation and maintenance of markers, buttons, or signs within or
adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled at the following
locations:
SW corner eastbound Spring Creek Road at Haeger's Bend Road (Ord. 02-16, 10-28-
2002)
   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
at that point, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
9-2-5: THROUGH, STOP, ONE-WAY STREETS:
9-2-5-1: THROUGH STREET:
   (A)   Board To Designate Through Streets: Only those streets or parts of
streets which have been or may be designated as through streets by the village
board of trustees shall be considered as such for the purpose of this title.
   (B)   Stop Signs Required: Whenever any ordinance designates and describes a
through street, the roads and bridges committee of the village board of
trustees shall cause to be placed and maintained a stop sign on each and every
street intersecting such through street or intersecting that part thereof
described and designated as such unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the
intersection of two (2) through streets, or at the intersection of a through
street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be
erected at the approaches to either or both of said streets as may be
designated by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
9-2-5-2: STOP STREETS:
The roads and bridges committee of the village board of trustees shall direct
the installation and maintenance of stop signs at the following locations:
NW corner southbound Barrington Hills Road at Donlea Road
NW corner southbound Braeburn Road at Spring Creek Road
NW corner southbound Buckley Road at Oak Knoll Road
SE corner northbound Buckley Road at Cuba Road
SE corner northbound Butternut Road at Donlea Road
SE corner northbound Caesar Drive at Lake-Cook Road
NE corner westbound Chapel Road at Haeger's Bend Road
SE corner northbound Church Road at Algonquin/River Road
NW corner southbound Country Oaks Drive at Lake-Cook Road
SE corner northbound Crabapple Drive at Donlea Road
NE corner westbound Creekside Lane at Sutton Road
NE corner westbound Cross Timber Road at Braeburn Road
NE corner westbound Cuba Road at Plum Tree Road
NW corner southbound Cuba Road at Merri-Oaks Road
NW corner southbound Dundee Lane at Dundee Road (Route 68)
SE corner northbound Dundee Lane at Hawthorne Road (Route 59)
NW corner southbound Haeger's Bend Road at Lake-Cook Road
NW corner southbound Haeger's Bend Road at Spring Creek Road
SE corner northbound Haeger's Bend Road at Spring Creek Road
NW corner southbound Hawley Woods Road at Old Dundee Road
SE corner northbound Hawley Woods Road at Otis Road
NW corner southbound Hawthorne Lane at Hawthorne Road (Route 59)
SE corner northbound Hawthorne Lane at Otis Road
NW corner southbound Healy Road at Penny Road
SE corner northbound Healy Road at Penny Road
SW corner eastbound Helm Road at Algonquin Road (Route 62)
NE corner westbound Hills and Dales Road at Brinker Road
SE corner northbound Hills and Dales Road at Otis Road
NW corner southbound Lake View Lane at Dundee Road (Route 68)
SE corner eastbound Longmeadow Drive at Bateman Road
NW corner southbound Meadowhill Road at Lake-Cook Road
SE corner northbound Meadowhill Road at Spring Creek Road
NE corner westbound Merri-Oaks Road at Ridge Road
NE corner westbound Oak Knoll Road at Ridge Road
SW corner eastbound Oak Knoll Road at Old Hart Road
SW corner eastbound Old Dundee Road at Routes 59/68
SW corner southbound Old Dundee Road at Routes 62/68/59
NW corner southbound Old Hart Road at Lake-Cook Road
NE corner westbound Plum Tree Road at Ridge Road
SW corner eastbound Plum Tree at Cuba Road
SW corner eastbound Plum Tree Road at Ridge Road
SW corner eastbound Rebecca Drive at Sutton Road
NW corner southbound Ridge Road at Lake-Cook Road
NW corner southbound Ridge Road at Merri-Oaks Road
NW corner southbound Ridge Road at Spring Creek Road
SE corner northbound Ridge Road at Merri-Oaks Road
SE corner northbound Ridge Road at Spring Creek Road
SE corner northbound Ridge Road at Plum Tree Road
SE corner northbound Rock Ridge Road at Plum Tree Road
SE corner eastbound Rolling Hills Road at Bateman Road
NE corner westbound Spring Creek Road at Braeburn Road
NE corner westbound Spring Creek Road at Haeger's Bend Road
NE corner westbound Spring Creek Road to Meadow Hill Road
SW corner eastbound Spring Creek Road at Braeburn Road
SW corner eastbound Spring Creek Road at Haeger's Bend Road
SW corner eastbound Spring Creek Road at Meadow Hill Road
SW corner eastbound Spring Creek Road at Ridge Road
NW corner southbound Springwood Lane at Algonquin Road (Route 62)
NW corner southbound Steeplechase (E) at Lake-Cook Road
NW corner southbound Steeplechase (W) at Lake-Cook Road
NW corner southbound Surrey Lane at Plum Tree Road
SW corner eastbound Tamarack Lane at Sutton Road
SE corner northbound Three Lakes Road at Lake-Cook Road
NE corner westbound Tricia Lane at Sutton Road
SE corner northbound Woodcreek Road at Dundee Road (Route 68)
(Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985; amd. Ord. 86-11, 11-24-1986; Ord. 88-13, 8-22-1988; Ord.
88-17, 10-24-1988; Ord. 89-16, 11-20-1989; Ord. 90-1, 1-29-1990; Ord. 99-10,
10-25-1999)
9-2-5-3: ONE-WAY STREETS:
   (A)   Designation, Marking Of One-Way Streets: The Roads and Bridges
Committee of the Village Board of Trustees is authorized, subject to approval
of the Village Board of Trustees by resolution, to designate one-way streets,
and it shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained giving notice
thereof. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
   (B)   Driving On One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands:
      1.   Upon a road designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices.
      2.   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be driven only
to the right of such island. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
9-2-6: VEHICLE LENGTH AND WEIGHT REGULATIONS:
9-2-6-1: EXCEPTIONS TO LENGTH REGULATIONS:
The length regulations adopted in this title by reference to the Illinois
Vehicle Code shall not apply to: agricultural implements; vehicles with loads
of livestock (including horses), hay, straw, corn, grain, fodder, fertilizer or
other similar farm products or farm byproducts used in the direct production of
agriculture; vehicles (including loads) required for emergency repair of public
utility facilities or properties; vehicles (including loads) required for
repair of septic systems or water wells; vehicles (including loads) operated by
home heating supply companies; firefighting equipment; vehicles (including
loads) or equipment used for snow and ice removal under contract with the
Village; vehicles (including loads) used in the transport or disposal of
garbage, refuse or septage; or vehicles (including loads) operating under an
overweight permit as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 91-21, 8-26-1991)
9-2-6-2: AXLE LOADS AND MAXIMUM WEIGHTS:
   (A)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles, unladen or with load, shall
exceed the maximum weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds per axle on the
road surface.
   (B)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles, regardless of the number of
axles, shall exceed a maximum weight of thirty six thousand (36,000) pounds,
whether said vehicle or combination of vehicles is unladen or with load. (Ord.
85-1, 1-28-1985)
   (C)   Said weight limitations shall not apply to: agricultural implements;
vehicles with loads of livestock (including horses), hay, straw, corn, grain,
fodder, fertilizer or other similar farm products or farm byproducts used in
the direct production of agriculture; vehicles (including loads) required for
emergency repair of public utility facilities or properties; vehicles
(including loads) required for repair of septic systems or water wells;
vehicles (including loads) operated by home heating supply companies; moving
vans or trucks (including loads) used for delivering or picking up residential
personal property on streets within the jurisdiction of the Village;
firefighting equipment; vehicles (including loads) or equipment used for snow
and ice removal under contract with the Village; vehicles (including loads)
used in the transport or disposal of garbage, refuse or septage; or vehicles
(including loads) operating under an overweight permit as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 19-04, 2-25-2019)
   (D)   The following roads maintained by, and under the jurisdiction of the
Village are subject to said weight limitations:
Aberdeen Drive (east and west) off Crabapple Drive
Barrington Hills Road from Donlea Road north and west to terminus
Braeburn Road from north Village limits south to Spring Creek Road
Buckley Road from Cuba Road south to Oak Knoll Road
Butternut Road from Donlea Road south to terminus
Caesar Drive from Lake-Cook Road south to terminus
Chapel Road from Haeger's Bend Road east to Church Road
Church Road from Chapel Road north to Algonquin/River Road
Country Oaks Drive from Lake-Cook Road north to terminus
Country Oaks Lane from Country Oaks Drive west to terminus
Crabapple Drive from Donlea Road south to terminus
Creekside Lane from Sutton Road east to terminus
Cross Timber Road from Braeburn Road east to terminus
Cuba Road from Plum Tree Road southeast and south to Merri-Oaks Road and east
to Chicago and Northwestern Railroad
Dana Lane from Caesar Drive west to terminus
Dundee Lane from Dundee Road (Route 68) to Hawthorne Road (Route 59)
Haeger's Bend Road from Lake-Cook Road north to Chapel Road
Haeger's Bend Road from Lake-Cook Road north to Village limits
Hawley Woods Road from Otis Road southwest to Old Dundee Road
Hawthorne Lane from Otis Road southeast to Hawthorne Road (Route 59)
Healy Road from Penny Road south to Village limits
Healy Road from Dundee Road (Route 68) southwest to Penny Road
Helm Road from Algonquin Road (Route 62) west to Village limits
Hills and Dales Road from Brinker Road east and north to Otis Road
Honeycut Road from Hills and Dales Road south to terminus
Lake View Lane from Dundee Road (Route 68) north to terminus
Leeds Drive from Crabapple Drive west to terminus
Longmeadow Court from Longmeadow Drive north to end
Longmeadow Drive from Bateman Road west to Rolling Hills
Meadow Hill Road from Lake-Cook Road north to Spring Creek Road
Merri-Oaks Road from Ridge Road east to Cuba Road
Oak Knoll Road from Ridge Road east to Old Hart Road
Old Dundee Road from Routes 59/68 to Routes 59/68 at Algonquin Road (Route 62)
Old Hart Road from Lake-Cook Road north to terminus
Plum Tree Road from Chicago and Northwestern Railroad west to Village limits
Rebecca Drive from Sutton Road west to terminus
Ridge Road from Lake-Cook Road north to Plum Tree Road
River Road within Village limits
Rock Ridge Road from Plum Tree Road south to end
Rolling Hills Drive from Bateman Road from west to end
Spring Creek Road from Ridge Road west to Village limits
Springwood Lane from Algonquin Road (Route 62) to terminus
Steeplechase Road on circle route from Lake-Cook Road to Lake-Cook Road
Surrey Lane (east and west) from Plum Tree Road north
Tamarack Lane from Sutton Road west to terminus
Three Lakes Road from Lake-Cook Road south to terminus
Tricia Lane from Sutton Road east to terminus
Wagon Wheel Lane between east and west Surrey Lane
Woodcreek Road from Dundee Road (Route 68) south to terminus (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-
1985; amd. Ord. 89-16, 11-20-1989; Ord. 89-17, 12-18-1989; Ord. 99-10, 10-25-
1999)
   (E)   Penalty: Any person violating this Section shall be fined as provided
in Section
9-9-4 of this Title. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-1986)
9-2-6-3: TEMPORARY PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN CLASSES OF VEHICLES:
   (A)   Whenever any highway or road, or parts thereof, under the jurisdiction
of the Village, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic
conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed by the use of trucks or other
commercial vehicles, the operation of said vehicles thereon in excess of twenty
thousand (20,000) pounds, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 87-1, 1-26-1987)
   (B)   Said weight limitations shall not apply to: agricultural implements;
vehicles with loads of livestock (including horses), hay, straw, corn, grain,
fodder, fertilizer or other similar farm products or farm byproducts used in
the direct production of agriculture; vehicles (including loads) required for
emergency repair of public utility facilities or properties; vehicles
(including loads) required for repair of septic systems or water wells;
vehicles (including loads) operated by home heating supply companies;
firefighting equipment; vehicles (including loads) or equipment used for snow
and ice removal under contract with the Village; vehicles (including loads)
used in the transport or disposal of garbage, refuse or septage; vehicles
traveling pursuant to seasonal permits issued during the period of a temporary
weight limit. (Ord. 91-21, 8-26-1991; amd. Ord. 06-07, 3-27-2006)
   (C)   The Chairman of Roads and Bridges Committee or the Chief of Police,
acting upon the advice of the Village Engineer, is hereby authorized to
determine and designate the time and the highways, roads, or parts thereof
which will be so seriously damaged or destroyed, as above provided, and shall
so advise the Board of Trustees of the Village. The Chairman or the Chief, upon
approval of the Board of Trustees by resolution, may prohibit the operation of
trucks or other commercial vehicles over and upon such roads or highways, or
parts thereof, so designated, provided that said prohibition shall not exceed
ninety (90) days in any one calendar year.
   (D)   After enactment of such resolution, the Roads and Bridges Committee
shall cause to be erected and maintained signs designating the provision of the
resolution at each end of that portion of any highway or road, or parts
thereof, affected thereby. The resolution shall not be effective unless and
until such signs are erected and maintained.
   (E)   If the President of the Village (or, in his absence, the President Pro
Tem) shall determine that any roads or highways, or parts thereof, might suffer
serious damage prior to the time in which the Board of Trustees could meet for
the purpose of approving remedial action as provided in subsections (C) and (D)
of this section, then in such emergency the President (or in his absence, the
President Pro Tem) may act alone in prohibiting the operation of trucks or
other commercial vehicles over and upon such roads or highways, or parts
thereof, and may direct the erection of signs at each end of such road or
highway, or parts thereof, affected thereby.
The Board of Trustees, at its next regular meeting called after action taken by
the President or President Pro Tem as provided above, shall either confirm said
action by resolution and extend said prohibition for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days or direct, by resolution, that the signs be removed and
declare that no emergency exists. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
   (F)   Any person violating this section shall be fined as provided in
section
9-9-4 of this title. (Ord. 86-3, 2-24-1986)
9-2-6-4: OVERWEIGHT PERMITS; FEES:
   (A)   Overweight Permits Required: Every vehicle exceeding the weight
limitations in this chapter, except those vehicles expressly exempted, shall
obtain an overweight permit prior to operating on any road under the
maintenance jurisdiction of the Village. No permit shall be issued unless the
vehicle is engaged in an activity specified in subsection (D) of this section.
   (B)   Application For Overweight Permit: Application for an overweight
permit shall be submitted online or by completing the application in the
Building Department.
   (C)   Issuance Of Permit: Upon receipt of a completed application and proof
of payment of the fee, the Police Chief or his designee shall issue an
overweight permit, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   In consideration of seasonal or other time limitations, the Police
Chief shall restrict the number or time of daily trips authorized by each
permit, as is consistent with the public safety.
      2.   In establishing the routes to be traveled, the Police Chief shall
establish the most direct and shortest route consistent with the public safety,
taking into consideration existing traffic, the character of the road or roads,
and the configuration of the terrain.
      3.   All permits shall be nontransferable and shall be valid only for the
applicant or his agent or employee.
      4.   Every permit shall be in writing and shall be open to inspection by
any police officer or agent of the Village.
   (D)   Fees For Overweight Permits: Permit fees shall be determined at the
time an application for a building permit or site development permit is filed,
based on the information provided in the application for building permit or
site development permit, or, if the vehicle is to be engaged in an activity
that does not require such a permit, from the information provided on the
application for an overweight permit. In addition to the fees assessed by the
Village, a convenience fee is assessed for those permit applications made
online. The fees assessed by the Village shall be set and charged as follows:
      1.   Single load, per job description for which the permit is issued, for
limited and defined purposes including, but not limited to, landscaping or
driveway construction, alteration, or repair: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Activity involving construction, alteration, repair or addition to
buildings or structures: Fifty dollars ($50.00) plus twenty cents ($0.20) per
square foot (permits are only valid for the job description for which the
permit is issued).
      3.   For any vehicle engaged in an activity which is not specified in
subsections (D)1 and (D)2 of this section, but which requires a building permit
or site development permit, such as the installation of subdivision
improvements, or for contractors acting on Village awarded contracts, or on its
own initiative, the Roads and Bridges Committee of the Board of Trustees shall
ascertain the scope of the work to be performed, specify the conditions under
which the work will be performed, and set the requisite fee based on:
         a.   The number of trips which the activity will require, and
         b.   The potential impact on the road which will be utilized.
      4.   Any vehicle requiring a permit during the period of a temporary
weight limit (see section
9-2-6-3 of this section
9-2-6) shall pay to the Village a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per load
or the total cost of the engineering review, whichever is greater regardless if
it obtained a permit prior to the imposition of the temporary limit.
      5.   There shall be no fee required in order to secure a permit when a
private road as designated within the Village's road jurisdiction list is being
paved by a private homeowners association, road associations, or other private
group or entity.
   (E)   When Required: When an overweight permit is required, no building
permit or site development permit shall be issued until the overweight permit
fee is paid and the overweight permit is issued by the Police Chief.
   (F)   Payment Of Fees: Payment of fees authorized by this chapter shall be
made to the Village at the time the application for an overweight permit is
submitted. All fees received under the terms of this section shall be deposited
in the General Fund and are nonrefundable. (Ord. 19-11, 5-21-2019; amd. Ord.
20-06, 3-24-2020)
9-2-7: PROHIBITION OF THROUGH TRAFFIC ON VILLAGE HIGHWAYS:
   (A)   No through truck or other commercial vehicle, with a gross weight in
excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, singularly or in combination,
whether loaded or unloaded, shall utilize any highway or road, or part thereof,
under the maintenance jurisdiction of the Village.
   (B)   Every truck or commercial vehicle utilizing a road or highway under
the maintenance jurisdiction of the Village from an origin or to a destination
within the Village shall otherwise conform to the requirements of section
9-2-6 of this chapter.
   (C)   Upon enactment of this section, the Roads and Bridges Committee, with
the approval of the Board of Trustees by resolution, shall cause to be erected
and maintained signs designating the prohibition of through trucks or other
commercial vehicles at each end of that portion of any highway or road, or
parts thereof, affected thereby. This provision shall not be effective unless
and until such signs are erected and maintained. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985)
CHAPTER 3
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
9-3-1: Applicability
9-3-2: Authority to Regulate, Prohibit Stopping, Standing and Parking
9-3-3: Authority to Designate Fire Lanes
9-3-1: APPLICABILITY:
In addition to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference
pursuant to Section
9-1-1, the following regulations shall apply. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-85)
9-3-2: AUTHORITY TO REGULATE, PROHIBIT STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING:
   (A)   Authority to Regulate Stopping, Standing and Parking: The Roads and
Bridges Committee of the Village Board is authorized, subject to approval by
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees, to determine and designate those
streets or parts of streets upon which stopping, standing or parking shall be
prohibited within certain hours or permitted for a limited time, and it shall
cause to be erected and maintained appropriate signs or curb markings giving
notice thereof.
   (B)   Authority to Prohibit Parking: The Roads and Bridges Committee of the
Village Board is authorized, subject to approval by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, to determine and designate those streets or parts of streets upon
which parking shall be prohibited or upon which parking shall be prohibited on
one side only, and it shall cause to be placed appropriate signs or curb
markings giving notice thereof. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-85)
9-3-3: AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE FIRE LANES:
The Roads and Bridges Committee of the Village Board of Trustees, with the
approval of the Village Board by resolution, may designate fire lanes and shall
cause appropriate signs designating such fire lanes to be erected and
maintained. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-85)
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-4-1: Applicability
9-4-2: Impounded Vehicles; Procedures
9-4-3: Vehicles Impounded In Connection With Certain Illegal Activities; Fees;
Procedures
9-4-1: APPLICABILITY:
In addition to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference
pursuant to Section
9-1-1, the following regulations shall apply. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-85)
9-4-2: IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; PROCEDURES:
Whenever officers of the Police Department of the Village are authorized to
remove a vehicle from any public way, the following procedures shall apply:
   (A)   Supervision of Removal; Place of Impounding: It shall be the duty of
the Chief of Police to cause every vehicle removed from any public way to be so
removed and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the Police
Department to an authorized garage.
   (B)   Redemption of Impounded Vehicle: Before the owner or person entitled
to possession of any legally impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the
same from the custody of the Chief of Police, he shall furnish evidence of his
identity and ownership of the vehicle and right of possession thereto, shall
sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay a fee to cover the cost of towing
or removal to an authorized garage, and in addition thereto, the cost of
storage at a rate for each day or fraction of a day said vehicle is stored
therein.
   (C)   Records of Vehicle Impounding: It shall be the duty of the Chief of
Police to safely keep any vehicle so impounded until such vehicle shall have
been repossessed by the owner or person legally entitled to possession thereof
or otherwise disposed of as hereinafter provided. The Chief of Police shall
cause to be kept an accurate record of the description of such vehicle,
including the name of the officer from whom such vehicle was received, the
person or entity employed to tow or deliver the same to said authorized garage,
the date and time when received, the place where found, seized or taken
possession of, the make and color of car, style or body, kind of power, motor
number, serial number, number of cylinders, year built, State license number,
if any, wheel tax license number, if any, equipment, vehicle contents, and
general description of condition, the name and address of the person redeeming
said vehicle, the date of redemption, and the manner and date of disposal of
said vehicle in case the same shall not be redeemed, together with the towing
and storage charges. Said record shall be in form prescribed by the Chief of
Police. It shall also be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep reports of all
such vehicles delivered to him which reports shall be kept in the office of
said Chief available for the inspection of any interested party at all
reasonable hours of the day.
   (D)   Notice of Impoundment:
      1.   Notice to Owner: Whenever the Police Department has impounded any
vehicle as aforesaid, it shall ascertain from the registration records of the
State or the Village the name and address of the owner thereof and shall
immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the
fact of such removal and impounding and the reason therefor and of the place to
which such vehicle has been removed.
      2.   Notice to Secretary of State: Whenever the Police Department has
impounded any vehicle as aforesaid and does not know and is not able to
ascertain the name of the owner, or for any reason is unable to give the notice
to the owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not
returned to the owner within a period of ten (10) days, then and in that event
said Police Department shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written
report of such removal and impounding by mail to the Illinois Secretary of
State. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the
date, time, and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and the
address of the vehicle pound or authorized garage where the vehicle is stored.
   (E)   Disposition of Unclaimed Impounded Vehicle: Whenever any impounded
vehicle shall remain unclaimed by the owner or other person legally entitled to
possession thereof for a period of thirty (30) days from the day such vehicle
was impounded, and after notice shall have been given, it shall be the duty of
the Police Department to sell such vehicle at public auction to the highest
bidder for cash, the time and place of such sale to be published at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village, not less than ten (10)
nor more than fifteen (15) days from expiration of said thirty (30) days, and
he shall also cause a notice of such sale to be mailed to the Illinois
Secretary of State not less than ten (10) nor more than fifteen (15) days from
the expiration of said thirty (30) days. Said notice shall contain a full
description of the vehicle to be sold and the time and place of sale; provided
that any such vehicle not sold at the first sale may be offered for sale and
sold at any subsequent sale without further notice or publication. The proceeds
of such sale after paying all liens and deducting all reasonable charges and
expenses incurred in receiving, towing, keeping, preparing and giving notices,
advertising for sale or selling or otherwise disposing of such vehicle shall be
received and deposited in the Village's general fund. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-85)
9-4-3: VEHICLES IMPOUNDED IN CONNECTION WITH CERTAIN ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES; FEES;
PROCEDURES:
   (A)   A motor vehicle that is used in connection with certain illegal
activities as set forth in subsection (B) may be subject to seizure and
impoundment by the Village, and the owner of record of said vehicle shall be
liable to the Village for an administrative fee in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) in addition to any towing and storage charges. The
administrative fee shall be waived by the Village upon verifiable proof that
the vehicle was stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded. "Stolen" means
the taking of the owner's vehicle without permission (express or implied) or
legal right and without intending to return the vehicle to the owner.
   (B)   Illegal activities subject to administrative fee for impoundment:
      (1)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to Section 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (2)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
Section 11-501 of this Code; or
      (3)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act; or
      (4)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act; or
      (5)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Section 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1
of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (6)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to Section 6-303 of this Code;
except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the
suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to
comply with emission testing; or
      (7)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing,
or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as
defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act;
or
      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's
license, in violation of Section 6-101 of this Code, if the period of
expiration is greater than one year; or
      (9)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver's license or permit, in violation of Section 6-101 of this Code, or
operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or
permit due to a person's age; or
      (10)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated Section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of this Code;
or
      (11)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (12)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of
the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (13)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of Section 11-503
of this Code:
         (a)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
         (b)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
   (C)   The following shall apply to any fees imposed for administrative and
processing costs pursuant to subsection (B):
      (1)   All administrative fees and towing and storage charges shall be
imposed on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of that
owner.
      (2)   The fees and charges shall be in addition to (i) any other
penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations;
and (ii) any towing or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company.
      (3)   All administrative fees shall be collected by and paid to the
Village imposing the fees.
      (4)   All towing or storage charges shall be collected by and paid to the
person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
   (D)   Impoundment notice and hearing procedures:
      (1)   Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing of the
vehicle to a facility authorized by the Village.
      (2)   At the time the vehicle is towed, the Village shall notify or make
a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself
or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to
be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of
the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an administrative
hearing.
      (3)   The Village shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will
remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing, unless
the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder posts with the county or
municipality a bond equal to the administrative fee set forth in subsection (A)
and pays for all towing and storage charges.
      (4)   The registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of
record shall be provided with a notice of hearing. The notice shall:
         (a)   Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record
either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party's
address as registered with the Secretary of State;
         (b)   Be served upon interested parties within 10 days after a vehicle
is impounded by the Village; and
         (c)   Contain the date, time, and location of the administrative
hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than 45
days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
      (5)   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the
vehicle impoundment.
      (6)   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle shall be forfeited to the Village.
      (7)   All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be
subject to review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law.
      (8)   Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for
the vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid.
      (9)   If the administrative hearing officer finds that the Village
exceeded its authority to impound the vehicle under the Illinois Vehicle Code,
the Village shall be liable to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle
for the cost of storage fees and reasonable attorney's fees.
      (10)   Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage
facility within 35 days after the administrative hearing officer issues a
written decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of Article II of Chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
      (11)   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine,
penalty, or administrative fee imposed under this section which remains unpaid
in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial
review under the Administrative Review Law may be enforced in the same manner
as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 21-14, 9-27-
2021)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
(Reserved)
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
(Ord. 15-21A, 11-19-2015)
CHAPTER 7
COMPETITIVE RACES OR EVENTS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Short Title
9-7-2: Definitions
9-7-3: License Required
9-7-4: Application For License
9-7-5: Standards For Issuance
9-7-6: Notice Of Rejection
9-7-7: Appeal Procedure
9-7-8: Contents Of License
9-7-9: Duties Of Licensee
9-7-10: Public Conduct During Organized Race, Training Or Event
9-7-11: Revocation Of License
9-7-12: Penalties And Fines
9-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the Barrington Hills
Organized Race, Training or Event License Ordinance. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be construed with the definitions set forth as follows:
ORGANIZED RACE, TRAINING OR EVENT: Any organized footrace, marathon race, walk-
a-thon, bike-a-thon, training, or other similar activity with 10 or more
persons in or upon any road within the Village of Barrington Hills (“Village”)
regardless of a competitive nature. Roadside cleanups and local school district
events are not included.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, city or
organization of any kind. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, shall engage in, participate, aid, form or start any organized race,
training or event, unless a license for such race, training or event has been
obtained from the Village. A Village of Barrington Hills sponsored race,
training or event does not require a license. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A person seeking issuance of an organized race, training or event license shall
file an application with the Village Clerk on forms provided by such officer.
   (A)   Filing Period: Any person desiring to conduct an organized race,
training or event shall file an application for license with the Village Clerk
not less than sixty (60) days before the proposed date of such race, training
or event. A maximum of two (2) licenses will be issued for dates January-June
on a first come basis. Applications will be accepted no earlier than September
1 of the preceding year. A maximum of two (2) licenses will be issued for dates
July-December on a first come basis. Applications will be accepted no earlier
than March 1 of the same year.
   (B)   Contents: The application for an organized race, training or event
license shall set forth the following information:
      1.   The name, address, email and phone number of person seeking to
conduct such race, training or event.
      2.   If the race, training or event is proposed to be conducted for, on
behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and phone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible persons
of such organization.
      3.   The name, address, email and 24/7 phone number of the person who
will be the race, training or event chairperson and who will be responsible for
its conduct.
      4.   The date when the race, training or event is proposed to be
conducted.
      5.   The route that will be traveled. The Village cannot authorize usage
of non-Village maintained roads. Proof of permission by the appropriate
authority to be submitted as part of the application.
      6.   Traffic plan for route. Applicant will be required to contract the
Barrington Hills Police Department preferably, or other State or County law
enforcement entity to provide traffic control for the organized race, training
or event. Applicant must obtain approval of the proposed route and provide
evidence that the proper authority has been secured for services on the
proposed date before the license will be issued.
      7.   The number of people expected to participate.
      8.   The hours (including setup and cleanup) when such a race, training
or event shall start and finish within the Village limits, events are limited
to two (2) hours of roadway interruption.
      9.   The organized race, training or event organizers shall provide to
the Village evidence of liability insurance in the amount of five million
dollars ($5,000,000.00) or greater naming the Village as an additional insured.
      10.   A nonrefundable application fee of two hundred ($200.00) dollars.
   (C)   Applications received after approval limit reached: The Village Clerk
shall hold all applications received after the maximum number of licenses have
been issued in case of a cancellation up until forty-five (45) days before the
date such race, training or event is proposed to be conducted. If an
application is accepted due to another event’s cancellation, the application
fee will be due within five (5) days of emailed notice to the applicant. (Ord.
24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-5: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
Within ten (10) business days of receiving an application or within such
extended period as may be necessary, the Chief of Police or designee shall
advise the Village Clerk to issue a license if a determination is made that:
   (A)   The conduct of the race, training or event will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other concurrent traffic to its
route.
   (B)   The conduct of the race, training or event will not require the
diversion of on-duty police officers of the Village to properly prevent normal
police protection to the Village.
   (C)   The conduct of such race, training or event will not interfere with
the movement of emergency vehicles.
   (D)   The conduct of such race, training or event is not reasonably likely
to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create
a disturbance.
   (E)   The race, training or event is scheduled to move from its point of
entry and exit of the Village expeditiously and without unreasonable delays.
   (F)   The conduct of the race, training or event will not obstruct access to
any points of ingress/egress along the proposed route.
   (G)   The maximum number of licenses has not already been issued.
   (H)   Any other factors or conditions determined to be in the best interests
of the health and safety of Village citizens as determined by the Chief of
Police or designee. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-6: NOTICE OF REJECTION:
The Chief of Police or designee shall notify the Village Clerk to issue the
applicant a notice of rejection, which shall be sent via email within ten (10)
days of said rejection stating the reasons for the denial of the license. (Ord.
24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-7: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any person shall have the right to appeal the denial of a race, training or
event license to the Board of Trustees. The appeal, along with payment of a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) filing fee, must be submitted to the Village Clerk
within fifteen (15) days after the applicant has received the notice of
rejection. The Board of Trustees shall act upon the appeal during its next
Board meeting after receipt of the appeal. The filing fee will only be returned
to the applicant if the Board determines that the application was wrongly
rejected. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-8: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Each organized race, training or event license shall state the following
information:
   (A)   Date of race, training or event.
   (B)   Person authorized to conduct the event.
   (C)   Starting time in and out of the Village.
   (D)   Roads to be traversed that may be occupied by the race, training or
event.
   (E)   Liability insurance provider.
   (F)   Emergency contact information for the Village. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-9: DUTIES OF LICENSEE:
A licensee hereunder shall comply with all license directions and conditions
and, with all applicable laws and ordinances, unless waived by the Chief of
Police or Board of Trustees for good cause shown.
The race, training or event chairperson or other person heading or leading such
activity shall be held responsible to place and retrieve all direction signs
and collect debris along route caused by said event within one (1) hour of
organized race, training or event.
Each participant in a race, training or event shall be assigned by the licensee
a number placard or other device, to be displayed by the participant at all
times during the race, training or event identifying them as a participant for
this race, training or event. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-10: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING ORGANIZED RACE, TRAINING OR EVENT:
   (A)   Interference: No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede,
or interfere with any race, training or event or with any person participating
in the race, training or event.
   (B)   Driving Through Race, Training or Event: No driver of a vehicle shall
unreasonably interfere with any licensed organized race, training or event.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The Chief of Police or designee shall have the authority to revoke an organized
race, training or event license at any time including during the race, training
or event upon violation of either the standards for issuance or license
conditions as set forth in these sections. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
9-7-12: PENALTIES AND FINES:
It is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person, as defined in this
ordinance to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The
violation for failure to comply may be punishable as set forth in Title 1,
Chapter 4, Section 1-4-1. (Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
CHAPTER 8
BICYCLES
SECTION:
9-8-1: Applicability
9-8-2: Parental Responsibility
9-8-3: Mandate Of Single File Bicycle Riding
9-8-4: Negligent Operation Of Bicycles
9-8-1: APPLICABILITY:
In addition to the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code adopted by reference
pursuant to section
9-1-1 of this title, the following regulations shall apply. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-
1985; amd. Ord. 89-10, 9-25-1989)
9-8-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this title applicable to bicycles. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-1985; amd. Ord. 89-10, 9-
25-1989)
9-8-3: MANDATE OF SINGLE FILE BICYCLE RIDING:
   (A)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway within the village shall only
ride single file. Persons riding bicycles on a roadway are hereby prohibited
from riding side by side.
   (B)   Any violation of this section, by any person, shall constitute a minor
violation under section
9-9-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01, 1-26-2009)
9-8-4: NEGLIGENT OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon a
roadway within the village in a manner which is negligent or creates a risk of
bodily injury or damage or loss of property.
   (B)   Any violation of this section, by any person, shall constitute a minor
violation under section
9-9-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-02, 1-26-2009)
CHAPTER 9
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
9-9-1: Applicability
9-9-2: Penalty
9-9-3: Minor Violations
9-9-4: Penalty For Violation Of Weight Regulations
9-9-5: Penalty For Violation Of Prohibition Of Through Traffic
9-9-1: APPLICABILITY:
In addition to the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code adopted by reference
pursuant to section
9-1-1 of this title, the following regulations shall apply. (Ord. 85-1, 1-28-
1985)
9-9-2: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this title, any person violating
any provision of this title shall be subject to the fines and penalties as
provided in the Illinois vehicle code and the Illinois criminal code of 1990,
as now in effect and as hereinafter amended. (Ord. 91-17, 6-24-1991)
9-9-3: MINOR VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Any person subject to a code or ordinance violation citation, who is
accused of violating an offense listed in subsection (C) or (D) of this
section, may settle and compromise claims against him by paying to the village,
within ten (10) days of the time such alleged offense was committed, the sum of
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (B)   Any violations of the following sections of the code shall be subject
to the procedures described herein:
   Section
3-3-2, "Permit Requirement", of this code.
   Section
9-1-8, "Unauthorized Use Of Public Way For Sale Of Vehicle", of this title.
   Section
9-8-3, "Mandate Of Single File Bicycle Riding", of this title.
   Section
9-8-4, "Negligent Operation Of Bicycles", of this title.
   (C)   Any violation of the following 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, known
as the Illinois vehicle code already adopted, in its entirety, by section
9-1-1 of this title, shall be subject to the procedures described herein:
Section Subject
Section      Subject
5/3-112      Failure to transfer title.
5/3-401      No valid registration.
5/3-413(a)   No front registration plate.
5/3-413(b)   Improper display of registration plates.
5/3-413(f)   Operation of vehicle with expired registration plates or sticker.
5/3-416      Failure to notify the secretary of state of a change of address/
             name (registration).
5/3-701      No valid registration.
5/5-202(e)   Failure to display "tow truck" plate (towed vehicle).
5/6-112      Failure to carry/exhibit driver's license.
5/6-116      Failure to notify the secretary of state of name/address (driver's
             license).
5/11-1301    Stopping, standing or parking outside of business or residence
             district.
5/11-1301.1  Handicapped person parking privileges exemptions.
5/11-1301.2  Special decals for handicapped parking.
5/11-1301.3  Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for handicapped
             persons.
5/11-1303    Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places.
5/11-1304    Additional parking regulations.
5/11-1401    Unattended motor vehicle left illegally.
5/11-1403(c) Illegal handlebars on a motorcycle.
5/11-1404    Riding a motorcycle without special equipment.
5/11-1405    No passenger footrests on a motorcycle.
5/11-1406    Driver's view or driving mechanism obstructed.
5/11-1407    Opening and closing vehicle doors.
5/11-1410    Coasting on downgrade.
5/11-1411    Following fire apparatus.
5/11-1413    Depositing injurious material on the roadway.
5/11-1419.01 Motor fuel tax I.D. card.
5/11-1501    Application of rules.
5/11-1502    Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.
5/11-1503    Riding on bicycles.
5/11-1504    Clinging to vehicle.
5/11-1505    Position of bicycles and motorized pedal cycles on roadways -
             riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
5/11-1505.1  Riding bicycles or motorized pedal cycles on roadways.
5/11-1506    Carrying articles.
5/11-1507    Lamps and other equipment on bicycles.
5/11-1508    Bicycle identifying number.
5/11-1509    Inspecting bicycles.
5/11-1510    Left turns.
5/11-1511    Turn and stop signals.
5/11-1512    Bicycles on sidewalks.
5/11-1513    Bicycle parking.
5/11-1514    Bicycle racing.
5/12-101     Driving vehicle which is in unsafe condition or improperly
             equipped.
5/12-201(a)  Driving without a lighted headlamp (motorcycle).
5/12-201(b)  Driving without lights when required, no taillight or only one
             taillight.
5/12-201(c)  No rear registration plate light.
5/12-202     Insufficient clearance, identification, or side marker lights.
5/12-204     Lamp or flag on projecting load.
5/12-205     Failure to display the safety lights required.
5/12-210     Failure to dim headlights.
5/12-211     Improper lighting. Only one headlight.
5/12-401     Use of illegal tires (studded).
5/12-405(c)  Use of unsafe tire (bald).
5/12-502     Mirrors.
5/12-503(a)  Obstructed windshield or front side windows.
5/12-503(c)  Obstructed rear window.
5/12-503(e)  Defective windshield, side, and/or rear window.
5/12-601     Defective horn.
5/12-602     Defective muffler - loud or no muffler.
5/12-603     No seat belts.
             Failure to wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat/safety belt
5/12-603.1   (driver and front seat passenger). Specifically excludes
             violations of the child restraint act.
5/12-604.1   Television in a motor vehicle.
5/12-606(a)  No sign or name attached to each side of a tow truck.
5/12-606(b)  Required equipment. Broom, shovel, trash can, fire extinguisher.
5/12-606(c)  Failure to remove debris, or spread oil absorbing material on the
             roadway.
5/12-607.1   Unlawful frame or floor height.
5/12-608(a)  No bumper, or unlawful bumper height.
5/12-610     Wearing a stereo headset while driving.
5/12-702     Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning devices.
5/12-710     Splash guards.
5/13-111     No valid safety test.
5/15-102     Width of vehicles.
5/15-103     Height of vehicles.
5/15-104     Repealed.
5/15-105     Improper projecting load. First division vehicle.
5/15-106     Loose protruding member - all vehicles.
5/15-107     Length of vehicles.
5/15-109.1   Covers or tarpaulins required for certain loads.
5/15-110(b)  Towed vehicles - safety chains.
 
(Ord. 92-12, 7-27-1992; amd. Ord. 14-05, 3-24-2014; Ord. 21-03, 3-29-2021)
9-9-4: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF WEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of sections
9-2-6-2, "Axle Loads And Maximum Weights", and 9-2-6-3, "Temporary Prohibition
Of Certain Classes Of Vehicles", of this title, including, but not limited to,
a maximum axle or gross limit specified on a regulatory sign posted in
accordance with section 9-2-6-3 of this title, shall be fined according to the
Village Fee and Penalty Schedule on file with the Village Clerk.
   (B)   In addition any person, firm or corporation convicted of four (4) or
more violations of section 9-2-6-2 or 9-2-6-3 of this title within any twelve
(12) month period shall be fined an additional amount set forth in the Village
Fee and Penalty Schedule, on file with the Village Clerk, for the fourth and
each subsequent conviction within the twelve (12) month period. Provided,
however, that with regard to a firm or corporation, a fourth or subsequent
conviction shall mean a fourth or subsequent conviction attributable to any one
employee-driver. (Ord. 25-04, 2-24-2025)
9-9-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF PROHIBITION OF THROUGH TRAFFIC:
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of section
9-2-7, "Prohibition Of Through Traffic On Village Highways", of this title,
including, but not limited to, a maximum axle or gross limit specified on the
regulatory sign posted in accordance with section
9-2-7 of this title, shall be fined according to the Village Fee and Penalty
Schedule on file with the Village Clerk.
   (B)   In addition, any person, firm or corporation convicted of four (4) or
more violations of section
9-2-7 of this title within any twelve (12) month period shall be fined an
additional amount set forth in the Village Fee and Penalty Schedule, on file
with the Village Clerk, for the fourth and each subsequent conviction within
the twelve (12) month period. Provided, however, that with regard to a firm or
corporation, a fourth or subsequent conviction shall mean a fourth or
subsequent conviction attributable to any one employee-driver. (Ord. 25-04, 2-
24-2025)
TITLE 10
ROADS AND BRIDGES
CHAPTER 1
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Driveways, Definitions And Purpose
10-1-2: Permit Required
10-1-2-1: Permit General Conditions
10-1-2-2: Obtaining Permits, Fees, Penalty
10-1-3: Design Criteria
10-1-4: Design Standards, Residential
10-1-5: Design Standards, Institutional And Commercial
10-1-6: Design Standards, Grades
10-1-7: Design Standards, Spacing
10-1-1: DRIVEWAYS, DEFINITIONS AND PURPOSE:
Driveways are privately owned roads which connect residences, buildings,
parking lots and other areas with public roads and highways. Although driveways
are essential to provide access to these facilities,, they can produce
hazardous roadway conditions. Engineering studies show that as residential and
commercial development expands along public roadways, accident rates increase.
The purpose is to review the design and frequency of driveways in order to
minimize the incidence of accidents and thereby maintain a reasonable and safe
traffic flow along the Village roadways. (Ord. 96-4, 4-22-1996)
10-1-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A permit shall be required in the following circumstances:
   (A)   New or relocated residential driveways.
   (B)   Culvert Installation along Village maintained roads. Both new and
replacements.
   (C)   Commercial and institutional driveways.
   (D)   The construction of any access driveway or the revision of any
existing driveway within the right of way along a Village roadway, if such
driveway can not meet the general design criteria described herein.
   (E)   Temporary Driveways. Temporary driveways will only be issued if deemed
necessary by the Village Engineer. Temporary driveways may be approved as part
of a building permit, a separate temporary driveway permit would not be
required. (Ord. 96-4, 4-22-1996; amd. Ord. 21-20, 12-16-2021)
10-1-2-1: PERMIT GENERAL CONDITIONS:
The permit will be issued by the Village Engineer. All construction work
performed is subject to any imposed conditions of the permit with accompanying
approved plans, drawings, sketches or other attachments. A guide called "Policy
on Permits for Access Driveways to State Highways" has been published by the
Illinois Department of Transportation. The design standards from this
publication are discussed in the following sections of this Chapter. The
provisions of this publication should be used along with other engineering
considerations to guide the owners (applicants) and the Village in its review
of permit applications. (Ord. 96-4, 4-22-1996)
10-1-2-2: OBTAINING PERMITS, FEES, PENALTY:
   (A)   Each application for permit required under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be made to the Village Engineer through the Building Department.
A sketch or plan of the proposed driveway(s) shall be submitted showing the
location of the driveway and adjacent uses including other driveways within
five hundred feet (500').
   (B)   Upon receipt of the plan, the Village Engineer will review the
proposal and either issue a permit or explain reasons for denial of a permit.
   (C)   A fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be required
upon submission of the application for permit.
   (D)   If a property owner does not first obtain a driveway permit under the
provisions of this Chapter, as specified, he shall be denied use of the
illegally installed access and such access may be closed by the Village. (Ord.
96-4, 4-22-1996; amd. Ord. 21-20, 12-16-2021)
10-1-3: DESIGN CRITERIA:
Driveways accessing major arterials require more stringent requirements than
those accessing collector or local roads. Standards for all driveways, however,
should minimize potential accidents and conflicts between through vehicles and
those entering and leaving the driveway. The objectives to be achieved through
the use of proper driveway spacing criteria include, but are not limited to:
   (A)   Minimize the speed differential between through vehicles and those
using the driveway.
   (B)   Eliminate encroachment of turning vehicles on adjacent lanes.
   (C)   Prohibit motorists from using driveways as a cut through to avoid
roadway construction.
   (D)   Provide sufficient space between driveways to reduce interference from
traffic using adjacent driveways.
   (E)   Discourage motorists from parking on roads or backing out onto the
highway or road.
   (F)   Preserve the original intent of the roadway, pedestrian walkway and
drainage facilities.
   (G)   Provide adequate sight distance of oncoming traffic for motorists
exiting the driveway. (Ord. 96-4, 4-22-1996)
10-1-4: DESIGN STANDARDS, RESIDENTIAL:
The following minimum design standards shall be required:
   (A)   Width Of Drive: All permitted residential, noncommercial or
noninstitutional driveways should have a width between ten feet (10') and
twenty-four feet (24') with appropriate flares at the curb or pavement edge.
   (B)   Flare Radii: The recommended radii for residential driveways is five
feet (5') at minimum and fifteen feet (15') maximum.
   (C)   Angle Of Driveway: The driveway centerline should generally be at a
right angle (90°) to the pavement edge and follow this angle from the roadway
to the right of way line, or to a minimum distance of forty feet (40') from the
edge of the pavement.
   (D)   Drainage: Each driveway approach shall be installed to such a slope or
height and such slope or height shall be thereafter maintained, so as not to
interfere with the drainage from the crown of the public road or the shoulder
of the roadbed toward the nearest downstream ditch or storm drain opening, as
may be necessary to accommodate the flow of surface water now existing along
such road at its present grade. Each driveway so designed shall include the
prevention of any erosion(s) or transfer of sediment or material from the
owner's property onto the village roadway(s). (Ord. 04-16, 12-20-2004; amd.
Ord. 96-4, 4-22-1996; Ord. 21-20, 12-16-2021)
10-1-5: DESIGN STANDARDS, INSTITUTIONAL AND COMMERCIAL:
The following minimum design standards shall be required:
   (A)   Width Of Driveway: All commercial and institutional driveways are
limited to a maximum width of thirty-five feet (35') measured at right angles
(90°) to the centerline of the driveway, exclusive of flares. The maximum
opening along the pavement should be no more than forty feet (40'), measured
six feet (6') back from the pavement edge.
   (B)   Flare Radii: The radii should be between ten feet (10') and twenty
five feet (25').
   (C)   Angle Of Driveway: Generally, the driveway should be at a right angle
(90°) to the roadway. The angle can be reduced to sixty degrees (60°) for two-
way driveways or forty five degrees (45°) for multiple (one-way) entrances.
(Ord. 96-4, 4-22-1996; amd. Ord. 21-20, 12-16-2021)
10-1-6: DESIGN STANDARDS, GRADES:
Driveways should have a grade that slopes away from the roadway surface at a
rate equal to the slope of the shoulder but not less than three-sixteenths inch
(3/16") nor greater than one inch (1") per foot. The slope should continue for
a distance equal to the shoulder width. Beyond the shoulder the driveway grade
should not exceed ten percent (10%). (Ord. 96-4, 4-22-1996)
10-1-7: DESIGN STANDARDS, SPACING:
Unless conditions indicate otherwise, only one driveway will be permitted for
each residential, commercial, or institutional property. Pursuant to the design
criteria of this chapter, commercial property may be allowed a maximum of two
(2) driveways. A minimum distance of four hundred forty feet (440'), and
preferably six hundred sixty feet (660'), shall be required between the
centerlines of commercial entrances and similar developments that generate high
traffic volumes. However, service driveways into these centers, which are not
used by the general public, may be closer than four hundred forty feet (440')
as long as they do not encroach on turning lanes. The minimum distance of four
hundred forty feet (440') is also desirable between major commercial entrances
and the nearest public roadway. For residential driveways requiring a permit,
the minimum distance between the driveways and the nearest public roadway
should be fifty feet (50').
If two (2) or more property owners have a legal agreement describing their
joint right to property access, they may be allowed access from the same
location as long as all other provisions of this title are followed. (Ord. 96-
4, 4-22-1996)
