VILLAGE CODE
of
BERKELEY, ILLINOIS
2016
Code current through:
Ord. 25-52, passed 9-16-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of Berkeley, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 25-52, passed 9-16-2025. Ordinances of
the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
BERKELEY VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Contents Of Code; Authority
1-1-3: Acceptance
1-1-4: Amendments
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
   A.   Upon the adoption by the village board of trustees, this code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of
Berkeley. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the BERKELEY
VILLAGE CODE and is hereby published by authority of the village board of
trustees and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation
as provided in section
1-1-4 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2016 Code)
   B.   Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Berkeley village code
or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the village, the reference
shall include all subsequent amendments, corrections and additions. (1976 Code
§ 1.01.050; amd. 2016 Code)
1-1-2: CONTENTS OF CODE; AUTHORITY:
The ordinances contained in the titles, chapters and sections of this code
constitute the Berkeley village code and are adopted pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1-1 et seq., and the village's home rule powers as
granted in article VII, section 6 of the Illinois constitution of 1970. (2016
Code)
1-1-3: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2016 Code)
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be promptly forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. (2016 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any
way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the meaning may
be changed or omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and
shall be returned to the office of the village clerk when requested by the
village clerk. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repealed And Unaffected Ordinances
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Constitutionality And Legal Validity
1-2-4: Reference To Specific Ordinances
1-2-1: REPEALED AND UNAFFECTED ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealed Ordinances: This code, from and after its effective date,
shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the
subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the
effective date of this code.
   B.   Unaffected Ordinances: All ordinances of a temporary or special nature
and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall
remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication. (2016 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or
amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the village
shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which
violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be
construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due
and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the
provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license,
fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof
required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance. All rights
and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and
effect. (1976 Code § 1.01.080)
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2016 Code)
1-2-3: CONSTITUTIONALITY AND LEGAL VALIDITY:
If any part or parts of this code or any ordinances heretofore or hereafter
adopted by the village board of trustees shall be held to be unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect
the validity of the remaining parts of this code or of any such ordinances. The
village board of trustees hereby declares that it would have passed the
remaining parts of this code and all ordinances, unless specifically provided
otherwise in the ordinance, if it had known that such part or parts thereof
would be declared unconstitutional or invalid. (2016 Code)
1-2-4: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are
specifically designated by number or otherwise, and which are included within
the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this code. (1976 Code § 1.01.070)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the village president and board of trustees may
be fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of the department or some other village officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   D.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   E.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   F.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   G.   Or; And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or" if the
sense requires it.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the village of Berkeley".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the
village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to village ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2016 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES; VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES; VILLAGE BOARD: Unless otherwise
indicated, the president and trustees of the village of Berkeley.
CODE: Unless otherwise stated, the Berkeley village code.
COUNTY: The county of Cook, state of Illinois.
IN THE VILLAGE OR WITHIN THE VILLAGE: All territory over which the village now
has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for any lawful purpose.
MEETING: Any gathering, whether in person or by video or audio conference,
telephone calls, electronic means (such as, without limitation, electronic
mail, electronic chat and instant messaging), or other means of contemporary
interactive communication, of a majority of a quorum of the members of a public
body held for the purpose of discussing public business or such other
definition as shall be contained within the state statutes. This definition
shall apply to any previous or existing ordinance, resolution, or policy of the
village.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OATH; SWORN: The word "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation; the
word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or
any city, or state, or any subdivision thereof and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
TRUSTEES: Unless otherwise provided, the six (6) elected trustees of the
village of Berkeley.
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley, county of Cook, state of Illinois.
YEAR: A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. (1976 Code § 1.04.010; amd.
Ord. 06-41, 12-19-2006, eff. 1-1-2007; 2016 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Settlement Of Penalties
1-4-3: Application Of Provisions
1-4-4: Nonliability Of Officers And Employees
1-4-5: Collection Fees For Debts Owed The Village
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village any act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful, or whenever in such Code or ordinance
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty and/or no specific minimum penalty is
provided, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day on which a violation occurs or
continues. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, any court of
competent jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter an order of supervision or
conditional discharge as provided by the Illinois Unified Code of Corrections,
730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1 et seq. (Ord. 13-7, 2-19-2013)
1-4-2: SETTLEMENT OF PENALTIES:
   A.   Procedure:
      1.   Any person accused of a violation of any section of this Code as
hereinafter listed may settle and compromise the claim by paying to the Village
the sums as hereinafter listed within the number of days from the time such
alleged violation was committed, or by paying to the Village the sums as
hereinafter listed subsequent to said periods and prior to the Village filing
with the Circuit Court Clerk a notice to appear or complaint for said violation
or the administrative adjudication hearing. A day shall be a day that the
Village Hall is open for public business.
      2.   The ticket issued under this section shall be as a courtesy in lieu
of arrest or issuance of a local ordinance citation. If the person accused of
the violation does not settle the claim, a notice to appear or complaint may be
issued for that violation or an administrative hearing held and the person
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section
1-4-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-7, 2-19-2013)
   B.   Fines:
      1.   Unless another penalty is specifically provided for in this Code,
any person who is issued a complaint for a violation that has a minimum fine of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less, that is not required to appear in
administrative adjudication or Circuit Court or has requested an administrative
adjudication hearing within ten (10) days from the date of the citation not
counting the day of issuance, may settle and compromise that complaint by
paying a reduced early settlement payment within the days from the date of the
citation as set forth in the following schedule:
 
If Paid Within 10 If Paid Within 11 To If Paid Within 31 To If Paid After 61
Days              30 Days              60 Days              Days
$50.00            $100.00              $150.00              $200.00
 
      2.   Payments received by mail shall be credited as paid on the date
received by the Village. (Ord. 18-11, 3-6-2018)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2016 Code)
   D.   Prohibited Acts Include Causing Or Permitting: Whenever in this Code
any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing,
permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or
omission. (1976 Code § 1.04.030; amd. 2016 Code)
1-4-4: NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the Village Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2016 Code)
1-4-5: COLLECTION FEES FOR DEBTS OWED THE VILLAGE:
Whenever any fine, charge, penalty or payment that is due pursuant to any
provision in this Code remains unpaid after exhaustion of or the failure to
exhaust administrative remedies or the conclusion of any judicial review
procedures, the Village shall send, mail or otherwise deliver notice (unless a
different period is stated elsewhere in this Code) to the person responsible
for such fine, charge, penalty or payment (the "responsible person") of the
delinquent amount. If the responsible person does not pay the amount due, the
Village may transfer such fine, charge, penalty or payment to a private
collection agency of the Village's choosing or to an attorney for collection
purposes. Any fees or costs incurred by the Village with respect to attorneys
or private collection agents for the collection of any fine, charge, penalty or
payment transferred to any such collection agency or attorney shall be assessed
against the responsible person as an additional fee subject to any applicable
statutory limits and added to the delinquent amount. (Ord. 18-02, 1-16-2018)
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Purpose
1-4A-2: State Regulations Adopted
1-4A-3: Definition
1-4A-4: Enforcement Officials
1-4A-5: Enforcement Procedures
1-4A-6: Hearings
1-4A-7: Failure To Appear
1-4A-8: Findings, Decision And Order; Review And Enforcement
1-4A-9: Provisions Applicable To Building Code Violations Only
1-4A-10: Provisions Not Exclusive
1-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to provide a method for fairly and efficiently
enforcing the Village ordinances, including the Building Code and automated
traffic law violations under Article 14B of this Code, as may be allowed by law
through an administrative adjudication of violations of the Village ordinances
and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties and authority for collection
of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014; amd. Ord. 19-41, 8-6-
2019)
1-4A-2: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
To accomplish the purpose set out in Section
1-4A-1 of this Article, all applicable and non-conflicting portions of Division
2.1 of article of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., and
Sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3
and 11-208.6, are hereby adopted in their respective current forms and as may
be amended from time to time for adjudication of municipal ordinance
violations, including. respectively, Building Code violations and automated
traffic law violations under Article 1-4B of this Code, to the extent permitted
by the Illinois Constitution. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 19-
41, 8-6-2019)
1-4A-3: DEFINITION:
As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise, “code” means
any village ordinance, including any ordinance, law, housing or building code
or zoning ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating,
electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards
that are applicable to structures in the village; any village ordinance that
requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and
debris, the removal of inoperable vehicles or the abatement of nuisances from
private property; automated traffic law violations as defined in Section
1-4B-2 of this Code; and any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or similar
offense adopted by the village that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-204. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014; amd. Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4A-4: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
Hearing officers, ordinance enforcement and code hearing administrators, and
hearing room personnel shall be appointed by the village administrator, or his
or her designee, with the following power and authority:
   A.   Hearing Officer:
      1.   Definition: The term "hearing officer", when used in this article,
means the person whose duty it is to:
         a.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether
or not a code violation exists and administer oaths and affirmations;
         b.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
         c.   At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer
assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses
to appear and give testimony at the hearing or produce relevant documents;
         d.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the
hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
         e.   Issue and sign a written findings, decision, and order stating
whether a code violation exists.
         f.   Impose penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent with
applicable ordinance provisions and assess costs upon finding a party liable
for the charged violation; except, however, that in no event shall the hearing
officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
         g.   Upon a finding of a violation, include an additional amount of
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) to be imposed by the hearing officer
as administrative adjudication hearing costs unless the maximum fine penalty is
imposed. This additional penalty shall not be construed as part of the fine for
the purposes of any reduction made in the fine for compliance.
      2.   Qualifications:
         a.   Prior to conducting proceedings under this article, the hearing
officer shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes the
following:
            (1)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that
will be conducted;
            (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that
will be administered;
            (3)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
            (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on
evidence and issuing final orders.
         b.   Every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice
law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years and be in good
standing with the Illinois supreme court's attorney registration and
disciplinary commission.
      3.   Independent Contractor: The hearing officer shall be employed as an
independent contractor of the village and shall not be considered an employee
of the village.
      4.   Removal: The hearing officer may be removed with or without cause by
the village administrator.
   B.   Ordinance Enforcement And Code Hearing Administrator:
      1.   The ordinance enforcement and code hearing administrator is
authorized and directed to:
         a.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance and to expedite the prosecution and correction of village ordinance
violations.
         b.   Promulgate such rules and regulations reasonably required to
operate and maintain such system.
         c.   Supervise the distribution and processing of notices as may be
required under this article or as may be reasonably required to carry out the
purpose of this article.
         d.   Supervise the collection of monies paid as fines and/or penalties
assessed after a final determination of liability.
         e.   Certify copies of final determination of violation adjudications
pursuant to this article or the laws of the state of Illinois, as from time to
time amended.
         f.   Pursue all postjudgment remedies available by law.
         g.   Perform all duties of the traffic compliance administrator, as
required by the Illinois Vehicle Code and this Code, including, but not limited
to, adopting, distributing and processing parking, compliance, and automated
speed enforcement system or automated traffic law violation notices and other
notices required by this Code or the Illinois Vehicle Code, collecting money
paid as fines and penalties for violation of parking and compliance ordinances
and automated speed enforcement system or automated traffic law violations, and
operating an administrative adjudication system related thereto, and making
certified reports to the Secretary of State under the Illinois Vehicle Code.
      2.   The ordinance enforcement and code hearing administrator is hereby
authorized and directed to operate and maintain any computer programs for the
administrative adjudication system hereby created, on a day to day basis,
including, but not limited to:
         a.   Input of ordinance violation notice information;
         b.   Establishing court dates and notice dates;
         c.   Record determination of liability, fine and penalty assessment
and payments;
         d.   Issue payment receipts;
         e.   Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final
determination of liability in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set
forth;
         f.   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed,
if any, fines and penalties assessed and paid;
         g.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties and direct the pursuit of all
postjudgment remedies available by law; and
         h.   Perform such other duties as directed by the village
administrator and/or his or her designee.
   C.   Hearing Room Personnel: The hearing room personnel are hereby
authorized and directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum;
      2.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the circuit court; and
      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the hearing officer or ordinance enforcement and code hearing
administrator. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014; amd. Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4A-5: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   When a full time police officer, community service officer, code
enforcement officer or inspector, or other individual specifically authorized
by any village official or village department to issue a code violation notice
finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a
multiple copy violation notice and report form that shall include, but shall
not be limited to:
      1.   The name and address of the party violating the ordinance, if known;
      2.   The type and nature of the violation;
      3.   The date and time the violation was observed;
      4.   The names of the witnesses of the violation;
      5.   The fine and penalty which may be assessed for late payment;
      6.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice;
      7.   The date and location of the adjudication hearing of ordinance
violations;
      8.   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to
be held and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing; and
      9.   In the case of a building code violation, the address of the
property where the violation is observed.
      10.   If applicable to the violation in question, the amount of the fine
that may be paid by a party that wishes to admit a violation in lieu of
requesting a hearing. Said fine, to be paid upon a written admission of a
violation and waiver of a hearing, shall be no less than the minimum fine set
by this code relative to the violation at issue.
   B.   The correctness of facts contained in any ordinance violation notice
shall be verified by the person issuing the notice by:
      1.   Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
      2.   In the case of a notice produced by a computer, signing a single
certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement and code hearing
administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
computer while under his/her control.
   C.   Parties shall be served with process in a manner reasonably calculated
to give them actual notice including, as appropriate, personal service of
process upon a party or its employer or agent; service by mail at a party's
address; or notice that is posted upon the property where the violation is
found where the party is the owner or administrator of the property.
   D.   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the ordinance
enforcement and code hearing administrator where a docket number shall be
stamped on all copies of the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the
blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form.
   E.   The hearing date shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness;
provided, that except for an emergency situation, if requested by the
defendant, he shall have at least fifteen (15) days after service to prepare
for the hearing. If service is provided by mail, the fifteen (15) day period
shall begin to run on the date the notice is deposited in the mail.
   F.   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files
of the ordinance enforcement and code hearing administrator and shall be part
of the record of hearing.
   G.   One copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the village in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of
the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated.
   H.   One copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the
alleged violator along with a summons commanding the alleged violator to appear
at the hearing.
   I.   In the case of a building code violation only:
      1.   If the village has an ordinance requiring property owners, meaning
the legal or beneficial owner(s) of a structure, to register therewith, service
may be made on the owner by mailing the report and summons to the property
owner's address registered with the village.
      2.   If the name of the property owner cannot be ascertained or if
service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner
by posting or mailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door of
the structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days
before the hearing is scheduled.
   J.   Any ordinance violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance
herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be
prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice and
shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding. (Ord.
14-24, 8-19-2014)
1-4A-6: HEARINGS:
   A.   Representation: The case for the village may be presented by an
attorney designated by the village or by any other village employee; except,
that the case for the village shall not be presented by any ordinance
enforcement and code hearing administrator. The case for the alleged violator
may be presented by the alleged violator, his or her attorney, or any other
agent or representative of the alleged violator. The parties may present and
cross examine witnesses.
   B.   Continuances: No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing
officer in proceedings under this section except in cases where a continuance
for good cause is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the alleged
violator. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any
continuance authorized by the hearing officer under this section shall not
exceed twenty five (25) days.
   C.   Hearing Held; Records: At the hearing, the hearing officer shall
preside, administer oaths and affirmation, hear testimony and accept any
evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code violation. A
record of all hearings shall be kept by tape recording or other appropriate
means.
   D.   Evidence: With regard to testimony heard and evidence presented, the
formal and technical rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall
not apply to hearings authorized by this section. Evidence, including hearsay,
may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. All oral testimony shall be
given under oath or affirmation. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014)
1-4A-7: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
   A.   If, on the dates set for the hearing, the alleged violator or his or
her attorney or designee fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the
alleged violator in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
   B.   Upon finding the alleged violation in default, the ordinance
enforcement and code hearing administrator shall send or cause to be sent
notices by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the violator who receives the
notice of an ordinance violation. Service of notices sent in accordance
herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   C.   The hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days after
the issuance of the order of default, if the hearing officer determines that
the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any
time if the petitioner establishes that the village did not provide proper
service of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this subsection,
the hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any
lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the village as a result
of the vacated default judgment. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014)
1-4A-8: FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER; REVIEW AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Findings, Decision And Order:
      1.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists.
      2.   The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as
findings, decision and order, including the fine, penalty or action with which
the defendant must comply.
      3.   The findings, decision and order shall include:
         a.   The hearing officer's findings of fact;
         b.   A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon
the findings of fact;
         c.   In the case of a village code violation only, an order that
states the sanction or dismisses the case if a village code violation is not
proved;
         d.   In the case of a building code violation only, an order ordering
the owner to correct the building code violation or dismissing the case if a
building code violation is not proved; and
         e.   In the case of a building code violation only, if a building code
violation is proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided
in the building code for the building code violation proved. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-
2014)
      4.   In the case of a village code violation only, a monetary sanction
for a village code violation under this section shall not exceed the amount of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation per day. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-
2014; amd. 2016 Code)
      5.   The maximum monetary fine imposed under this code shall be exclusive
of costs of enforcement or costs incurred by the village to secure compliance
with this code and ordinances, and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce
the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the village.
      6.   A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the
alleged violator within five (5) days after it is issued.
      7.   Service shall be in the same manner that the report form and summons
are served.
      8.   Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of any fine
monies shall be in the manner as set forth in this code.
   B.   Administrative Review: The findings, decision and order of the hearing
officer shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review
and shall be subject to review in the circuit court of Cook County. The
provisions of the administrative review law 1 , and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the
findings, decision and order of the hearing officer under this section.
   C.   Judgment And Enforcement:
      1.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or
the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative
review law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
      2.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under
the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the
code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
      3.   In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a
judgment ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine
or other sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by the
village to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney fees,
court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after
they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or the hearing officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in accordance
with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by the hearing officer
pursuant to this subsection, the village shall provide notice to the defendant
that states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the
administrative hearing officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to
comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing,
which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is
served. If notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to
run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
      4.   Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the
code of civil procedure or by the uniform commercial code, a lien shall be
imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the
amount of any debt due and owing the village under this section. The lien may
be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
1-4A-9: PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS ONLY:
In the case of a building code violation only:
   A.   Retaliation Against Occupants Prohibited: No action for eviction,
abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar
proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling
solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a building code
violation hearing.
   B.   Defenses: It shall be a defense to a building code violation charge
under this article if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or
representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
      1.   The building code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact
exist, or at the time of the hearing, the violation has been remedied or
removed;
      2.   The building code violation has been caused by the current property
occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the property owner to
maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue
to cause the building code violations; or
      3.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the
owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the building code violation.
   C.   Order And Sanction Attach To Property: The order to correct a building
code violation and the sanctions imposed by the village as the result of a
finding of a building code violation under this article shall attach to the
property as well as to the property owner so that a finding of a building code
violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the
property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property is
subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this
article. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014)
1-4A-10: PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This article does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce
the provisions of this code. (Ord. 14-24, 8-19-2014)
ARTICLE B. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT
SYSTEM VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-4B-1: Purpose
1-4B-2: Definitions
1-4B-3: Violation
1-4B-4: Signage
1-4B-5: Notice Of Violation
1-4B-6: Administrative Adjudication
1-4B-7: Hearings
1-4B-8: Final Determination Of Liability, Notice Of Final Determination Of
Liability, Notice Of Impending Suspension
1-4B-9: Petitions To Set Aside Determination
1-4B-10: Penalty
1-4B-11: Defenses
1-4B-12: Non-Residents
1-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The Village has, pursuant to authority granted by Sections 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3,
625 ILCS 5/11-208.6 and 625 ILCS 5/11-208(f) of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
instituted an automated traffic law enforcement system, which detects motor
vehicles which fail to abide by red light traffic-control signals at
intersections under penalty of a fine, and a system of administrative
adjudication by which such detected infractions shall be resolved. The purpose
of this Article is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of automated
traffic law violations through administrative adjudication of such violations,
and to establish a schedule of uniform fines and penalties and authority and
procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties, all pursuant to the
authority provided in Sections 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.6, and
625 ILCS 5/11-208(f) of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4B-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                                  A device within the Village with one or
                                  more motor vehicle sensors working in
                                  conjunction with a red light signal to
                                  produce recorded images of motor vehicles
                                  entering an intersection against a steady
                                  or flashing red signal indication in
                                  violation of Section 11-306 of the
                                  Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-306,
                                  or similar violation of this Code. The
                                  automated traffic law enforcement system
                                  shall not be used to enforce speed limit
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT regulations. The recorded images produced
SYSTEM:                           by the automated traffic law enforcement
                                  system, which consist of either two (2)
                                  or more photographs or two (2) or more
                                  electronic images of a video recording
                                  showing the motor vehicle, shall capture
                                  and display images of the vehicle
                                  allegedly entering an intersection
                                  against a steady or flashing red light
                                  signal indication, together with the
                                  license plate on such vehicle, and shall
                                  also show the time, date and location of
                                  the violation.
                                  A violation punishable as a civil penalty
                                  wherein a vehicle disregards a traffic
                                  control device by entering an
                                  intersection against a steady or flashing
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION:  red signal indication in violation of
                                  Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle
                                  Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-306, as captured on
                                  recorded images produced by an automated
                                  traffic law enforcement system.
                                  The person appointed as such pursuant to
HEARING OFFICER:                  Section
                                  1-4A-4 of this Code, and the applicable
                                  sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
                                  Images produced by the automated traffic
                                  law enforcement system, which consist of
                                  either two or more photographs; two or
                                  more microphotographs; two or more
                                  electronic images; or, a video recording
RECORDED IMAGES:                  showing the motor vehicle and, on at
                                  least one image or portion of the
                                  recording, clearly identifying the
                                  registration plate number of the motor
                                  vehicle, along with the time, date and
                                  location of any violation.
                                  The person appointed as the Ordinance
                                  Enforcement and Code Hearing
TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: Administrator pursuant to Section
                                  1-4A-4(B) of this Code, and the
                                  applicable sections of the Illinois
                                  Vehicle Code. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
 
1-4B-3: VIOLATION:
It shall be an automated traffic law violation for a vehicle to disregard a
traffic control device by entering an intersection against a steady or flashing
red signal indication in violation of Section 11306 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/1 1-306, as captured on recorded images by an automated
traffic law enforcement system. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4B-4: SIGNAGE:
Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system must
have a sign posted which is visible to approaching traffic indicating that the
intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law enforcement system.
(Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4B-5: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   In the event an automated traffic law enforcement system records an
automated traffic law violation, which shall be deemed a non-criminal violation
for which a civil penalty of One Hundred and Dollars ($100) shall be assessed
and for which no points shall be assigned by the State of Illinois motor
vehicle code point system for license suspension to the owner or driver of the
vehicle. the Village shall issue a written notice of the violation to the
registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be mailed by first class
mail within thirty (30) days after the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the
Village of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and
in no event later than ninety (90) days following the violation, except that in
the case of a lessee of a motor vehicle, service of an automated traffic law
violation notice may occur no later than two hundred ten (210) days after the
violation. The Village shall only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing
company/lessor provides the lessee’s name by an affidavit and a copy of the
lease within sixty (60) days of the original notice’s issuance. If the driver
information is not provided within sixty (60) days, the leasing company/lessor
may be found liable. If any notice to an address is returned as undeliverable,
a second notice shall be sent to the last known address recorded in a United
States Post Office approved database of the owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle. The second notice shall be made by first class mail postage prepaid.
Service of such notices shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in
the United States mail.
   B.   Each notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law
violation shall require a review of the associated recorded image by a law
enforcement officer or retired law enforcement officer of the Village Police
Department to determine whether a violation has occurred or whether one of the
defenses enumerated below in Section
1-4B-11 is visibly applicable upon inspection. Upon determination that the
recorded image captures a violation and that no defense applies, the notice of
violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner or lessee in the
manner provided for above. The Traffic Compliance Administrator, or his or her
designee, shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and
other correspondence mailed to the alleged violator.
   C.   Based on inspection of the recorded images produced by the automated
traffic law enforcement system, each notice of violation shall constitute
evidence of the facts contained in the notice, is admissible in any proceeding
alleging an automated traffic law violation under Section
1-4B-3, and shall establish prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to
rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in Section
1-4B-11.
   D.   Each notice of violation shall include the information required by law,
and such other information as the Village may determine, such as following:
      1.   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such
information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office approved database;
      2.   The registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the
violation;
      3.   The vehicle make, if available and readily discernible;
      4.   The violation charged;
      5.   The location where the violation occurred;
      6.   The date and time of the violation;
      7.   A copy of the recorded images;
      8.   A website address, accessible through the internet, where the
violator may review the recorded images of the violation;
      9.   A statement that the violator may elect to proceed by paying the
civil penalty or challenging the alleged violation in an administrative hearing
or by mail (if a non-resident) or, following the administrative hearing, in
court;
      10.   The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
charge may be contested on its merits, a date that shall be no less than 15
days from the mailing or other service of the first notice of violation;
      11.   The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by which the
civil penalty should be paid if liability for the violation is not going to be
contested;
      12.   A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date
noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or
lessee, and the amount of the late fee;
      13.   A statement that the recorded images are evidence of a violation of
a red light signal;
      14.   A warning that failure to either pay the civil penalty or contest
liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability and may result in a
suspension of the driving privileges of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle in addition to the specified penalties for failing to contest liability
or to pay the civil penalty in advance of the hearing;
      15.   A statement that payment of the indicated civil penalty and of any
applicable penalty for late payment shall constitute a final disposition of the
violation; and
      16.   The signature and identification number of the party reviewing the
recorded images and confirming that a violation took place. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-
2019)
1-4B-6: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
The Village may utilize its existing personnel and system of administrative
adjudication for vehicular standing and parking violations, and violations
regarding the display of municipal stickers/licenses, for the adjudication of
automated traffic law violations, consistent with this Article and as specified
in Article 1-4A. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4B-7: HEARINGS:
Administrative hearings on automated traffic law violations shall be conducted
in conformance with Article 1-4A of this Code. A failure of the motor vehicle
owner or lessee of a vehicle to appear at the hearing will result in a finding
of liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a determination of liability
shall be sent to the owner or lessee. The owner or lessee’s failure to pay the
amount by the date specified in the determination of liability shall result in
a final determination upon either denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination, or upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without
a filing having been made. Administrative hearings on automated traffic law
violations shall be audio recorded, and the Hearing Officer shall conduct the
hearing in accordance with his or her powers and duties, enumerated herein and
in Article 1-4A of this Code. The Hearing Officer shall enter either a default
judgement or determination of liability or non-liability in accordance with
consideration of the facts and testimony, if any, and shall constitute a final
determination of liability from which an appeal may be taken. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-
2019)
1-4B-8: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY, NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION OF
LIABILITY, NOTICE OF IMPENDING SUSPENSION:
   A.   Notices of determination of liability shall be sent in conformance with
the general mailing provisions in Article 1-4A of this Code.
   B.   Final determinations of violation liability shall occur pursuant to the
provisions set forth in Article 1-4A of this Code.
   C.   Notices of final determination of liability shall be sent in
conformance with Article 1-4A of this Code.
   D.   Notices of impending suspension of a person’s driver’s license shall be
sent in conformance with Section
7-2-102(B) of this Code. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4B-9: PETITIONS TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION:
A petition to set aside determination of violation liability may be filed by a
person in the manner and subject to the restrictions and grounds as set forth
in Section
1-4A-7 of this Code, along with the following grounds:
   A.   The person against whom the determination of liability is made was not
the owner or lessee of the “cited vehicle” on the date the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation notice was issued.
   B.   The person’s having paid the fine or penalty prior to the determination
of liability for the violation in question. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4B-10: PENALTY:
   A.   The motor vehicle owner or lessee of a vehicle found to have committed
an automated traffic law violation is subject to a civil penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100).
   B.   If the civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100) referred to in
Subsection A. above is not timely paid or the Notice of Violation is not
contested timely, a One Hundred Dollar ($100) late payment penalty will be
assessed in addition to the original One Hundred Dollar ($100) penalty by way
of “Final Determination of Liability.”
   C.   The Village may establish procedures for the collection of the civil
penalty imposed. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4B-11: DEFENSES:
The hearing officer may consider only the defenses set forth below when offered
by an alleged violator contesting his or her liability for an automated traffic
law violation. The defenses shall be weighed by the hearing officer and shall
only rebut the prima facie case established by the notice of liability insofar
as one or more defenses are established by a preponderance of the evidence:
   A.   The motor vehicle or registration plates were stolen before the
violation occurred and were not under the control of or in the possession of
the owner at the time of the violation. This defense may be demonstrated
through the submission of a certified copy of a report concerning the stolen
motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in
a timely manner;
   B.   The vehicle was an authorized emergency vehicle;
   C.   The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the
light was red either to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle or as
part of a funeral procession;
   D.   The facts alleged in the Notice of Violation are inconsistent or do not
support a finding that a violation occurred;
   E.   The operator of the vehicle received a Uniform Traffic citation from a
police officer at the time of the violation for the same incident as captured
by the automated traffic law enforcement system and either paid such citation
or successfully contested said citation;
   F.   The vehicle was leased to another and within sixty (60) calendar days
after the citation was mailed to lessor, lessor submitted to the municipality
the correct name and address of the lessee of the vehicle identified in this
Notice of Violation at the time of the alleged violation, together with a copy
of the lease agreement, the lessee’s driver’s license number and any additional
information that may be needed; or
   G.   The respondent was not the registered vehicle owner, lessee or renter
of the cited vehicle at the time of the violation. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
1-4B-12: NON-RESIDENTS:
Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident of
the Village, but seeks to contest the merits of an alleged automated traffic
law violation, the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle may contest
the violation using the same available defenses in Section
1-4B-11, and the same procedures, by either attending an administrative
hearing, or by submitting documentary evidence no later than the hearing date
referenced in the notice of liability, together with a written statement
reflecting that they are non-residents of the Village. (Ord. 19-41, 8-6-2019)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Corporate Seal, Official Logo And Village Flag
1-5-2: Elections
1-5-3: Electronic Attendance At Meetings
1-5-4: Indemnification Of Village Officials
1-5-5: Rules Concerning Public Comment And Participation
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL, OFFICIAL LOGO AND VILLAGE FLAG:
   A.   Corporate Seal: The corporate seal of the village shall be as follows:
A disc, circular in form, with the words "Village of Berkeley, Inc. May 20,
1924, Cook Co., IL".
   B.   Official Logo: The logo on file in the office of the village clerk and
displayed on the village website is hereby adopted as the official logo of the
village for all municipal purposes. The use of the logo for any private
commercial purpose without prior approval by the village board of trustees is
hereby prohibited.
   C.   Private Use Prohibitions:
      1.   Flags And Emblems: It shall be unlawful for any person to use the
village flag, standard, pennant, any village badge, or any imitation or design
thereof without the prior approval of the village board of trustees, except for
the usual and customary purposes of decoration or display. No person shall
print or stamp thereon or cause to be displayed thereon any letter, word,
legend or device not provided for in this section.
      2.   Corporate Seal Or Official Logo: No person shall fraudulently forge,
deface, corrupt or counterfeit the corporate seal or any official logo of the
village including, but not limited to, any patch of the police or fire
department; nor shall any person, other than a duly authorized public official,
make use of said seal or logo without prior approval of the village board of
trustees, except for the usual and customary purposes of decoration or display.
(2016 Code)
1-5-2: ELECTIONS:
Elections for village offices shall be held in accordance with Illinois
election code, 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq. (2016 Code)
1-5-3: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
The electronic attendance at meetings policy approved by the village board is
by this reference made a part of this section and is the official policy of the
village regarding attendance of members of all village boards, commissions, and
committees to participate in public meetings by means other than physical
presence. (Ord. 06-41, 12-19-2006, eff. 1-1-2007; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 23-47,
10-3-2023)
1-5-4: INDEMNIFICATION OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
   A.   The village policy as to indemnification of village officials is as
follows:
      1.   The village has the power to indemnify its officials, both elected
and appointed, pursuant to law.
      2.   The term "officials", as used in this section, shall mean the
president and trustees, the village administrator, department directors and
appointed committee and commission members, as well as all other officers of
the village, whether or not currently serving.
      3.   It is in the best interest of the village to provide for the
indemnification of its officials, both elected and appointed, against claims,
expenses and liabilities to which such persons may be subject by reason of
their having acted in their capacity as a public official.
   B.   The village shall indemnify any official who was or is a party, or may
become a party, to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or
proceeding, whether civil, administrative or investigative, by reason of any
act or omission, error, misstatement or misleading statement, or neglect or
breach of duty or any other action which could reasonably be construed to have
been committed, attempted or allegedly committed or attempted by such person in
the discharge of his or her duties in his or her capacity as an official, both
elected and appointed, against expenses (including attorney fees), judgments
and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him or her
in connection with such action, suit or proceeding, if such person acted in
good faith in a manner in which he or she reasonably believed was in the best
interests of the village. This indemnification shall not apply to any claim,
suit, action or proceeding:
      1.   Which is for the return by any such official, both elected and
appointed, of any remuneration paid in fact to him or her without the previous
approval of the village if it shall be determined by judgment or other final
adjudication that such remuneration is in violation of law or if such
remuneration is to be repaid to the village under a settlement agreement.
      2.   Which is for an accounting of profits made from a purchase or sale
by such official, both elected and appointed, of village property for any
transaction prohibited by the village ethics ordinance.
      3.   Which is brought about or contributed to by the fraudulent or
dishonest acts of such official, both elected and appointed, if a judgment or
other final adjudication adverse to such official establishes that acts of
active and deliberate dishonesty were committed or attempted by such official
with actual dishonest purpose and intent and were material to the cause of
action so adjudicated.
      4.   Which is brought about or contributed to by any criminal activities
of such official, and there has been a judicial determination of said criminal
activities.
      5.   For which the village is not authorized by law to provide
indemnification to the official, either elected or appointed.
      6.   With reference to any of the aforementioned enumerated items, a
presumption shall exist that indemnification shall apply unless a judicial
finding to the contrary is made.
   C.   The termination of any action, suit or proceeding, contrary to the best
interests of the official, by judgment, order, settlement or other resolution
shall not create a presumption that the official did not act in good faith in a
manner in which he or she reasonably believed was in the best interests of the
village. To the extent that an official has been successful, on the merits or
otherwise, in the defense of any action, suit or proceeding or in the defense
of any claim which qualifies herein for indemnification, such person shall be
indemnified against expenses (including attorney fees) actually and reasonably
incurred by such person in connection therewith. However, the village shall not
withhold payment of attorney fees until the conclusion of any legal
proceedings, but shall pay the attorney fees of the official on a timely basis.
   D.   The village shall indemnify only those officials, either elected or
appointed, from whom or with respect to whom the village has received written
notice of a claim. To the extent practicable, any notice from such official
shall be mailed as soon as practicable and shall identify the official seeking
the indemnification and contain information with respect to the time, place and
circumstances of the claim, the names and addresses of any injured persons or
other claimants and the names of any available witnesses. In the case where
legal proceedings have been commenced, indemnification may be denied if the
official fails to mail to the village, within twenty (20) days after receiving
service of process, a copy of such process relating to a claimed wrongful act
unless: 1) the village has otherwise received a copy of, or written notice of,
such process; or 2) the failure to notify within such twenty (20) day period
does not adversely impact upon the village's ability to defend against such
claim. Notice of the claim shall be made in writing to the village clerk.
   E.   The village shall indemnify the official for any damages, expenses,
court costs and legal fees incurred in connection with any defense of or
settlement of a claim, action or proceeding where such settlement has been
approved in advance by the village, or where the village refuses or fails to
approve such settlement, such settlement is deemed to be reasonable by
independent legal counsel chosen by both the village and the official.
   F.   Any indemnification pursuant to this section shall be made by the
village upon a determination that indemnification of the person is required by
this section. Such determination shall be made: 1) by the president and board
of trustees by a majority vote of a quorum of the board who were not parties to
such claim, suit, action or proceeding; or 2) if such quorum is not obtainable
or, even if obtainable, where a majority of a quorum of the board fails to
approve the indemnification, by independent legal counsel chosen by both the
claimant and the village board.
   G.   Any official against whom any action, suit or proceeding is brought may
employ his or her own attorney; provided, that such attorney is reasonably
acceptable to the village; and provided further, that the costs of such
attorney shall not be paid by the village unless the village attorney or
independent counsel for the village shall have advised the village that such
official's interests should not be represented by the same counsel that
represents the village in such action, suit or proceeding.
   H.   The indemnification provided herein shall be in addition to and not
exclusive of any other indemnity or insurance or other protection to which the
indemnitee may be entitled. The indemnification provided herein shall be
payable whether or not the village has obtained insurance therefor and, in the
case of the death of the indemnitee, shall inure to the benefit of his or her
heirs or successors. (2016 Code)
1-5-5: RULES CONCERNING PUBLIC COMMENT AND PARTICIPATION:
The public comment and participation policy approved by the Village Board is by
this reference made a part of this section and is the official policy of the
Village regarding participation of members of the public at meetings of public
bodies of the Village. (Ord. 23-48, 10-3-2023)
CHAPTER 6
ELECTIVE VILLAGE OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-6-1: Commencement Of Term
1-6-2: Inauguration
1-6-1: COMMENCEMENT OF TERM:
The terms of elected village officers shall commence at the first regular or
special meeting of the corporate authorities after receipt of the official
election results from the Cook County clerk of the regular municipal election
at which the officers were elected, but in no event will terms commence later
than the first regular or special meeting of the corporate authorities in June
following the election, or as otherwise established by state law. (2016 Code)
1-6-2: INAUGURATION:
The date for inauguration of newly elected officers of the village shall be
immediately prior to the commencement of business of the meeting established in
section
1-6-1 of this chapter. (1976 Code § 2.10.020; amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE PRESIDENT
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Reference To Mayor
1-6A-2: Election And Term
1-6A-3: Bond And Oath
1-6A-4: Compensation
1-6A-5: Powers And Duties
1-6A-6: President Pro Tem
1-6A-7: State Of Emergency
1-6A-1: REFERENCE TO MAYOR:
The village president, in his or her discretion, may be addressed, designated
or referred to as mayor. (2016 Code)
1-6A-2: ELECTION AND TERM:
The village president shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and shall
be president of the village board as provided by statute. (1976 Code §
2.04.010)
1-6A-3: BOND AND OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the president shall give bond,
with sureties to be approved by the board, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties, in the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). He
shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. (1976 Code § 2.04.040;
amd. 2016 Code)
1-6A-4: COMPENSATION:
The annual salary of the village president shall be eight thousand dollars
($8,000.00), until the same is amended or modified by subsequent ordinance.
(Ord. 94-18, 11-1-1994; amd. 2016 Code)
1-6A-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The president shall have all the powers and perform all the duties
hereinafter set forth and as are provided by the laws of the state of Illinois
or by the village ordinances. He shall be the chief executive officer and
representative of the village. Among other things, he shall perform the
following duties:
      1.   Preside at all regular and special meetings of the board of
trustees, unless unavoidably prevented.
      2.   Nominate persons to fill the appointive offices of the village.
      3.   Investigate all matters pertaining to the interests of the village
and well being of the residents.
      4.   Countersign all commissions, licenses and permits authorized by
statute or village ordinance.
      5.   Sign all contracts and warrants on behalf of the village, approved
by resolution.
      6.   Generally, be charged with the responsibility for the proper conduct
of the village affairs and the enforcement of all ordinances of the village.
   B.   The village president shall submit to the board of trustees a report
relative to the affairs of the village, and he shall recommend for
consideration by the board such measures as he may deem expedient. (2016 Code)
1-6A-6: PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
If a temporary absence from the village or disability of the president
incapacitates him from the performance of his duties, but does not create a
vacancy in the office, the board of trustees shall elect one of its members to
act as village president pro tem. The village president pro tem, during this
absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and
powers of the village president but shall not be entitled to vote as president
pro tem and trustee. (2016 Code)
1-6A-7: STATE OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   The Village President is authorized to declare of a state of emergency
within the Village of Berkeley based on the following findings and supporting
facts:
      1.   There has occurred, or there is actual imminent danger of occurring,
a natural disaster, catastrophe, pestilence or contagious disease, which is
likely to cause loss of life, loss of productivity, hardship or suffering to
the persons residing in or doing business in the Village.
      2.   That the declaration of emergency is necessary in order to prevent
loss of life or injury, alleviate damages, loss, hardship, or suffering.
   B.   During a declared state of emergency, the Village President is
authorized to exercise, by executive order, such powers of the Village
President and Board of Trustees as may be reasonably necessary to respond to
the emergency.
   C.   A declaration of a state of emergency shall:
      1.   Be executed under oath.
      2.   Set forth the basis and underlying facts supporting the declaration
of a state of emergency.
      3.   Make reference to published statements of federal, state or county
agencies whose duty it is to address emergency matters.
      4.   To the extent possible, specify the procedures and protocols to be
followed during the state of emergency.
      5.   To the extent possible, make specific reference to any regulations
which may be subject to suspension during the state of emergency.
      6.   Consistent with Section C.8. below, set forth the duration of the
state of emergency.
      7.   Be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as practicable.
      8.   Expire no later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of
the Village President and Board of Trustees after the state of emergency has
been declared.
   D.   A declaration of emergency pursuant to this authority may not suspend
in any way the rights of persons under the Illinois or United States
Constitutions.
   E.   The authority granted to the Village President herein is in addition to
the authority of the Village President elsewhere in the Village Code to address
emergencies in the Village of Berkeley, including, but not limited to, in
Article 6-38. (Ord. 20-19, 3-17-2020)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Election And Terms
1-6B-2: Oath Of Office
1-6B-3: Compensation
1-6B-4: Meetings
1-6B-5: Quorum
1-6B-6: Committees
1-6B-7: Rules And Order Of Business
1-6B-1: ELECTION AND TERMS:
The Board of Trustees, consisting of six (6) members, shall be elected to
office for a four (4) year term as is provided by statute. This Board shall be
the legislative department of the Village government and shall perform such
duties and have such powers as may be delegated thereto by State Statute. (1976
Code § 2.08.010)
1-6B-2: OATH OF OFFICE:
The members of the Board shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute.
(1976 Code § 2.08.020)
1-6B-3: COMPENSATION:
The annual salaries of Village Trustees shall be five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), until the same are amended or modified by subsequent ordinance.
(Ord. 94-18, 11-1-1994; amd. 2016 Code)
1-6B-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The Village Board of Trustees shall hold its regular
meetings on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at the hour of six
thirty o’clock (6:30) P.M. Meetings are held in the Bicentennial Room.
   B.   Committee Meetings: Committee meetings, when required, will be held and
notice given in compliance with the Open Meetings Act 1 . Committee meetings
shall be at the Village Hall of the Village of Berkeley unless otherwise
ordered by the Board of Trustees.
   C.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the President of
the Village or any three (3) Trustees upon at least seventy two (72) hours'
notice to all Trustees and the President.
   D.   Open Meetings: All meetings provided for in this section shall be
according to the directives and regulations of the Open Meetings Act provided
in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
   E.   Disturbing Village Meetings: It is unlawful for any person to disturb
any meeting of the Board of Trustees or of any committee thereof. (1976 Code §
9.16.040; amd. Ord. 98-29, 9-1-1998; Ord. 03-55, 9-16-2003; 2016 Code; Ord. 19-
72, 12-17-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
1-6B-5: QUORUM:
   A.   A majority of the Village Board constitutes a quorum.
   B.   Approval of all ordinances and of all resolutions or motions creating
liabilities or for expenditures requires the concurrence of a majority of the
Village Board. (2016 Code)
1-6B-6: COMMITTEES:
   A.   Standing Committees: The Village President shall make Trustee
assignments to the following standing committees:
      Administration, Zoning, Technology,
      Community and Intergovernmental Relations,
      Finance and Economic Development,
      Fire and Public Health,
      Police and Property Maintenance, and
      Public Works and Utilities. (Ord. 18-10, 3-6-2018)
   B.   Other Committees: The President shall appoint such other and further
committees as may be necessary to properly carry on the business of the
Village. Written minutes shall be made of all committee meetings and submitted
to the Board of Trustees at the next regular meeting.
   C.   Committee Of The Whole: In addition, a Committee of the Whole shall
consist of the Village President, the members of the Board of Trustees, and the
Village Administrator, if there be one. The Chair of said committee shall be
the Village President. The Village President shall be an ex officio member of
all committees. (2016 Code)
1-6B-7: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The following rules for the government of the meetings of the Board of Trustees
are hereby adopted:
   A.   Order Of Business:
      1.   Regular Meetings: The order of business at all regular meetings
shall be determined by roll call vote at each meeting. The agenda for each
meeting may include the following items but not in any particular sequence:
         a.   Call to order.
         b.   Pledge of Allegiance.
         c.   Roll call.
         d.   Presentations and appointments.
         e.   Approval of minutes of any regular meeting and special meeting.
         f.   Approval of the directive to pay, and consideration of, bills
against the Village.
         g.   Consent agenda.
         h.   Reports of committees.
         i.   Village President report.
         j.   Reports of the administrative staff.
         k.   Old business.
         l.   New business.
         m.   Public comments and questions.
         n.   Adjournment.
      2.   Special Meetings: The order of business at special meetings shall be
as follows:
         a.   Call to order and calling of the roll of the Trustees.
         b.   Consideration of the object of the meeting.
   B.   Rules Of Procedure:
      1.   The Village Board may adopt rules of order and procedure and if not
governed by those rules or State Statute, meetings shall be conducted in
accordance with "Robert's Rules of Order".
      2.   The President shall decide all questions of order, subject to an
appeal to the Board; and in all cases, where these rules are not applicable,
the Board of Trustees shall be governed by parliamentary law, as laid down in
"Robert's Rules of Order".
   C.   Suspension Of Rules: The rules of the Board of Trustees, other than
those prescribed by statute, may be suspended during any one meeting by a
majority vote of the members present.
   D.   Written Resolutions And Ordinances: All resolutions and ordinances
shall be reduced to writing before being presented to the Board of Trustees for
action.
   E.   President And Trustees To Attend Meetings: It shall be the duty of the
President and Board of Trustees to attend every meeting of the Board of
Trustees and their respective committee meetings unless unavoidably detained.
   F.   Referring Documents: All ordinances, petitions, resolutions, orders,
and communications to the Village shall be referred by the President or
presiding officer to the proper committee, officer or employee.
   G.   Committee Reports: Each committee shall make a report in the committee
minutes or orally on the state of the matters before that committee. (2016
Code)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-6C-1: Election And Term
1-6C-2: Bond
1-6C-3: Compensation
1-6C-4: Vacancy In Office
1-6C-5: Duties
1-6C-6: Deputy Clerk
1-6C-1: ELECTION AND TERM:
The village clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until
his or her successor is elected and qualified as provided by statute. (1976
Code § 2.09.010)
1-6C-2: BOND:
Before entering upon his or her duties of office, the village clerk shall
execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the
board of trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties.
(1976 Code § 2.09.020)
1-6C-3: COMPENSATION:
The annual salary of the village clerk shall be six thousand dollars
($6,000.00), until amended or modified by subsequent ordinance. (Ord. 94-18,
11-1-1994; amd. Ord. 01-15, 6-19-2001)
1-6C-4: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In case the office of village clerk becomes vacant for any reason, the
president and village board of trustees shall appoint a successor as provided
by state statute. (1976 Code § 2.09.110)
1-6C-5: DUTIES:
In addition to the statutory duties and those contained elsewhere in this code,
the village clerk shall:
   A.   Attend all meetings of the board of trustees; and post notice of and
record all proceedings of the board of trustees; and make available for public
inspection that record, within seven (7) days after approval by the board of
trustees.
   B.   Tape, or make a digital recording of, all closed meetings of the board
of trustees pursuant to the Illinois open meetings act 1 , secure such recorded
media in a safe place where it shall be kept in confidentiality, and otherwise
assure that the requirements of the open meetings act are met with respect to
their release and destruction. If the village clerk cannot attend a closed
meeting for whatever reason, the village clerk, a deputy village clerk, or
another designee of the clerk shall be responsible for assuring compliance with
the requirements of this subsection. The person taking minutes for such meeting
shall record the meeting and then provide the village clerk with the original
recorded media for security thereof. No copies of such recorded media shall be
made by any person other than the village clerk, or an authorized deputy clerk.
   C.   Keep a record of all ordinances and resolutions of the village in a
book or books provided for that purpose. For every ordinance requiring posting
or recording, the clerk shall, when so required, have noted thereon the date of
such posting or recording, and make a certificate of such posting or recording
and attach the same to the original ordinance kept in the records of the
village.
   D.   Seal and attest all ordinances, resolutions and contracts of the
village, certain licenses and permits, and other such documents as shall
require this formality. The seal of the village may be mechanically or
digitally printed on certain licenses, permits and other such documents, so
that a manual seal by the clerk is not necessary, but all documents with a
mechanical or digital seal, as provided herein, shall nevertheless be
considered officially sealed village documents.
   E.   Serve certain notices, either by personal service, by publication or
posting, required by statute, local ordinance, or by order of the president or
board of trustees to be served and in the manner by law required, unless
notices are expressly ordered to be served by another village official.
   F.   Keep a complete and accurate file of the official papers of the village
so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had by any properly
authorized elected official, village officer, or village staff member.
   G.   Countersign, in writing, all contracts, bonds, other agreements, or
evidence of indebtedness, of the village made in the name of the village, and
by the authority of the village president and board of trustees.
   H.   If created by the board of trustees, keep a list of all village board
committees, and a record of the business brought before them.
   I.   Be the custodian of the village seal and shall affix its impression on
documents whenever this is required, pursuant to subsection D of this section.
   J.   Perform all, and such duties as are, from time to time, imposed by the
village president or board of trustees. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
1-6C-6: DEPUTY CLERK:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment; General Powers And Duties: There is hereby
created the office of deputy clerk. The village administrator is authorized to
appoint a deputy clerk, who shall have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the village clerk,
and affix the seal of the village thereto whenever required. (1976 Code §
2.09.120; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Signature: When signing any documents, the deputy clerk shall sign the
name of the village clerk followed by the word "by" and the deputy clerk's own
name and the words "deputy clerk". (1976 Code § 2.09.120)
   C.   Duties: The deputy village clerk, under the general supervision of the
village clerk and village administrator, shall:
      1.   Maintain custody of all village records;
      2.   Publish and post notices of all public meetings and copies of
resolutions and ordinances adopted by the village board when appropriate or
directed;
      3.   Maintain the corporate seal and certify the authenticity of all
copies of village documents;
      4.   Serve as local registrar of all vital statistics kept by the
village;
      5.   Attend meetings of the village president and board of trustees when
the village clerk is unavailable and keep a record of their proceedings;
      6.   Receive developer escrow fees; and
      7.   Perform such functions or duties as assigned by the village clerk or
village administrator. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 7
OTHER VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-7-1: Retirement
1-7-2: Social Security
1-7-1: RETIREMENT:
The village president and board of trustees elect that the village shall
participate in the Illinois municipal retirement fund, effective January 1,
1969. (1976 Code § 2.32.010)
1-7-2: SOCIAL SECURITY:
   A.   Policy And Purpose: It is the policy and purpose of the village to
extend to the eligible employees thereof, effective as of August 1, 1954, the
benefits of the federal old age and survivors insurance system as authorized by
the federal social security act and amendments thereto. In pursuance of said
policy, and for that purpose, the village clerk shall take such action as may
be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (1976 Code §
2.32.020)
   B.   Execution Of Agreement With State: The village president is authorized
and directed to execute an agreement with the state employees' retirement
system (social security unit) to secure coverage of eligible employees as
provided in subsection A of this section. (1976 Code § 2.32.030)
   C.   Withholdings; Remittance: Withholdings from salaries or wages of
employees for the purpose provided in subsection A of this section are
authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the
state agency in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws
or regulations. (1976 Code § 2.32.040)
   D.   Employer Contributions: Employer contributions and administrative
expense shall be paid to the state agency in accordance with applicable state
laws and regulations from amounts appropriated for such purposes. (1976 Code §
2.32.050)
   E.   Records And Reports: The village finance director shall maintain such
records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state and
federal laws or regulations. (1976 Code § 2.32.060; amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Office Created; Appointment And Term; Qualifications
1-7A-2: Oath Of Office
1-7A-3: Compensation
1-7A-4: Powers And Duties
1-7A-5: Conflict Of Interest
1-7A-6: Removal From Office
1-7A-7: Acting Village Administrator
1-7A-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created the office of village administrator. The village
administrator shall be appointed by the president, with the advice and consent
of the board of trustees, for such term as determined at the time of his or her
appointment or by contract or as otherwise provided by law. The village
administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her executive and
administrative qualifications, with special reference to his or her actual
experience in, and knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of
his or her employment as set forth herein. At the time of such appointment, the
village administrator need not be a resident of the village, but shall reside
either within the village or within reasonable distance therefrom during the
term of office. (2016 Code)
1-7A-2: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the village administrator
shall take and subscribe the oath as set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/3.1-10-25, as may be amended from time to time. This oath, so subscribed,
shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. (2016 Code)
1-7A-3: COMPENSATION:
The village administrator shall receive such compensation and benefits as the
president and board of trustees shall determine by ordinance, or alternatively,
pursuant to any contract which defines said terms. No compensation shall be
paid to the village administrator in addition to that provided in the ordinance
or by the terms of any contract; except, however, the village administrator
shall be entitled to reimbursement for any reasonable actual expenses incurred
by him or her in the performance of his or her duties. (2016 Code)
1-7A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village administrator shall be the administrative director of all
departments of the village. He or she shall be responsible to the president and
board of trustees for the proper administration of all affairs of the village.
The village administrator shall perform such duties in addition to those which
may be prescribed by law, and shall be subject to such other rules and
regulations as the president and board of trustees may provide by ordinance
from time to time. Specifically, but without limitation, the village
administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   Supervise and coordinate the work of all departments of the village now
in existence or that may hereafter be created by the president and board of
trustees, except as limited or restricted by any ordinance of the village;
   B.   Recommend to the president and board of trustees in regard to the
hiring of all employees of the village. He or she shall recommend to the
president the removal or suspension of any department director or employee when
such removal or suspension shall be consistent with the village personnel
manual and/or any relevant provisions of the Illinois state statutes. All such
recommendations for the hiring of employees shall be based upon merit and
qualifications. Any recommendation for either hiring or removal shall be made
without regard to political belief or affiliation;
   C.   Review, annually, salaries, wages and hours and conditions of
employment of all department directors and employees under his or her
jurisdiction. No expenditure shall be made on account of or pursuant to such
appointment or employment by the village administrator unless authorized by or
under the annual budget of the village, and all such expenditures shall be
subject to the approval of the president and board of trustees;
   D.   Act as purchasing agent of the village and make or supervise all
necessary purchases of equipment, materials and supplies by the village, and
all contracts therefor. The village administrator shall have the power to enter
into contracts for services and purchase goods and materials involving up to
and including twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) without the prior approval
of the village board, as long as those services, goods and materials have been
previously budgeted. Contracts and purchases in excess of this amount shall
require the prior approval of the village board, whether or not they have been
previously budgeted. The village administrator may issue rules and regulations
governing requisitions and the transaction of business of purchasing between
himself or herself, as purchasing agent, and the department directors and
employees of the village;
   E.   Make recommendations concerning compensation for each department
director and employed position in the service of the village, including
minimum, intermediate and maximum rates;
   F.   Recommend the creation, consolidation and combination of offices,
positions, departments or units of the administrative and executive departments
of the village;
   G.   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the village and services maintained by the
public utilities in the village, and see that all franchises, permits and
privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed;
   H.   Prepare and present to the president for his consideration at the end
of each fiscal year an estimate of income and expenses for the ensuing year;
prepare the annual tax levy ordinance in the form and within the time required
by law; and prepare the annual budget; and submit such ordinance and budget to
the president for his submittal to the board of trustees, together with the
village administrator's opinion and recommendations covering their important
features; and upon the adoption of such ordinance and budget, the
administration of the same. To the end that all financial matters of the
village are coordinated, the village finance director is hereby directed to
cooperate with the village administrator and to assist him or her in the
performance of the duties imposed upon him or her by this article;
   I.   Act as business manager for the village under the direction of the
president and board of trustees and in cooperation with the village finance
director and clerk; control and direct all expenditures made by the village;
supervise the keeping of all necessary records and books of accounts of the
village that are not under the supervision of the finance director or clerk, by
ordinance or statute;
   J.   Attend all regular and special meetings of the village board, and
committees thereof, unless excused by the same;
   K.   Render or cause to be rendered monthly to the president and board of
trustees written statements showing the exact financial condition of the
village as of the end of the preceding month, including the statement of
current assets and liabilities, and a summarized statement of receipts and
expenditures;
   L.   Make recommendations to the president and board of trustees, or
appropriate committee thereof, relative to the adoption of such ordinances and
resolutions as he or she may deem necessary or expedient; meet with the
committees of the president and board of trustees as often as necessary and
when requested;
   M.   Make special reports or recommendations to the board of trustees, or
the appropriate committee thereof, as the board of trustees may request;
   N.   Render to all department directors of the village, and said department
directors shall render to him or her, all such assistance as is possible in the
performance of their respective duties, and all department directors and
employees of the village shall furnish and disclose to the village
administrator such oral or written information and material relating to the
affairs of the village as he or she shall request;
   O.   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the
village and the location of such property; be responsible for the care and
custody of all village property which is not by law assigned to some other
department director or body for care and control;
   P.   Devote his or her entire time during reasonable hours to the discharge
of his or her official duties. He or she shall hold no other employment for
compensation; except, that he or she may receive occasional stipends for
consultation with others not connected with the village, making speeches,
writing professional articles, and the like; provided, that such secondary
duties do not conflict with his or her duties as village administrator; and
   Q.   Perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by the
corporate authorities not inconsistent with the statutes of the state of
Illinois or with the ordinances of the village. (2016 Code)
1-7A-5: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
The village administrator shall abide by the relevant provisions of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes pertaining to conflicts of interest, disclosures of
economic interests and contracts, including, but not limited to, 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 420/4A-101 et
seq., and as the same and any other relevant provisions of the state statutes
may be amended from time to time by the Illinois general assembly. The village
administrator shall promptly disclose any potential conflict of interest to the
president and board of trustees. (2016 Code)
1-7A-6: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The village administrator may be removed by the president on any formal charge
whenever the president is of the opinion that the interests of the village
demand removal. Such removal is subject to the payment of any valid remaining
portion of his or her contract, if hired by contract. The president shall
report the reasons for such removal to the village board at a meeting to be
held not more than ten (10) days after the removal. If the president fails or
refuses to report to the board of trustees the reasons for the removal, or if
the village board, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by
law to be elected, disapproves of the removal, the village administrator,
thereupon, shall be restored to office. Upon restoration, the village
administrator shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. (2016 Code)
1-7A-7: ACTING VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
In the event the village administrator shall be incapacitated from performing
the duties of his or her position, a qualified person shall be appointed as
acting village administrator by the president, with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees, during such absence or incapacity, with all the powers
and duties of that office, who shall perform all the duties thereof without
furnishing any additional bond if such appointee shall already be under bond to
the village in any other capacity. If such appointment shall be a person not
already under bond to the village, such appointee shall furnish a bond in such
amount and with such surety as may be approved by the president and board of
trustees. The compensation to be paid the acting village administrator shall be
fixed by the president and board of trustees. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE FINANCE DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Office Created; Appointment And Term
1-7B-2: Powers And Duties
1-7B-3: Special Assessment Fund
1-7B-4: Drawing Warrants; Transfer Of Funds
1-7B-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is hereby created the office of finance director. The finance director
shall be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. The finance director shall have a term of office of one year
and until his successor has been chosen and has qualified. (2016 Code)
1-7B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   In addition to the duties specifically delegated to the finance
director by this code, the finance director shall have all duties and powers
which are assigned by any statute of the state of Illinois or any code,
ordinance or resolution of the village to the office of village treasurer and
shall serve ex officio in such capacity concurrently with his employment as
finance director.
   B.   The finance director shall:
      1.   Perform such duties as may be prescribed for the village treasurer
by statute or ordinance.
      2.   Receive all monies paid into the village, whether directly from the
person paying the money or from the hands of such other officer or employee as
may receive it, and he shall pay out monies only on vouchers or orders properly
signed by the village president and clerk.
      3.   Review all claims for reimbursement against the village and submit a
list of all outstanding claims to the finance committee for their
consideration, together with his report as to the status of the claims.
      4.   Prepare and file all fiscal, financial, and tax reports, documents,
and materials as may be required of the village to be presented to public
agencies of the federal, state, and county governments, and to be presented to
such financial institutions as may be doing business with the village.
      5.   On or before June 15 of each year, submit to the board of trustees a
report of his estimate, as nearly as may be, of the money necessary to defray
the expenses of the village during the current fiscal year. For the purpose of
making this report, the finance director shall require all officers of the
village to submit statements of the condition and expenses of their offices or
departments; and any proposed improvements and the estimated expense thereof; a
statement of all unperformed contracts; and the amount of all unexpended
budgeted items of the preceding year. His report shall also:
         a.   Classify the objects and purposes of such estimated expenditures
and the amounts required for each;
         b.   Show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year, from all
sources;
         c.   Show the amount of liability on which interest is to be paid;
         d.   Show the bonds and debts due and payable and the dates when such
are due and payable; and
         e.   Give such other information regarding the financial situation of
the village as the board of trustees may require.
      6.   Deposit the village funds in such depositories as may be selected
from time to time as provided by law and keep the deposit of the village monies
separate and distinct from his own monies. The finance director shall not use
village monies for personal or private use.
      7.   Keep such books, accounts, and records as may be required by statute
or ordinance, and establish, supervise, and maintain the financial record
system of the village. The records, books, and accounts of the finance director
shall show, among other things, all monies received by him showing the source
from which received and the purpose for which paid. (2016 Code)
1-7B-3: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND:
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the finance
director as a special fund to be applied only to the payment of the
improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest
thereon, for which the assessment was made, and such money shall be used for no
other purpose unless to reimburse the village for money expended for such
improvements. Payment on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with the
statutes and the law, and the finance director shall keep his books and
accounts in such a manner so that proper prorations in payments of principal
and interest can be made and ascertained. (2016 Code)
1-7B-4: DRAWING WARRANTS; TRANSFER OF FUNDS:
   A.   All warrants drawn on the finance director must be signed by the
president and countersigned by the clerk, stating the particular fund or
appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable,
and no money shall be otherwise paid except as may be provided by statute.
   B.   Money shall not be transferred by the finance director from one fund to
another after it has been received by him, nor appropriated to any other
purpose than that for which is has been collected or paid, except as may be
ordered by the president and board of trustees in manner and form prescribed by
statute. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Office Created; Qualifications
1-7C-2: Appointment; Legal Advisor
1-7C-3: Duties
1-7C-4: Compensation
1-7C-1: OFFICE CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created the office of village attorney, which office shall be
held by an attorney or firm of attorneys admitted to the bar and licensed to
practice law in the state. (2016 Code)
1-7C-2: APPOINTMENT; LEGAL ADVISOR:
The village president may appoint and retain the village attorney to act as
legal advisor to the village, and said village attorney shall render advice on
all legal questions affecting the village, as the board of trustees may request
from time to time. (2016 Code)
1-7C-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Prepare Documents: The village attorney shall prepare all ordinances
and resolutions required by the board of trustees, and shall draft and/or
supervise the content of any contracts, leases, or other documents and
instruments to which the village may be a party.
   B.   Attend Meetings: The village attorney shall attend all regular and
special meetings of the board of trustees and such meetings of boards and
commissions of the village or committees of the board of trustees as he shall
be directed by the board of trustees.
   C.   Suits And Actions: The village attorney shall defend any and all suits
or actions at law or equity to which the village may be a party, or in which it
may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the
village, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the village. (2016
Code)
1-7C-4: COMPENSATION:
For such services, the village attorney shall be paid such salary and
compensation as shall be agreed upon by the village attorney and the board of
trustees at the time of appointment. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE D. VILLAGE PROSECUTOR
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Office Created; Qualifications
1-7D-2: Appointment; Duties
1-7D-3: Assisted By Village Attorney
1-7D-4: Compensation
1-7D-1: OFFICE CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created the office of village prosecutor, who shall be an
attorney licensed to practice in the state. (2016 Code)
1-7D-2: APPOINTMENT; DUTIES:
The village prosecutor shall be appointed by the village president and shall
prosecute all matters involving the violation of any ordinances of the village
or in which the village may be interested. (2016 Code)
1-7D-3: ASSISTED BY VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
The village attorney shall assist the village prosecutor at the request of the
board of trustees. The village prosecutor shall notify the village attorney of
any notice of appeal served in connection with the imposition of any fine or
other penalty for a violation of a village ordinance. The village prosecutor
shall report to the village attorney on the progress of any matters which have
been continued from time to time and their final disposition. (2016 Code)
1-7D-4: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the village prosecutor shall be as determined by the
village board of trustees. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 8
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Statement Of Policy And Intent
1-8-2: Definitions
1-8-3: Financial Interest In Village Contracts Or Property
1-8-4: Disclosure Of Economic Interests
1-8-5: Incompatibility Of Office Or Employment
1-8-6: Prohibited Political Activities
1-8-7: Gift Ban
1-8-8: Confidential Information
1-8-9: Misuse Of Office Or Village Property
1-8-10: Complaints
1-8-11: Enforcement
1-8-12: Penalties
1-8-13: Copies To Village Officials And Personnel
1-8-14: Provisions Are Additional
1-8-1: STATEMENT OF POLICY AND INTENT:
   A.   All village public officials and employees, paid or unpaid, hold their
positions for the benefit of the village. They are bound to uphold the
constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state of Illinois
and to carry out the laws of the nation, the state and the village. They are
obligated to faithfully discharge the duties of their office, acting
independently and impartially for the public interest. They are expected to
make and carry out decisions and policy within the proper channels of
government structure without prejudice or favoritism; the opportunity for
personal gain will not influence their actions or decisions. They are expected
to observe a high standard of conduct in the discharge of their official duties
and to avoid any actions that might, to a reasonable person, suggest the
appearance of impropriety.
   B.   This code of ethics, which defines the expectations of the community in
regard to the behavior of public officials and employees, is not intended to
work hardship on any individual dedicated to serving the public interest. It
should not exclude those who are best qualified to serve or work, nor violate
any individual's right to personal privacy. It is not intended to impair an
individual's ability to participate in functions associated with official
duties.
   C.   In recognition of these expectations, there is hereby established a
code of ethics for all public officials and employees. (2016 Code)
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPOINTED OFFICERS: Shall include any officer appointed by the village
president including, but not limited to, the village administrator, finance
director, police chief, fire chief and superintendent of public works.
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities:
   A.   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action (as those terms are defined in section 2 of the lobbyist
registration act);
   B.   Relating to collective bargaining; or
   C.   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
"regular election", as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMMISSION/COMMITTEE MEMBERS: Persons appointed by the village president who
serve on standing and ad hoc boards, committees and commissions including the
9-1-1 board, ALS ad hoc committee, code enforcement board of appeals, economic
development commission, fire and police commission and planning and zoning
commission.
COMPENSATED TIME: Means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the covered
individual is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate, in whole or in part, for time worked in excess of the minimum
work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
COVERED INDIVIDUAL: Village president, trustee, appointed officer, village
employee, commission member, and committee member.
ELECTED OFFICIALS: Shall include the village president, village clerk, and
village trustees.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed by the village, but does not include independent
contractors, subcontractors, or elected public officials, or members of
commissions or committees.
EMPLOYER: The village of Berkeley.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
a covered individual.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive:
   A.   Compensation for employment;
   B.   Service credit toward pension benefits; and
   C.   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICERS: Persons who hold an elected or appointed office pursuant to statute
or appointed to an office which is established and the qualifications and
duties of which are prescribed by statute, with or without compensation, to
discharge a public duty for the village including elected officials and
appointed officers.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
   A.   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action;
   B.   Relating to collective bargaining; or
   C.   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating
in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding any thing of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action:
      1.   By an officer; or
      2.   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business:
      1.   With the officer; or
      2.   With an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing
that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated:
      1.   By the officer; or
      2.   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that
employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the covered individual.
   E.   Is an agent of a spouse, or an immediate family member who is a
"prohibited source". (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-8-3: FINANCIAL INTEREST IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS OR PROPERTY:
   A.   Prohibited Interests:
      1.   No covered individual shall be interested, directly or indirectly,
in his or her own name or in the name of any other person, association, trust
or corporation, in any contract, work or business of the village, or in the
sale of any article, whenever the expense, price or consideration of the
contract, work, business or sale is paid either from the village treasury or by
any assessment levied by statute or village ordinance.
      2.   No covered individual shall be interested, directly or indirectly,
in the purchase of any property which:
         a.   Belongs to the village; or
         b.   Is sold for taxes or assessments; or
         c.   Is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the village.
   B.   Exemptions For Village President And Trustees: (The dollar amounts
included in the following paragraphs are those provided by state law.):
      1.   Less Than Seven And One-Half Percent Ownership Share: Any elected or
appointed village president or village trustee may provide materials,
merchandise, property, services or labor to the village if:
         a.   The contract is with a person, firm, partnership, corporation or
cooperative association in which such interested member of the governing body
of the village has less than a seven and one-half percent (71/2%) share in the
ownership; and
         b.   Such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent
of his or her interest prior to or during deliberations concerning the proposed
award of the contract; and
         c.   Such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the
contract (though the member shall be considered present for the purpose of
establishing a quorum); and
         d.   Such contract is approved by a majority vote of those members
presently holding office; and
         e.   The contract is awarded after sealed bids to the lowest
responsible bidder if the amount of the contract exceeds one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00), but the contract may be awarded without bidding if
the amount is less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); and
         f.   The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of
such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
      2.   Contracts For Less Than Two Thousand Dollars: Any elected or
appointed village president or village trustee may provide materials,
merchandise, property, services or labor if:
         a.   The award of the contract is approved by a majority vote of the
governing body of the village; provided, that any such interested member shall
abstain from voting; and
         b.   The amount of the contract does not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00); and
         c.   The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of
all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to
exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00); and
         d.   Such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent
of his or her interests prior to or during deliberations concerning the
proposed award of the contract.
         e.   The interested member abstains from voting on the contract
(though the member shall be considered present for the purpose of establishing
a quorum).
      3.   Public Utility Services: A contract for the procurement of public
utility services by the village with a public utility company is not barred by
this section by one or more members of the corporate authorities being a
covered individual of the public utility company or holding an ownership
interest of no more than seven and one-half percent (71/2%) in the public
utility company.
      4.   Financial Services With A Local Bank: Nothing contained in this
section shall preclude a contract of deposit of monies, loans or other
financial services by the village with a local bank or local savings and loan
association, regardless of whether the village president or a trustee is
interested in such bank or savings and loan association as a covered individual
or as a holder of less than seven and one-half percent (71/2%) of the total
ownership interest. Such interested member of the corporate authorities must
publicly state the nature and extent of his or her interest during
deliberations concerning the proposed award of such a contract, but shall not
participate in any further deliberations concerning the proposed award. A
member abstaining from participation in deliberations and voting under this
subsection may be considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum.
Such interested member or members shall not vote on such a proposed award. The
award of such a contract shall require approval by a majority vote of those
members presently holding office. Consideration and award of any such contract
in which a member or members are interested may only be made at a regularly
scheduled public meeting of the village board of trustees.
   C.   Exemptions For Employees Or Committee Or Commission Members: Any
employee or committee or commission member may provide materials, merchandise,
property, services or labor if:
      1.   Less Than Seven And One-Half Percent Ownership Share:
         a.   The contract is with a person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or cooperative association in which such employee has less than a
seven and one-half percent (71/2%) share in the ownership; and
         b.   The contract is awarded after sealed bids to the lowest
responsible bidder if the amount of the contract exceeds one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00), or awarded without bidding if the amount of the
contract is less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); and
         c.   The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of
all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to
exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
      2.   Contracts For Less Than Two Thousand Dollars: In addition, any
employee or committee or commission member may provide materials, merchandise,
property, services or labor, regardless of the size of ownership interest the
employee or committee or commission member may have in the contracting entity,
if:
         a.   The amount of the contract does not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00); and
         b.   The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of
all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to
exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00).
      3.   Public Utility Contracts: A contract for the procurement of public
utility services by the village with a public utility company is not barred by
this section when an employee or committee or commission member is also a
covered individual of the public utility company, or when an employee or
committee or commission member holds an ownership interest of any size in the
public utility company.
      4.   Financial Services By A Local Bank: Nothing in this section shall
preclude a contract of deposit of monies, loans or other financial services by
the village with a local bank or local savings and loan association regardless
of whether a village employee or committee or commission member is interested
in such bank or savings and loan association as a covered individual or a
holder of an ownership interest of any size in such an institution.
      5.   Purchase Of Property At Auction: Nothing in this section shall
prohibit any employee or committee or commission member from bidding on and
purchasing property auctioned by the village at an auction open to all members
of the general public, whether the auction is sponsored by the village or by an
association of municipalities, such as the Northwest Municipal Conference.
(2016 Code)
1-8-4: DISCLOSURE OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS:
All elected officials, appointed officers, commissioners, committee members and
employees required to file economic disclosure statements with the county clerk
pursuant to article 4A of the Illinois governmental ethics act 1 , shall be in
violation of this code of ethics if they fail to comply with and fulfill the
requirements set forth in the state act. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 420/4A-101 et seq.
1-8-5: INCOMPATIBILITY OF OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT:
No covered individual shall hold another office or position of employment where
the duties of either office or employment are such that the holder cannot, in
every instance, properly and faithfully perform all of the duties of the other
office or position of employment in accordance with federal and state laws.
This section is not intended to automatically exclude a village employee from
holding an appointed office or position with a local board, commission or
committee, nor to prohibit an appointed commissioner or committee member from
also holding a position of employment with the village, either with or without
compensation, unless, as provided in this section, the commissioner, committee
member, officer or employee cannot, in every instance, properly and faithfully
perform all of the duties of both positions. When any questions arise under
this section, the opinion of the office of the Illinois attorney general shall
be sought, and that opinion shall be followed. (2016 Code)
1-8-6: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No covered individual shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined in section
1-8-2 of this chapter. No covered individual shall intentionally use any
property or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited
political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any covered individual intentionally require any other
covered individual to perform any prohibited political activity:
      1.   As part of that covered individual's duties;
      2.   As a condition of employment; or
      3.   During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
   C.   No covered individual shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that covered individual
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any covered individual be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for a
covered individual to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by a covered individual on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment; or 2) in a position, the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (2016 Code)
1-8-7: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Prohibitions And Exceptions:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no elected or
appointed official, officer, member or village employee shall intentionally
solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source or in violation of any
federal or state statute, rule, or regulation. This ban applies to and includes
the spouse of and immediate family living with the official, officer, member,
or village employee. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a
gift that violates this subsection. The restriction does not apply to the
following:
         a.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
         b.   Anything for which the covered individual pays the market value.
         c.   Any:
            (1)   Contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or
under this chapter; or
            (2)   Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of
a political organization or candidate.
         d.   Educational materials and missions.
         e.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss village business.
         f.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
         g.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the member, officer, or employee has reason to believe that,
under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position
or employment of the member, officer, or employee and not because of the
personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of
personal friendship, the member, officer, or employee shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
            (1)   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
            (2)   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the member, officer, or
employee, the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or
sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
            (3)   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the member, officer, or
employee, the individual who gave the gift also, at the same time, gave the
same or similar gifts to other members, officers, or employees.
         h.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per person in value on a single calendar day; provided, that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared; or 2) catered. For the purposes of this subsection, "catered" means
food or refreshments that are purchased ready to eat and delivered by any
means.
         i.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the duties of the officer, member, or employee as an
office holder or employee) of the officer, member, or employee, or the spouse
of the officer, member, or employee, if the benefits have not been offered or
enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer, member,
or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
         j.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this subsection, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to a covered
individual from another covered individual, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to a covered individual by a member, officer, or employee of
another governmental entity.
         k.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
         l.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      2.   Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection A is mutually
exclusive and independent of one another.
   B.   Disposition Of Gifts: A covered individual does not violate this
chapter if the covered individual promptly takes reasonable action to return
the prohibited gift to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (2016 Code)
1-8-8: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
No covered individual shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose
confidential information, including executive session materials and
discussions, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the village.
The use of confidential information to advance the financial or any other
private interest of any covered individual or any other person is prohibited.
(2016 Code)
1-8-9: MISUSE OF OFFICE OR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
   A.   Misuse Of Office: No covered individual shall use his or her position
for individual gain rather than for the benefit of the village.
   B.   Use Of Public Property: No covered individual shall request or permit
the use of village owned vehicles, equipment, materials or any other property
for personal use or personal profit, except when the property is made available
to the public in general or provided to the covered individual for his or her
use as part of an approved village policy, adopted by either the board of
trustees or the village administrator. It is expected that covered individuals
shall report suspected violations of this subsection. (2016 Code)
1-8-10: COMPLAINTS:
   A.   It is not the intention of this chapter to permit complaints designed
to harass, embarrass or to serve a political purpose. It is the intention of
this chapter to bring forth well grounded allegations of violations of this
chapter.
   B.   Any person wishing to file a complaint against a covered individual
alleging a violation shall do so by filing a written, signed complaint in the
office of the village administrator in the case of village employees or to the
village president in the case of the village administrator, other elected
officials, or commissioners for processing in the appropriate manner.
Complaints regarding the village president shall be filed with the village
attorney. Copies of said complaint shall be distributed as provided herein.
   C.   Any such complaint shall be based on personal knowledge and shall
include a statement of facts and circumstances sufficient to inform the covered
individual of the nature of the alleged violation. All complaints shall be
signed by the person or persons bringing them forth and having knowledge of the
matters stated therein and shall be accompanied by a certification swearing,
under oath, that the statements set forth therein are true and correct. Any
person who intentionally makes a false statement in a complaint shall be in
violation of this code of ethics.
   D.   Within two (2) business days of receiving a complaint, the village
clerk shall forward a copy to the person alleged to be in violation of this
code of ethics. Complaints made regarding a village employee or appointed
officer who is subject to disciplinary procedures under the village personnel
manual and state law shall also be forwarded to the offices of the village
president and village administrator. Complaints regarding employees subject to
the jurisdiction of the board of fire and police commissioners shall also be
forwarded to each commissioner, along with the village president and village
administrator. Complaints made regarding all appointed officers shall be
forwarded to the village president. Complaints made regarding the village
president, trustees, or commission/committee members shall be forwarded to the
village president and each of the trustees. (2016 Code)
1-8-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Officials:
      1.   The enforcement of this code of ethics against any appointed officer
and employees covered by the village personnel manual and state law, which
could result in disciplinary action, including, but not limited to, suspension
or removal from village employment, shall be the responsibility of the village
president and the village administrator.
      2.   Complaints against employees subject to the jurisdiction of the
board of fire and police commissioners shall be enforced by that board.
   B.   Enforcement Of Complaints:
      1.   Any applicable procedure requiring notification of the allegations
and a hearing which is required, either by federal law, state law, the village
personnel manual, or any applicable ordinance, shall be followed by the
administrator and board of fire and police commissioners in enforcing this
chapter.
      2.   Each complaint received by the village president involving appointed
officers shall be enforced by the village president, in accord with state law.
      3.   Each complaint received by the board of trustees involving the
village president, trustees, or commission/committee members shall be enforced
by the board of trustees, in accord with state law.
      4.   Violations of this chapter which would require judicial procedure
for enforcement shall be forwarded to the county state's attorney. (2016 Code)
1-8-12: PENALTIES:
Any person found to be in violation of this code of ethics by the appropriate
enforcing person, officer or public body shall be subject to reprimand,
censure, suspension, removal or other appropriate disciplinary/monetary action
to the extent allowed by the law. If a complaint is determined to be
intentionally false, the complaining party shall be liable to the party
complained of for all legal expenses incurred in the defense of the complaint.
If a violation of this chapter results in a direct loss of funds or property to
the village, the person found guilty of such a violation shall make restitution
to the village for such a loss. (2016 Code)
1-8-13: COPIES TO VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND PERSONNEL:
A copy of this code of ethics shall be provided to all elected officials,
appointed officers and appointed commissioners/committee members upon beginning
their term of office. A copy of this code of ethics shall be provided to all
employees upon its passage and to new employees upon employment. All appointed
officers, employees, and commission and committee members shall sign a receipt
acknowledging delivery of the code of ethics in a manner to be determined by
the village administrator. Notwithstanding the foregoing, failure to receive a
copy of same shall not constitute a defense for any violation of this code of
ethics. (2016 Code)
1-8-14: PROVISIONS ARE ADDITIONAL:
The requirements set forth in this chapter are in addition to, and not a
substitute for, any similar requirements provided under state or federal law.
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 9
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Public Records
1-9-2: Freedom Of Information Act Officer
1-9-3: Procedure For Filing Request
1-9-4: Inspection Of Records
1-9-5: Fees And Waivers
1-9-6: Destruction Or Removal Of Records Prohibited
1-9-1: PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   The village recognizes that, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
140/1, the Illinois freedom of information act ("FOIA") provides that it is a
primary obligation of public bodies to provide records.
   B.   The village also recognizes that, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 140/3.3 of the FOIA, public bodies are not required to interpret or
advise requesters as to the meaning or significance of public records.
   C.   The village also recognizes that, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 140/1 of the FOIA, public bodies are not obligated to create a public
record which was not already created or prepared by the public body.
   D.   Pursuant to the authority contained in the FOIA, the village hereby
promulgates this chapter as the rules and regulations, but to the extent that
said rules and regulations might otherwise be interpreted as inconsistent with
the FOIA, the FOIA shall govern in all respects. (2016 Code)
1-9-2: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICER:
   A.   Position Created: There is hereby created the position of "freedom of
information act officer" ("FOIA officer"). There may be one or more FOIA
officer(s) designated. The corporate authorities of the village will designate
one or more officials or employees of the village to act as a freedom of
information officer, and the village shall disclose the identity of its FOIA
officer(s) on either its website or by means of a list of such officers
available for public access. The list of FOIA officer(s) shall also be provided
to the state's public access counselor ("PAC").
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: The FOIA officer(s) or his or her designee
shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
      1.   Training: Initially, within six (6) months after January 1, 2010,
all FOIA officers shall successfully complete, via electronic means, a training
course administered by the Illinois PAC. All FOIA officer(s) shall thereafter
complete additional training on an annual basis. New FOIA officers must
complete the curriculum within thirty (30) days after their appointment to the
position.
      2.   Responsibilities: The FOIA officer shall be responsible for:
         a.   Receiving FOIA requests.
         b.   Ensuring timely responses to FOIA requests.
         c.   Issuing FOIA responses.
         d.   Developing a list of documents or categories of records that the
village will immediately disclose upon request.
         e.   Meeting with requesters to inspect records in his or her
presence.
      3.   Duties: Upon receiving an FOIA request, the FOIA officer shall do
the following:
         a.   Note the date the village received the written request;
         b.   Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and
make a notation of that date on the written request;
         c.   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request,
including all documents submitted with the request until there has been
compliance with the request or the request has been denied; and
         d.   Create a file for the retention of each original request, a copy
of the response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a
copy of other related communications.
      4.   Notices: The FOIA officer or his or her designee is authorized to
issue notices of extension of time for production of records as well as notices
of denial and/or intent to deny production of records.
   C.   Posting And Providing Information: In compliance with the provisions of
the Illinois FOIA, the village shall prominently display at its administrative
office at the village hall, make available for inspection and copying, and send
through the mail, if requested, any or all of the following:
      1.   A brief description of itself, including a short summary of its
purpose, a block diagram giving its functional subdivisions, the total amount
of its operating budget, the number and location of all of its separate
offices, the approximate number of full and part time employees, and the
identification and membership of any board, commission, committee, or council
which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the operation of the public
body, or which exercises control over its policies or procedures, or to which
the public body is required to report and be answerable for its operations; and
      2.   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating the freedom of
information officer or officers, the address where requests for public records
should be directed, and any fees allowable under the FOIA.
      3.   The village shall also post this information on any website the
village maintains. (2016 Code)
1-9-3: PROCEDURE FOR FILING REQUEST:
   A.   Pursuant to the FOIA, requests for inspection of or copies of records
shall be made in writing and directed to the village FOIA officer, but no
standard form for such request is required. Requests may be made by
appointment, mail, e-mail, facsimile request, or personal delivery. If a
requester wishes, the FOIA officer will provide the requester with a "freedom
of information act request form" for his or her use.
   B.   Questions regarding access to village records shall be directed to the
FOIA officer or his or her designee. In consideration of the type, size, and
complexity of the document(s) requested, it may be necessary for a requester to
make an appointment with the FOIA officer to answer questions or review
documents. (2016 Code)
1-9-4: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
   A.   Inspection; Copies: The FOIA officer or his or her designee shall
obtain the file or files requested and allow the requester to inspect them in
his or her presence. Should the requester request copies of all or a portion of
the information, the requester must indicate in writing, or on the FOIA request
form what copies are desired, and the FOIA officer or his or her designee will
make the requested copies and provide them to the requester within the time
frame prescribed by the FOIA; provided, however, that such information is not
determined to be exempt.
   B.   Redaction Of Exempt Information: For any request made to inspect and/or
photocopy a public record containing information that is both exempt from
disclosure and not exempt from disclosure, the village shall make only the
nonexempt information available for inspection and/or photocopying by redacting
the exempt information from the document.
   C.   Hours: Public records may only be inspected at the village hall during
the hours when it is regularly open.
   D.   Business Days: Monday through Friday, both inclusive, except holidays,
as defined or fixed by any statute of the state, are hereby declared to be
"business days".
   E.   Search, Location And Reproduction Of Records: Only village personnel
shall be permitted to search village files to locate records requested, and
only village personnel shall be permitted to operate village equipment to
reproduce the requested copies. (2016 Code)
1-9-5: FEES AND WAIVERS:
   A.   Each requester is required to pay to the village the appropriate fees
for copies of village records and will receive a receipt for same. The village
will charge the following fees for reproduction or copying of records as set
forth in the FOIA:
      1.   There is no charge for providing the initial fifty (50) pages of
black and white, letter or legal size copies. The cost after fifty (50) pages
will be as provided in the annual fee schedule.
      2.   The fee for color or irregular sized copies shall be the actual cost
incurred by the village for reproducing the records.
      3.   If the village maintains the respective document(s) in electronic
format, such document(s) must be furnished in the electronic format if the
requester so requests. The village is not required to produce records kept in
electronic format in an alternate manner. The fee charged for producing records
in an electronic format shall be the actual cost incurred by the village for
purchasing the recording medium.
   B.   All payments for production of records shall be made in the form of
cash or certified or cashier's check made payable to the village.
   C.   Requests to waive any fee(s) for reproduction of document(s) must be
made, in writing, to a village FOIA officer and must state how the information
requested "primarily benefits the general public". The FOIA officer shall be
authorized to determine whether such request for a waiver shall be honored.
(2016 Code)
1-9-6: DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF RECORDS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to mutilate, destroy, transfer, remove, or
otherwise damage or dispose of, in whole or in part, any village public record,
unless the same is required in the discharge of village business, and otherwise
except as provided by law. (1976 Code § 2.56.030; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 10
PSEBA BENEFIT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
1-10-1: Purpose
1-10-2: Policy And Procedure For Administering Applications For PSEBA Benefits
1-10-3: Policy And Procedure For Hearings For PSEBA Benefits
1-10-4: PSEBA Benefits Granted By The Village
1-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of a full-time village employee for the benefits
enumerated under the public safety employee benefits act, 820 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 320/1, et seq., as amended ("PSEBA"). All benefits provided by the
village to employees pursuant to the PSEBA shall be consistent with the PSEBA
and limited to the benefits available under the PSEBA. (Ord. 19-7, 3-5-2019)
1-10-2: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING APPLICATIONS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
   A.   Employees, or family member(s) of injured or deceased employees, who
may qualify for PSEBA benefits must file a full and complete application in
writing with the village administrator.
   B.   A complete application shall include the following:
      1.   The applicant's name and date of hire, detailed information
regarding the incident for which PSEBA benefits are sought, including
information relating to how the injury was sustained in the line of duty,
including the date, time, place, nature of injury, and other factual
circumstances surrounding the incident;
      2.   The applicant's first-hand knowledge explaining, to the village's
satisfaction, how the injury directly resulted from:
         a.   Response to fresh pursuit;
         b.   Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
         c.   Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
         d.   The investigation of a criminal act;
      3.   A signed unconditional PSEBA medical authorization release which
authorizes the village to collect information related to the incident
including, but not limited to, disability pension proceedings, worker's
compensation records, and medical records, and a complete list of the names and
addresses for all health care providers involved in the diagnosis, treatment,
review or handling of the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought;
      4.   A signed unconditional PSEBA general information release specifying
the name and signature of the applicant or her/his authorized representative
along with legal proof of the representation and name and signature of witness
authorizing the collection of information necessary to review the application;
      5.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses to the
incident resulting in the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought, along
with any statements of the witnesses which the applicant either possesses, may
obtain or is aware of;
      6.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses the
applicant intends to call at the PSEBA hearing, along with their anticipated
subjects of testimony and any opinions the witnesses are expected to give;
      7.   Information and documentation filed with any pension board by the
applicant;
      8.   Information regarding other sources of health insurance benefits
currently enrolled in, received by, or available to the applicant and/or the
applicant's family members, including the source of the benefits and the
benefits provided or available; and
      9.   Any other information supporting the PSEBA eligibility requirements.
   C.   The PSEBA application must be sworn to by the applicant and notarized
to certify the truthfulness of the application's contents. A review of the
application by the village shall not occur until the application is complete.
   D.   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the
village, the completed application shall then be submitted to the village
administrator as the preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date
stamped and provided to the applicant.
   E.   Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the village
administrator shall set the matter for an administrative hearing with the
village administrator or his or her designee serving as the hearing officer to
make a determination on whether to grant the application and provide the
applicant with benefits under PSEBA.
   F.   The applicant shall be given written notice of the date for the
administrative hearing not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the
commencement of the hearing. If the applicant, upon receiving written notice of
the administrative hearing, cannot attend that date, the applicant must contact
the hearing officer in writing within seven (7) calendar days after being
served. The hearing officer shall establish an alternative hearing date within
thirty (30) calendar days of the original hearing date. The applicant's failure
to appear at the administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA
benefits.
   G.   The village administrator may delegate any of his or her authority,
duties and obligations under this chapter, in whole or part, to a designee, or
designees. (Ord. 19-7, 3-5-2019)
1-10-3: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
   A.   Hearing Officer: The village administrator or his or her designee shall
be the hearing officer for hearings on applications for PSEBA benefits. The
hearing officer shall have all of the authorities granted under statute,
ordinance and common law relative to the conduct of administrative hearings,
including to:
      1.   Adopt, revise and enforce rules of procedure for hearings;
      2.   Preside over hearings;
      3.   Administer oaths;
      4.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
      5.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties, their
representatives or the hearing officer;
      6.   Rule upon objections to the admissibility of evidence;
      7.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      8.   Issue a final written determination on each application for PSEBA
benefits based on the evidence presented at the hearing which shall include
findings of fact, decision and order.
   B.   Hearings: Hearings for the determination of eligibility for benefits
under PSEBA shall be initiated by the village after the submission of a full
and complete PSEBA application, and a determination by the hearing officer that
it is appropriate to proceed with the hearing, which determination shall
include consideration of the status of any disability pension proceeding
related to the applicant and whether the disability pension proceeding has
resulted in a final and non-appealable decision. A hearing shall be held to
adjudicate and determine whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under
the PSEBA. If the applicant is found eligible, the PSEBA benefits provided to
the applicant shall be consistent with the PSEBA.
      1.   Record: Hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter,
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by the certified court
reporter.
      2.   Procedures: The village and the applicant shall be parties at the
hearings and are entitled to representation by counsel at hearings and may
present witnesses, testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing
witnesses, and may request the issuance by the hearing officer of subpoenas to
compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant
documents. The hearing officer may issue subpoenas to compel the appearance of
relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents in his or her
discretion.
      3.   Evidence: The Illinois rules of evidence shall apply to the extent
practicable unless, by such application, the hearing officer determines that
application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of
evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent person in the
conduct of her/his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole discretion
of the hearing officer.
      4.   Final Determination: A written determination by the hearing officer
of whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under the PSEBA shall
constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of judicial
review under the common law writ of certiorari. Motions to reconsider, set
aside or challenge the final determination of the hearing officer are not
permitted.
      5.   Burden Of Proof: At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all
hearings shall be by the preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 19-7, 3-5-2019)
1-10-4: PSEBA BENEFITS GRANTED BY THE VILLAGE:
   A.   Basic Group Insurance Plan: If an applicant is determined to be
eligible for PSEBA benefits, the applicant will be eligible to receive
continued health coverage consistent with the PSEBA under the village's basic
group health insurance plan. The basic group health insurance plan shall be the
least expensive health plan offered to village employees at the time PSEBA
benefits are awarded as determined solely by the village from time to time. The
basic group health insurance plan may change from time to time. A PSEBA
beneficiary may choose to enroll in any other health insurance plan offered by
the village different from the basic group health insurance plan, but shall pay
the difference in insurance premium between the village's basic plan and the
other plan. Failure of a PSEBA beneficiary to timely pay the premium's non-
basic level coverage shall result in coverage in the basic plan. PSEBA benefits
do not include benefits not provided in the village's basic group health
insurance plan, such as, but not limited to, dental, vision, life insurance,
and the like. Individuals receiving benefits from the village under the PSEBA
may only change from one health insurance plan to another during the village's
open enrollment period.
   B.   Reduction Or Elimination Of PSEBA Benefits By Other Health Coverage: If
a PSEBA beneficiary becomes eligible to receive health insurance benefits from
any other source, including, but not limited to, Medicare, the PSEBA
beneficiary's coverage may be reduced or eliminated as determined by the
village consistent with PSEBA. Health insurance benefits payable from any other
source will reduce the PSEBA benefits payable from the village. Receipt of
health insurance benefits from other sources without notice to the village
shall require the PSEBA beneficiary to reimburse the village for the value of
those benefits. The PSEBA beneficiary shall notify the village when the PSEBA
beneficiary becomes Medicare eligible regardless of the status of the
enrollment period, so the village may assist with the transition to Medicare
coverage and/or adjust health insurance benefits or PSEBA benefits accordingly.
   C.   Affidavit Of Continued PSEBA Eligibility: All recipients of PSEBA
benefits from the village shall complete and return to the village
administrator on an annual basis an affidavit verifying the recipient's
continued eligibility for PSEBA benefits. The affidavit must be completed and
returned to the village administrator within sixty (60) calendar days of
written notice from the village. If the recipient does not complete and return
the affidavit within the time required, the village administrator shall give
the recipient an additional written notice providing an additional thirty (30)
calendar days for the recipient to complete and return the affidavit. Failure
to return the affidavit within the time required shall result in the recipient
incurring responsibility for reimbursing the village for premiums paid during
the period the affidavit is due and not filed.
   D.   Disclosure Of Health Insurance Coverage: PSEBA beneficiaries have an
ongoing obligation and shall update health insurance coverage information
provided and failure to do so may result in the denial of benefits and/or
reimbursement to the village for duplicate coverage. If duplicate coverage has
been received by a PSEBA beneficiary, further PSEBA benefits will be denied
until the village has been fully reimbursed by the PSEBA beneficiary for what
it would have been credited if it had known about other coverage. (Ord. 19-7,
3-5-2019)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Board Established; Appointment; Chair
2-1-2: Term Of Office; Vacancies
2-1-3: Qualifications And Restrictions
2-1-4: Oath And Bond
2-1-5: Compensation
2-1-6: Removal Of Members
2-1-7: Officers And Advisors
2-1-8: Rules And Regulations
2-1-9: Appointments By Board
2-1-10: Annual Report And Budget
2-1-11: Rooms And Funds
2-1-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; CHAIR:
There is hereby established a board of fire and police commissioners which
shall consist of three (3) members. The members of the board shall be appointed
by the village president, with the consent of the board of trustees; provided,
however, that no appointment shall be made by the president within thirty (30)
days before the expiration of his term of office. The board members shall elect
a chair to serve during the municipal fiscal year. (2016 Code)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
All reappointments or subsequent appointments shall be for a three (3) fiscal
year term. Vacancies on the board shall be filled in the manner provided
herein, and appointments to such vacancy shall be effective until the end of
the term applicable to the commissioner being replaced. (2016 Code)
2-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Each member of the board shall be considered an officer of the village.
Members of the board do not need to be residents of the village or qualified
electors of the village.
   B.   No person holding an office under the United States, this state or any
political subdivision thereof, or the village shall be a member of the board of
fire and police commissioners or the secretary thereof. The acceptance of any
such office by a member of the board shall be treated as a resignation of his
office as a member of the board or the secretary thereof.
   C.   No person shall be appointed a member of the board who is related,
either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected
official of the village.
   D.   No more than two (2) members of the board shall belong to the same
"political party" existing in the village at the time of such appointments and
as defined in section 10-2 of the election code 1 . If only one or no political
party exists in the village at the time of such appointments, then state or
national political party affiliations shall be considered in making such
appointments. Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person
appointed as a member of the board.
   E.   No person shall be appointed a member of the board of fire and police
commissioners who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state
or comparable laws of any other state or the United States. (2016 Code) (amd.
Ord. 19-23, 5-21-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/10-2.
2-1-4: OATH AND BOND:
Each member shall take an oath (or affirmation) of office and shall give bond
in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The cost of such bond will
be borne by the village. (2016 Code)
2-1-5: COMPENSATION:
Members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be compensated for
their services by payment of twenty dollars ($20.00) per meeting. (2016 Code)
2-1-6: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
A member shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written
charges, and after an opportunity to be heard, within thirty (30) days, in his
own defense, before a regular meeting of the village board of trustees. A
majority vote of the corporate authorities shall be required to remove any such
member from office. (2016 Code)
2-1-7: OFFICERS AND ADVISORS:
   A.   Secretary:
      1.   The board may employ a secretary at such compensation as may be
approved by the board of trustees in the annual budget. In the alternative, the
board may designate one of its own members to act as secretary, with or without
compensation. If the secretary is to be compensated, the amount thereof shall
be fixed by the board of trustees.
      2.   The secretary shall keep the minutes of the board's proceedings
(copies of which shall be sent to the village board), shall be custodian of all
records pertaining to the business of the board, shall keep a record of all
examinations held, and shall perform such other duties as the board may
prescribe.
   B.   Attorney For Board: The village attorney or an attorney appointed by
the village president, with the consent of the board of trustees, shall serve
as counsel for the board. (2016 Code)
2-1-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The board shall make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
provide for the appointment, promotion, suspension and removal of the members
of the police and fire departments and from time to time may make such changes
in the rules and regulations as may be required.
   B.   The rules and changes therein shall be printed immediately for
distribution. The board shall give notice: 1) of the places where the printed
rules may be obtained; and 2) of the date, not less than ten (10) days
subsequent to the time of publication, when the rules or changes therein shall
go into operation. This notice shall be published in one or more newspapers
with a general circulation in the village.
   C.   The rules of the board shall apply only to the conduct of examinations
for original appointments, for promotions, and to the conduct of hearings on
charges brought against a member of the police or fire department. No such
rules shall be made by the board to govern the operation of the police or fire
department, or the conduct of its members. (2016 Code)
2-1-9: APPOINTMENTS BY BOARD:
   A.   The board shall appoint all officers and members of the fire department
and police department; except, that the chief of police and the chief of the
fire department shall be appointed by the village president, with the consent
of the board of trustees, and deputy chiefs, commanders and part time employees
shall be appointed as provided in this code.
   B.   The board shall conduct and hold examinations for original appointment
and promotion examinations for the police and fire departments as provided by
law.
   C.   The board shall issue certificates of appointment as provided by law.
(2016 Code)
   D.   The board shall have the authority to establish rules for a second
register of eligibles for the hiring of "lateral transfer applicants" who have
been certified as having successfully completed the basic law enforcement
course as required by the Illinois law enforcement training and standards board
and may be given preference in appointment over noncertified applicants on the
register of eligibles maintained for police officer applicants, and further
shall have the authority to exempt lateral transfer applicants from any written
testing requirements for original appointments under its rules and regulations.
(Ord. 15-56, 10-20-2015)
2-1-10: ANNUAL REPORT AND BUDGET:
   A.   Annual Report:
      1.   The board of fire and police commissioners shall, on or before the
first Monday of June each year, submit a written report to the village
president containing the following:
         a.   A statement of the board's activities for the twelve (12) month
period ending with the preceding May 31.
         b.   A copy of all rules and regulations of the board then in effect.
         c.   A statement concerning the practical effect of such rules and
regulations.
         d.   Such suggestions the board may have which would result in the
greater efficiency of the police department and of the fire department.
         e.   Such other information as the board deems advisable to include in
such report.
      2.   The report required to be submitted by subsection A1 of this section
shall be signed by the members of the board. Any member who wishes to comment
on any portion of the report separately from the other members may do so, and
his separate comments shall be attached to and be made a part of such report.
      3.   The village president shall advise the board of trustees, the
village administrator, the fire chief and the police chief of the contents of
such report as soon as practicable after receipt by the village president.
   B.   Annual Budget Request: The board shall submit an annual budget request
to the village president and board of trustees prior to February 28 of each
year. (2016 Code)
2-1-11: ROOMS AND FUNDS:
The board of trustees shall provide suitable rooms for the board of fire and
police commissioners, and shall allow reasonable use of public buildings for
holding examinations by the board, and shall further provide adequate funds in
the annual budget for the operation of the board. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Purpose; Commission Created
2-2-2: Composition; Appointment; Qualifications; Vacancies
2-2-3: Term Of Office; Compensation; Code Of Conduct And Ethics
2-2-4: Organization
2-2-5: Meetings
2-2-6: Responsibilities
2-2-1: PURPOSE; COMMISSION CREATED:
The village did conduct and approve the St. Charles Road corridor plan in 1999,
which provides a framework to assist the village in enhancing economic
development and redevelopment on and around the village's primary commercial
corridor – St. Charles Road. The establishment of an economic development
commission is one of several key strategies identified by the plan to help
facilitate and implement the goals and objectives set by the plan. Therefore,
an advisory commission to promote and encourage business development within the
village is hereby created, which shall be known as the ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
COMMISSION. (Ord. 05-25, 4-19-2005)
2-2-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; VACANCIES:
The commission shall be composed of seven (7) members to be appointed by the
village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. Where
possible, the appointed members will have a broad base of professional and
complementary expertise in the fields of business, finance, real estate,
advertising, retail and economic development. When feasibly possible, a
majority of members shall be residents. Vacancies among the members of the
commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
(Ord. 05-25, 4-19-2005)
2-2-3: TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION; CODE OF CONDUCT AND ETHICS:
Terms of the members of the economic development commission shall be for three
(3) years. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Commission members shall serve for a compensation of twenty dollars
($20.00) per regularly scheduled monthly meeting. All members shall adhere to
and abide by applicable conflict of interest and ethics policies. (Ord. 10-11,
3-16-2010)
2-2-4: ORGANIZATION:
The village president, with the advice and consent of the village board, shall
appoint one of the members to serve as chairperson of the commission on an
annual basis. The commission shall meet and elect, on an annual basis, one of
its members as secretary, and shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its
meetings and carrying out its activities in furtherance of the duties and
purposes of the commission. (Ord. 05-25, 4-19-2005)
2-2-5: MEETINGS:
The commission shall adopt a regular schedule of meetings and shall meet at the
village hall in accordance with such schedule and at all other times when
called to meeting by the president and board of trustees, or by the chair of
the commission, or by four (4) of its members. A majority of the members of the
commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Meetings
shall be held no less than quarterly and properly noticed publicly. Any member
who fails to attend two (2) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the
commission, unless excused by the chair for good cause, shall, after notice to
the member, constitute resignation from the commission. Copies of the minutes
of all meetings of the commission and other reports of activities shall be
furnished to the village board at least twice per year. (Ord. 10-11, 3-16-2010)
2-2-6: RESPONSIBILITIES:
The economic development commission shall help maintain a favorable climate for
economic development through:
   A.   Analyzing and measuring the implementation of the goals and objectives
identified by the St. Charles Road corridor plan.
   B.   Reviewing, prioritizing and updating, as necessary, the business
redevelopment "opportunity sites" as identified by the plan.
   C.   Reviewing the development of marketing strategy materials and making
recommendations for additional materials and resources.
   D.   Considering and recommending potential plans related to other
commercial/industrial locations in the village outside of St. Charles Road.
   E.   Studying the conditions and trends of development, advising the board
of growth and potential and recommending policies and objectives for economic
development efforts.
   F.   Following a board approved plan to meet with businesses to encourage
and assist in locating in Berkeley.
   G.   Participating in welcoming new businesses to the village.
   H.   Preparing and recommending to the village board, from time to time,
ordinance changes involving zoning, parking restrictions, licensing, or other
changes which will enhance or otherwise benefit the commercial districts and
activities within the village.
   I.   Undertaking such further studies and projects regarding economic
development within the village as may be referred to the commission from time
to time by the village board. (Ord. 05-25, 4-19-2005)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 17-11, 3-7-2017, eff. 5-1-2017)
CHAPTER 4
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Established
2-4-2: Membership; Election Of Members; Terms; Vacancies
2-4-3: Election Procedures
2-4-4: Powers, Duties And Procedures
2-4-5: Meetings
2-4-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a board known as the BERKELEY FOREIGN FIRE
INSURANCE BOARD. This board shall be comprised of and shall exercise the powers
as designated herein being consistent with state statutes. (2016 Code)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP; ELECTION OF MEMBERS; TERMS; VACANCIES:
   A.   The board shall consist of seven (7) members. The members of the board
shall be designated chair, vice chair, secretary, treasurer, and trustee. Each
member of the board shall be either a full time member or part time member with
more than one year of service, not including noncivilian members of the village
fire department.
   B.   The members of the board shall be elected by full time members or part
time members with more than one year of service, not including noncivilian
members of the department.
   C.   The members of the board shall serve two (2) year terms. In the event
no successor member assumes office prior to the expiration of the two (2) year
term, then the member shall serve until a successor member assumes office. The
initial term of office of the members of the board shall begin thirty (30) days
after completion of the election. Each board member shall hold office during
his term unless the member resigns from the department, retires from the
department, or is discharged from the department. If any of the three (3)
events occurs, the board member shall automatically be removed from the board
and the position deemed vacant.
   D.   Vacancies in the board shall be filled by election by the noncivilian
members of the department, and such election shall be for the balance of the
unexpired term. Any person elected to fill a board vacancy shall assume office
immediately upon completion of the election. (2016 Code)
2-4-3: ELECTION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Initial Election:
      1.   There is hereby established a temporary fire department election
committee. The temporary election committee shall consist of three (3) members.
The chief of the fire department shall serve as a member and as chair of the
committee. The chief shall appoint a member of the department to serve as a
member of committee and the remaining member shall be from the Berkeley
professional firefighters association.
      2.   The temporary election committee shall be responsible for
organizing, conducting, and supervising the initial election of department
officers to serve on the board. Thereafter, the board shall establish election
procedures consistent with this chapter.
   B.   Subsequent Elections:
      1.   The board shall develop a procedure for governing the nomination of
members to run for the various offices to serve on the board. The nominating
procedure shall be established a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the board members' terms of office.
      2.   The board shall develop a procedure for the final election of
members to the various offices on the board. The final election procedure shall
be established a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the
board members' terms of office.
      3.   The board may adopt rules and regulations governing the election of
officers of the board. All rules and regulations with respect to the election
process shall be posted throughout the department a minimum of thirty (30) days
prior to the election. (2016 Code)
2-4-4: POWERS, DUTIES AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   The board shall make all needful rules and regulations with respect to
the foreign fire insurance board and/or the management monies budgeted to the
board.
   B.   Prior to the budgeting of funds by the village board of trustees, the
board shall develop and maintain a listing of those items that the board feels
are appropriate expenditures under the state statutes.
   C.   All expenditures by the board shall be in accordance with all village
ordinances, rules, procedures, and policies concerning the expenditure of
monies. Good and sound accounting principles shall be followed regarding the
holding and spending of any monies.
   D.   The funds of the board shall be annually reviewed as part of the
village audit. The audit shall verify that purchases by the board are for the
maintenance, use, and benefit of the village fire department.
   E.   The treasurer of the board shall give a sufficient bond to the village.
The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of
his or her duties under the state statutes, ordinances, and the rules and
regulations adopted by the board.
   F.   The funds received by the village pursuant to the foreign fire
insurance board fee shall be set apart and shall be appropriated annually in
the budget ordinance by the village board of trustees to the foreign fire
insurance board.
   G.   The treasurer of the board shall receive funds appropriated by the
village and shall pay out money and/or otherwise make expenditures upon the
order of the board. Any expenditures made by the treasurer, pursuant to the
order of the board, shall be solely for the maintenance, use, and benefit of
the village fire department. (2016 Code)
2-4-5: MEETINGS:
   A.   The board shall, in accordance with the open meetings act, establish a
regular time and place for its meetings and publish notice of same. The board
shall be subject to the provisions of the Illinois open meetings act.
   B.   The chair shall preside at board meetings, and the secretary shall keep
record of the proceedings and actions of the board and may certify the same.
   C.   Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   D.   The chair may call a special meeting at any time. A special meeting may
also be called upon the written notice of three (3) members of the board. Such
notice shall be in writing, duly signed by the board members. Such notice shall
describe, in brief, the nature or object of the special meeting.
   E.   Any person shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter
before the board.
   F.   Minutes of board meetings shall be filed with the village clerk. (2016
Code)
TITLE 3
FINANCES AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Fiscal Year
3-1-2: Deposit And Withdrawal Of Village Funds
3-1-3: Annual Budget
3-1-4: Annual Fee Ordinance
3-1-5: Contracts
3-1-6: Identity Theft Prevention Program
3-1-7: Debts Due And Owing The Village
3-1-8: Payment Of Municipal Fees, Costs And Expenses
3-1-1: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May 1 of each year and extend
through April 30 of the following year. (1976 Code § 1.12.010; amd. 2016 Code)
3-1-2: DEPOSIT AND WITHDRAWAL OF VILLAGE FUNDS:
   A.   Authorized Depository: Any bank having a physical presence in the
village, a public treasurer's investment pool created under section 17 of the
state treasurer's act, a money market mutual fund registered under the
investment company act of 1940, and pursuant to 30 Illinois Compiled Statutes
235/5 and any other depository authorized by the board of trustees is hereby
designated as an authorized depository in which the funds of the village may be
deposited. (2016 Code)
   B.   Deposit Of Funds: The village finance director shall deposit such funds
and monies only in one or more of the depositories designated in subsection A
of this section, or as otherwise specifically designated by the board of
trustees. (1976 Code § 2.10A.090; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Signatures Required For Withdrawals: All checks or drafts drawn against
village funds and monies on deposit in one or more of the depositories
designated in subsection A of this section shall be hand signed by at least two
(2) of the following village officers: the president, finance director, clerk
or village administrator; provided, however, that any check drawn in an amount
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be issued with facsimile
signatures of the president and clerk in lieu of the hand signatures otherwise
required in this subsection. (1976 Code § 2.10A.090; amd. 2016 Code)
3-1-3: ANNUAL BUDGET:
   A.   Passage Of Budget: The annual budget shall be adopted by the village
board before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. Passage of
the annual budget shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation ordinance
heretofore enacted annually. The annual budget shall be published in the manner
provided in subsection G of this section.
   B.   Budget Officer: There is hereby created the office of budget officer.
The budget officer shall be appointed by the village president to perform such
duties as are assigned by the village president including, but not limited to:
      1.   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions and boards.
      2.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with this section.
      3.   Examine all books and records of all village departments,
commissions and boards which relate to monies received by the village and
village departments, commissions and boards, and paid out by the village and
village departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable, and
amounts owed by or to the village and village departments, commissions and
boards.
      4.   Obtain such additional information from the village and village
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the budget officer for
purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by
the village and village departments, commissions and boards in the form
required by the budget officer. Any department, commission or board which
refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the budget
officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget
for the village until such village department, commission or board shall comply
in full with the request of the budget officer.
      5.   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no
expenditures are made by the village and village departments, commissions or
boards except as authorized by the budget.
   C.   Compilation And Contents Of Budget: At least thirty (30) days prior to
the beginning of each fiscal year, the budget officer shall submit to the
village board an annual budget which shall contain actual or estimated revenues
and expenditures for the two (2) years immediately preceding the fiscal year
for which the budget is prepared. The budget will contain revenues available to
the village for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with
recommended expenditures for the village and all the village departments,
commissions, and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations
shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal
management practice. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each
anticipated expenditure shall be made.
   D.   Capital Improvement, Repair Or Replacement Fund: The annual budget may
contain a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific capital
improvements, repairs and/or replacements of specific types of municipal
equipment or other tangible property both real and personal. Expenditures from
this fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital
improvement, repair or replacement will occur. Funds no longer necessary for
capital improvement, repair or replacement shall be transferred into the
general corporate fund of the village on the first day of the fiscal year
following such abandonment, completion or discovery of surplus funds.
   E.   Funds For Contingency Purposes: The annual budget may contain money set
aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total
budget.
   F.   Revision Of Budget: The village administrator shall have the power to
revise the budget within any separate fund including deleting, adding to, and
changing or creating subclasses within previously budgeted object classes as
may be required. The corporate authorities, by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
the members then holding office, shall have the authority to revise the budget
by transferring monies from one fund to another or adding to any fund. No
revision of the annual budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event
monies are not available to do so.
   G.   Public Hearing; Notice And Inspection Of Budget: At least one public
hearing shall be held by the village board on the tentative annual budget prior
to final action by the village board. Notice of this hearing shall be given by
publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the village at least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Copies of the tentative annual budget shall
be made available for public inspection in the office of the village clerk for
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. After said hearing, the tentative
budget may be further revised and passed without further notice, inspection, or
hearing.
   H.   Abandonment Of Provisions: This section may be abandoned only by a vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of the corporate authorities then holding office. (Ord. 14-
28, 9-2-2014)
3-1-4: ANNUAL FEE ORDINANCE:
There shall annually be adopted an ordinance, as amended from time to time as
necessary, setting forth the applicable fees and charges due for the various
licenses, permits and services authorized by this code and by other ordinances
of the village. Whenever reference is made to the “annual fee schedule”, such
reference shall mean the most current fee ordinance adopted pursuant to this
section. By this reference, the annual fee ordinance, as amended, is hereby
incorporated herein as if fully set forth. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 20-21, 4-21-
2020; Ord. 21-17, 4-6-2021; Ord. 21-33, 5-18-2021; Ord. 21-75, 10-5-2021; Ord.
22-17, 4-5-2022)
3-1-5: CONTRACTS:
   A.   Bids Required: Any work or other public improvement which is not to be
paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when
the expense thereof shall exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be
constructed by a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after
advertising for bids unless waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the
trustees then holding office.
   B.   Other Purchases: Purchases of goods or services, other than those
described in Subsection A, shall be conducted in accordance with the guidelines
established in the Village of Berkeley's Purchasing Manual.
   C.   Competitive Bidding: Competitive bidding shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the Village of Berkeley's
Purchasing Manual.
   D.   Purchasing Manual:
      1.   The Village Administrator shall, in accordance with this Section,
prepare guidelines and processes for purchasing goods and services, including,
but not limited to, competitive bidding.
      2.   The Purchasing Manual shall become effective upon presentation to
the Village Board, and its adoption of a Resolution approving it.
      3.   The Purchasing Manual shall be reviewed by the Village Administrator
annually and any proposed amendments presented to the Village Board for its
consideration. (Ord. 12-1, 2-21-2012; amd. Ord. 22-45, 9-6-2022)
3-1-6: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM:
   A.   Short Title: This section shall be known as the IDENTITY THEFT
PREVENTION PROGRAM.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to comply with 16 CFR section
681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying
and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a
manner that will prevent identity theft.
   C.   Process Of Establishing A Covered Account: As a precondition to opening
a covered account with the village, each applicant shall provide the village
with personal identifying information of the customer such as a valid
government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer
or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's
agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the
village computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded.
   D.   Access To Covered Account Information:
      1.   Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be
limited to authorized village personnel.
      2.   Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is
to be reported immediately to the village administrator and the password
changed immediately.
      3.   Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is
considered confidential, and any request or demand for such information shall
be immediately forwarded to the village administrator and the chief of police.
   E.   Sources And Types Of Red Flags: All employees responsible for or
involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered
account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as
indicators of possible identity theft, and such red flags may include:
      1.   Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or
forged.
      2.   Identification on which the photograph or physical description is
inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer.
      3.   The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial
payment but no subsequent payments.
      4.   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable
although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the
customer's account.
      5.   The village is notified that the customer is not receiving paper
account statements.
   F.   Prevention And Mitigation Of Identity Theft: In the event that any
village employee responsible for opening a new covered account or involved in
restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with
respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her
discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags
suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such
employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely
or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the
village administrator. If the village administrator, in his or her discretion,
determines that further action is necessary, a village employee shall perform
one or more of the following responses:
      1.   Contact the customer;
      2.   Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the
customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the
customer's covered account:
         a.   Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other
security devices that permit access to an account; or
         b.   Close the account;
      3.   Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and
decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that
the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access
has caused additional charges to accrue;
      4.   Notify law enforcement in the event that someone other than the
customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to
accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or
      5.   Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
   G.   Updating Program: The village board of trustees shall annually review
and, as deemed necessary by the board, update the identity theft prevention
program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks
to customers or to the safety and soundness of the village and its covered
accounts from identity theft.
   H.   Program Administration:
      1.   The administration/finance department office manager is responsible
for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The village
administrator is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding
compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to
the program, as necessary in the opinion of the village administrator, to
address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types
of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be
submitted to the village board of trustees for consideration.
      2.   The administration/finance department office manager will report to
the village administrator, at least annually, on compliance with the red flag
requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program
and evaluate issues such as:
         a.   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the village
in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of
covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts.
         b.   Service provider arrangements.
         c.   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management
response.
         d.   Recommendations for material changes to the program.
      3.   The administration/finance department office manager is responsible
for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening
a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting
payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and
requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The administration/
finance department office manager shall exercise his or her discretion in
determining the amount and substance of training necessary. (Ord. 08-33, 10-21-
2008, eff. 10-21-2008)
3-1-7: DEBTS DUE AND OWING THE VILLAGE:
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity ("debtor") owing any fine,
penalty, cost, tax, user charge, fee, judgment, financial contractual
obligation or any other debt to the village or any person, partnership,
corporation or entity under the control of such debtor, shall not be entitled
to any village service, permit, license or other village action or approval
unless that debt is paid in full.
This section shall not prohibit any emergency village services to a debtor such
as from the police or fire departments. (Ord. 16-17, 4-19-2016)
3-1-8: PAYMENT OF MUNICIPAL FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES:
It is the policy of the village of Berkeley to accept from any debtor for the
payment and satisfaction of municipal services, products, fines, penalties and
the like payment in the form of cash, personal check, certified or cashier's
check or credit card in the normal and usual course of municipal business,
unless there is a specific ordinance, resolution, policy or regulation contrary
hereto.
In the event the form of payment made to the village of Berkeley by a debtor
results in said payment being unacceptable and therefore rejected, denied or
returned, by the individual, business or institution which is to honor the
payment such as a banking institution or credit card issuer, the debtor shall
be notified by the village of Berkeley, in writing, of such occurrence and
debtor be required to satisfy said debt only by way of a cash payment or by
cashier's or certified check in the amount of the debt plus any late charges
and costs or expenses incurred by the village resulting from said rejection or
denial.
In the event there is a second instance of a debtor of the village of Berkeley
tendering payment to the village of Berkeley for a financial obligation of the
debtor to the village, and said payment in whatever form is rejected by the
institution or company which is to honor the payment, the debtor, in addition
to the amount of the obligation to the village of Berkeley, shall be made to
pay any cost or expense incurred by the village of Berkeley as a result of the
credit denial as well as a twenty five dollar ($25.00) handling fee
representing reimbursement to the village of Berkeley for in house costs and
expenses.
Any debtor who has incurred two (2) instances of credit rejection in any twelve
(12) month period, in any form whatsoever, in the process of attempting to
satisfy an obligation to the village of Berkeley, shall thereafter be required
to make any subsequent payment to the village in the form of cash or cashier's
or certified check only.
Any debtor of the village of Berkeley who fails and refuses to pay to the
village of Berkeley as satisfaction for the debtor's debt to the village of
Berkeley as herein provided for shall have the matter of the debt referred for
collection. (Ord. 00-05, 2-15-2000)
CHAPTER 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES AND FEES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-2-2: Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-2-3: Automobile Renting Use Tax
3-2-4: Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
3-2-5: Foreign Fire Insurance Company Fees
3-2-6: Municipal Cannabis Retailer’s Occupation Tax
3-2-7: Amusement Tax On Plays Of Video Gaming Terminals
3-2-1: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
village in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the
village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales
of services made in the course of business in accordance with the provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
   B.   Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the
village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the
report to the state department of revenue required by section 3 of "an act in
relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property to purchasers for use or consumption".
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the receipts, by the person filing such report, from the sales of tangible
personal property during the preceding month.
   D.   Collection And Enforcement: The tax imposed herein and all civil
penalties arising therefrom that may be assessed as an incident of the tax
shall be collected and enforced by the state department of revenue. The
department of revenue shall proceed to administer and enforce this section as
of January 1, 2001.
   E.   Statute Provisions Apply: All of the other terms, conditions and
requirements for the collection, enforcement, imposition of penalties and
exemptions and/or rebates and refunds shall be according to the terms and
conditions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1. (Ord. 00-30, 7-25-2000)
3-2-2: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales of services made in the course of
business in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
8-11-5.
   B.   Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the
village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the
report to the state department of revenue required by the service occupation
tax act.
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the receipts, by the person filing such report, from the sales of services
during the preceding month.
   D.   Collection And Enforcement: The tax imposed herein and all civil
penalties arising therefrom that may be assessed as an incident of the tax
shall be collected and enforced by the state department of revenue. The
department of revenue shall proceed to administer and enforce this section as
of January 1, 2001.
   E.   Statute Provisions Apply: All of the other terms, conditions and
requirements for the collection, enforcement, imposition of penalties and
exemptions and/or rebates and refunds shall be according to the terms and
conditions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5. (Ord. 00-31, 7-25-2000)
3-2-3: AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed upon the privilege of using in the
village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois, and which
is titled or registered with an agency of the state government in the village
at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while
this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8. (1976 Code § 3.24.010)
   B.   Change In Tax Rate Or Discontinuance Of Tax: Any ordinance or
resolution effecting a change in the rate of the tax levied under this section
shall be effective on the first day of the second calendar month next following
publication. Upon a change in rate of the tax levied under this section, or
upon the discontinuance of the tax, the village clerk shall, on or not later
than five (5) days after publication of the ordinance or resolution
discontinuing the tax or effecting a change in rate, transmit to the Illinois
department of revenue a certified copy of the ordinance or resolution effecting
such change or discontinuance. (2016 Code)
   C.   Responsibility For Tax: The tax provided for in this section shall be
collected from the persons whose Illinois addresses for titling or registration
purposes is given as being in the village. (1976 Code § 3.24.030)
   D.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (1976 Code §
3.24.040)
3-2-4: AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting automobiles in the village at the rate of one percent (1%)
of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business
while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-7. (1976 Code § 3.26.010; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Change In Tax Rate Or Discontinuance Of Tax: Any ordinance or
resolution effecting a change in the rate of the tax levied under this section
shall be effective on the first day of the calendar month next following
publication. Upon a change in rate of the tax levied under this section, or
upon the discontinuance of the tax, the village clerk shall, on or not later
than five (5) days after publication of the ordinance or resolution
discontinuing the tax or effecting a change in rate, transmit to the Illinois
department of revenue a certified copy of the ordinance or resolution effecting
such change or discontinuance. The village clerk or board of trustees may, in
their discretion and from time to time, request a current list of those persons
who are registered with the Illinois department of revenue to pay automobile
renting occupation tax within the village. (2016 Code)
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (1976 Code §
3.26.030)
3-2-5: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY FEES:
   A.   Compliance Required: It is unlawful for any corporation or association
not incorporated under the laws of the state to engage in the village in
effecting fire insurance or to transact any business of fire insurance in the
village while in default by not fully complying with any of the requirements of
this section and until such requirements have been fully complied with. This
subsection shall not relieve any company, corporation, or association from the
payment of any risk that may be undertaken in violation of this section. (1976
Code § 5.51.010)
   B.   Fee: Any such corporation, company, or association not incorporated
under the laws of the state, which is engaged in the village in effecting fire
insurance, shall pay to the foreign fire insurance board for the maintenance,
use, and benefit of the fire department of the village a sum of money equal in
amount to two percent (2%) per year of the gross receipts received for premiums
by any and all agents of any such corporation, company, or association during
the year ending on July 1 for any insurance effected or agreed to be effected
in the village by any such corporation, company, or association during such
year. (1976 Code § 5.51.020; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Report Required: Every person acting in the village as agent for or on
behalf of any such corporation, company, or association shall, on or before
July 15 of each and every year, render the treasurer of the foreign fire
insurance board a full, true, and just account, verified by his oath, of all
premiums which, during the year ending July 1 preceding such report, have been
received by him or by any other person for him in his behalf, of any such
corporation, company, or association. Such agent shall also, at the time of
rendering the aforesaid report, pay to the treasurer of the foreign fire
insurance board the sum of money for which such company, corporation, or
association represented by him is chargeable by virtue of the provisions of
this section. (1976 Code § 5.51.030; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Recovery Of Fees:
      1.   The sum of money for which such company, corporation, or association
is so chargeable may be recovered of it or its agent or agents by an action in
the name of and for the use of the village as for money had and received.
      2.   Nothing in this subsection shall be held to exempt any person,
corporation, company, or association from indictment and conviction under the
provisions of an act entitled "an act to enable cities, towns and villages,
organized under any general or special law, to levy and collect a tax or
license fee from foreign insurance companies for the benefit of organized fire
departments", in force July 1, 1895. (1976 Code § 5.51.040)
   E.   Default In Payments: No insurance broker in the village shall write any
insurance with any company, association, or corporation not incorporated under
the laws of the state, which shall be in default for not reporting or making
payment as provided in this section, until there has been compliance with all
the requirements of this section. (1976 Code § 5.51.050)
3-2-6: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILER’S OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Whenever used herein, unless the context requires otherwise, the words,
terms and phrases used herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1 , et seq., as amended.
   B.   Beginning January 1, 2020, and if the Village permits the retail sale
of cannabis in the Village, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in
the business of selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the
Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/
1, et seq., at retail in the Village at the rate of three percent (3%) of the
gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that business. Retailers
may reimburse themselves for their tax liability hereunder by separately
stating the tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in
combination, in a single amount, with any State tax that retailers are required
to collect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-22, as amended,
which is incorporated as though fully set forth herein. The tax levied herein
is in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
   C.   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as
an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-
22, as amended. The Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois shall have
full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Section. The
failure to timely collect or remit all taxes due hereunder is a violation of
the Berkeley Village Code, and may be subject to the penalties hereunder. (Ord.
19-50, 9-3-2019)
3-2-7: AMUSEMENT TAX ON PLAYS OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
   A.   Applicability: The provisions of this Section, except as otherwise
provided, shall apply to all amusements (as defined below), whether
specifically licensed or regulated under other provisions of this Village Code
or other ordinances, or not.
   B.   Definitions: The following words and phrases shall have the meanings
below for purposes of this Section, whether capitalized or not:
 
           1.   Any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular performance, motion
           picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act, circus, rodeo,
           athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition for public entertainment,
           including, without being limited to, boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing,
AMUSEMENT: swimming, racing, or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball,
           softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling,
           billiard and pool games; and
           2.   Any entertainment offered for public participation, including, without
           being limited to, dancing, carnival, amusement park rides and games, bowling,
           billiard and pool games, or any Video Gaming Terminal (as defined below).
           Any natural individual that participates in an amusement, including a firm,
           organization, society, foundation, institution, partnership, association,
PERSON:    joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, public or
           private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee or other representative
           appointed by order of any court, or any other entity recognized by law.
           Each individual push of the Video Gaming Terminal which initiates the
PLAY:      simulation provided by the Video Gaming Terminal. Play shall not include the
           push of individual wager amounts, selection of types of games on the Video
           Gaming Terminal or entry of any information or printing of winning receipts.
           Any individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company that is
           licensed under the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as
TERMINAL   amended, and that owns, services, and maintains Video Gaming Terminals for
OPERATOR:  placement in licensed establishments, licensed truck stop establishments,
           licensed large truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal establishments,
           or licensed veterans establishments.
           Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, electronic
           cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is available to play or
VIDEO      simulate the play of a video game, including but not limited to video poker,
GAMING     line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a
TERMINAL:  video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games
           or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine
           that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes
           only.
 
   C.   Amusement Push Tax:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, an amusement tax is
imposed upon any person who participates in the play of a Video Gaming Terminal
that takes place within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Village.
      2.   The rate of the tax shall be equal to one cent ($0.01) per play on a
Video Gaming Terminal.
      3.   The Terminal Operator of a Video Gaming Terminal may separately
itemize and charge the tax imposed in this Section each Person who plays a
Video Gaming Terminal.
      4.   The tax imposed in this Section is in addition to all other taxes
imposed by the State of Illinois or any municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof.
   D.   Registration:
      1.   Every Terminal Operator of a Video Gaming Terminal(s) located in the
Village shall apply for registration as a tax collector with the Village within
the later of thirty (30) days after commencing such business or thirty (30)
days after the effective date of the Ordinance imposing the tax.
      2.   The application shall be submitted to the Village on the forms
provided by the Village and contain such information as reasonably required by
the Village to impose, collect, and audit all amounts related to the tax
imposed in this Section.
   E.   Collection, Payment and Accounting:
      1.   It shall be the joint and several duty of every Terminal Operator of
a Video Gaming Terminal(s) to secure from each Person participating in the play
of a Video Gaming Terminal the tax imposed in this Section.
      2.   For purposes of this Section, it shall be presumed that the amount
of the tax imposed on each Person, unless the taxpayer or tax collector
provides otherwise with books, records, or other documentary evidence, has been
collected from the Person by the Terminal Operator.
      3.   Tax payments accompanied by tax returns prescribed by the Village
shall be remitted to the Village on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the
month following the month in which payment for the tax is made.
      4.   Every Terminal Operator of a Video Gaming Terminal who is required
to collect the tax imposed in this Section shall be considered a tax collector
for the Village. All tax amounts collected shall be held by the Terminal
Operator as trustee for and on behalf of the Village. The failure of the
Terminal Operator to collect the tax shall not excuse or release the Person
from the obligation to pay the tax.
      5.   The ultimate incidence of the tax imposed in this Section shall
remain on the Person and shall never be shifted to the Terminal Operator.
      6.   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Village Code, in order to
permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village, no person shall be
entitled to a refund of, or credit for, the tax imposed in this Section unless
the person files a claim for a refund or credit within one (1) year after the
date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the Village.
      7.   The Terminal Operator of any Video Gaming Terminal(s) shall be
subject to audit, inspection, and record keeping provisions in this Village
Code.
      8.   It shall be unlawful for any Terminal Operator and/or Person to
prevent, hinder, or interfere with the Village's officials, employees,
contractors and / or agents designated to discharge their respective duties in
the performance and enforcement of the provisions of this Section. It is the
duty of every Terminal Operator of a Video Gaming Terminal(s) to keep accurate
and complete books and records to which the Village's officials, employees,
contractors and / or agents shall at all times have full access.
   F.   Rules and Regulations: The Village Administrator is authorized to
adopt, promulgate, and enforce any additional rules and regulations pertaining
to the interpretation, collection, administration, and enforcement of this
Section.
   G.   Failure to Pay Tax:
      1.   If a Terminal Operator fails to pay to the Village the tax imposed
by this Section by the date the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate at
a rate of one and a half percent (1.5%) per month until paid.
      2.   Whenever any Terminal Operator falsely reports to the Village
information regarding the tax levied in this Section, or fails to pay the tax
levied in this Section, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the
Village President and Board of Trustees, bring or cause to be brought an action
to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
      3.   If the Village President or their designee, after holding a hearing,
shall find that a Terminal Operator has failed to make payment of the tax
imposed by this Section, or has provided false information or reports regarding
the tax imposed by this Section, the Village President may suspend or revoke
all Village licenses held by such Terminal Operator. The Terminal Operator may
have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, which shall be held not less
than ten (10) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, with said
notice, addressed to the Terminal Operator at their last known place of
business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any license which the Terminal
Operator may possess may be temporarily suspended by the Village President. Any
suspension or revocation of any license as provided for hereunder shall not
release or discharge the Terminal Operator from their civil liability for the
payment of the tax nor from prosecution for such offense.
   H.   Penalties and Enforcement:
      1.   Violation: It shall be a violation of this Section for a Terminal
Operator to fail to file a report or return within the time prescribed in this
Section.
      2.   Report Required: A Terminal Operator who falsely reports, or who
fails to report, the amount of tax due as required by this Section shall be in
violation of this Section.
      3.   False or Inaccurate Information: It shall a violation of this
Section for any Person to knowingly furnish false or inaccurate information
regarding the tax imposed in this Section to the Village.
      4.   Fine: Any Terminal Operator violating the provisions of this Section
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), for each offense. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation and offense. (Ord. 21-79, 10-
19-2021)
CHAPTER 3
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Tax Imposed
3-3-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-3-4: Tax Returns
3-3-5: Resales
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the
village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money, whether paid
in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination
point within the village and charges for that portion of the interoffice
channels provided within the village. Charges for that portion of the
interoffice channel connecting two (2) or more channel termination points, one
or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the village,
shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total
charge for the interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
number of channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional
boundary of the village and the denominator of which is the total number of
channel termination points connected by the interoffice channel. However,
"gross charge" shall not include any of the following:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter; 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act; 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code; 4) 911 surcharges; or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the
village;
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a timesharing agreement;
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic
opportunity;
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications
devices; or
   I.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
   J.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable; 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice; and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the
sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of
any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision
of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state,
who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state.
The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith, for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, "service address" means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who, individually or through his or her agents, employees,
or permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the village and who incurs a tax liability as authorized
by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, night of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this definition,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord. 02-40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-
2003; amd. 2016 Code)
3-3-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the
village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%)
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof
that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall
be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the
municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the
village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%)
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state
which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local
tax in this state. (Ord. 02-40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the village.
(Ord. 02-40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid and, if unpaid, is
recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at
retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the
manner provided by the department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 02-40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-4: TAX RETURNS:
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this chapter on
telecommunications retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified
municipal telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this
act. (Ord. 02-40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-3-5: RESALES:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided in subsections A and B of this section, the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall
not be made tax free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the
person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that
number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any
sale to such person is nontaxable because of being for resale. (Ord. 02-40, 9-
17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES TAXES
ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-4A-1: Definitions
3-4A-2: Tax Imposed; Rates
3-4A-3: Effective Date Of Tax
3-4A-4: Tax Is Additional
3-4A-5: Exemptions From Tax
3-4A-6: Collection Of Tax
3-4A-7: Tax Remittance And Return
3-4A-8: Resales
3-4A-9: Credit For Erroneous Payments Or Overpayments
3-4A-10: Statute Of Limitations
3-4A-11: Books And Records
3-4A-12: Additional Enforcement Remedies
3-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
EXEMPT PURCHASER: A purchaser of electricity specifically exempt by law or by
contract or agreement.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any
state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes
of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of
electricity by a "public utility", as defined in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/8-11-2, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or
sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail other than an exempt
purchaser.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4A-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATES:
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, and any and all other
applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser: (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998)
Number Of Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed In A Month Cents Per Kilowatt Hour
Number Of Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed In A Month Cents Per Kilowatt Hour
For the first 2,000                                  0.589
For the next  48,000                                 0.392
For the next  50,000                                 0.353
For the next  400,000                                0.343
For the next  500,000                                0.333
For the next  2,000,000                              0.314
For the next  2,000,000                              0.309
For the next  5,000,000                              0.304
For the next  10,000,000                             0.299
All in excess of 20,000,000                          0.294
 
(Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4A-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity
by residential customers and with respect to the use of or consumption of
electricity by nonresidential customers, beginning with the first bill issued
to such customers by delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the
public utilities act 1 , or the first bill issued to such customers on or after
October 1, 1998, whichever issuance occurs sooner. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998; amd.
2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
3-4A-4: TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
The tax imposed by this article is in addition to all taxes, fees and other
revenue measures imposed by the village, the state of Illinois, or any other
political subdivision of the state. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998)
3-4A-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the tax shall not
be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution
of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998)
   B.   No person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity shall be subject to taxation under the
provisions of this article for such transactions as are or may become subject
to taxation under the provisions of the municipal retailers' occupation tax
act, authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1, approved July 25,
1961, as amended. (1976 Code § 3.28.020; amd. Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998; Ord. 02-
40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
   C.   The tax imposed under this article shall not apply with respect to
gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or
sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject
to the tax imposed by that ordinance establishing a municipal utility tax
enacted by the president and village board on July 2, 1985. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-
1998)
3-4A-6: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of section
3-4A-8 of this article regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the
tax imposed under this article shall be collected from purchasers by the person
maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time
and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
   B.   Any tax required to be collected by this article, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering
the electricity; provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity, the charges
for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998)
   C.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser
by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse them
for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing
and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon
request. For purposes of this article, any partial payment of a billed amount
not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the
delivery of electricity. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4A-7: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
   A.   Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form
prescribed by the village. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due
on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax
is collected or is required to be collected under the provisions of this
article.
   B.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under any applicable law or
agreement, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the
village and pay the tax directly to the village on or before the last day of
the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
(Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998)
3-4A-8: RESALES:
   A.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the state of
Illinois or, in the alternative, by the village, and furnishes that number to
the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the
sale is either or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
   B.   If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the state of
Illinois or, in the alternative, the village, for a resale number. The
applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by
this article on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional
information as the state of Illinois or, in the alternative, the village, may
reasonably require.
   C.   Upon approval of the state of Illinois, the village, shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   D.   The state of Illinois or, in the alternative, the village, may cancel
the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable
under this article for electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the
number: 1) was obtained through misrepresentation; or 2) is no longer necessary
because the person has discontinued making resales.
   E.   1. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this article
directly to the village pursuant to the terms and conditions of this article on
the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect
the tax pursuant to section
3-4A-6 of this article and remit the tax pursuant to section
3-4A-7 of this article on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller
to a purchaser.
      2.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller; provided, that the person reports to the village the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the village may reasonably require. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998)
3-4A-9: CREDIT FOR ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS OR OVERPAYMENTS:
   A.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
(3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. (1976
Code § 3.28.070; amd. Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998; 2016 Code)
   B.   If the taxpayer under this article is unable to use a credit authorized
by this section solely because the tax imposed by this article has been
replaced by the tax imposed under the "proportional method" based on kilowatt
hour usage as herein set forth, then the taxpayer may apply such credit against
any tax due under the terms and conditions of this article. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-
1998)
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this article, or that
ordinance establishing a municipal utility tax adopted by the village on July
2, 1985, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village,
no person shall be eligible for a refund or credit unless the person files a
claim for a refund or credit within three (3) years after the date on which the
tax was paid or remitted. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4A-10: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(1976 Code § 3.28.080)
3-4A-11: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this
article, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that give
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this article. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day. (Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4A-12: ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article.
(Ord. 98-25, 7-21-1998)
ARTICLE B. MUNICIPAL GAS UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-4B-1: Definitions
3-4B-2: Tax Imposed; Rate
3-4B-3: Effective Date Of Tax
3-4B-4: Tax Is Additional
3-4B-5: Exemptions From Tax
3-4B-6: Tax Remittance And Return
3-4B-7: Credit For Erroneous Payments
3-4B-8: Statute Of Limitations
3-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. "Gross receipts" shall
not include that portion of the consideration received for distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas to business enterprises described in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, paragraph (e), to the extent and during
the period in which the exemption authorized by said paragraph (e) is in effect
or for school districts or units of local government described in paragraph (f)
during the period in which the exemption authorized in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-2, paragraph (f), is in effect.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of this state, or receiver, trustee, guardian or other
representative appointed by order of any court. (1976 Code § 3.28.050; amd.
Ord. 02-40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; 2016 Code)
3-4B-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of five
percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (1976 Code § 3.28.010; amd. Ord.
02-40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-4B-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The tax provided in this article shall be based on the "gross receipts", as
defined in section
3-4B-1 of this article, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or
after August 1, 1985. (1976 Code § 3.28.050; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4B-4: TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
The municipal gas utility tax shall be in addition to the payment of money or
value of products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
(1976 Code § 3.28.030; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4B-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by
this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged
in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas be
subject to taxation under the provisions of this article for such transactions
as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the municipal
retailers' occupation tax act, authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-
11-1, approved July 25, 1961, as amended. (1976 Code § 3.28.020; amd. Ord. 02-
40, 9-17-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
3-4B-6: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
   A.   On or before November 30, 1985, each taxpayer shall make a return to
the village clerk for the months of August, September and October 1985,
stating: (1976 Code § 3.28.060; amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require. (1976 Code § 3.28.060)
   B.   On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each
taxpayer shall make a like return to the village clerk for a corresponding
three (3) month period.
   C.   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the village clerk the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he
so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(1976 Code § 3.28.060; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4B-7: CREDIT FOR ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. (1976 Code §
3.28.070)
3-4B-8: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(1976 Code § 3.28.080)
ARTICLE C. MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
SECTION:
3-4C-1: Short Title
3-4C-2: Definitions
3-4C-3: Tax Imposed; Responsibility For Tax
3-4C-4: Effective Date Of Tax
3-4C-5: Exemptions From Tax
3-4C-6: Payment Of Tax
3-4C-7: Resales
3-4C-8: Collection Of Tax By Public Utility
3-4C-9: Credit For Overpayments
3-4C-10: Statute Of Limitations
3-4C-11: Books And Records
3-4C-12: Application Of Tax To Large Users
3-4C-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX and
is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the village of Berkeley,
the state of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006)
3-4C-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The public utilities act as amended 1 .
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the public
utilities act.
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means
any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
3-4C-3: TAX IMPOSED; RESPONSIBILITY FOR TAX:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the village that is purchased in a sale
at retail at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per therm.
   B.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006)
3-4C-4: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is
billed by a public utility on or after May 1, 2006. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006;
amd. Ord. 06-15, 4-18-2006)
3-4C-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
   A.   Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitution of the United States
or the state of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
village. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006)
   B.   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the village by a retail
purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article if the gross
receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are
properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the
village municipal utilities taxes, as amended from time to time (articles A and
B of this chapter), authorized pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-
11-2. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006; amd. Ord. 06-15, 4-18-2006)
3-4C-6: PAYMENT OF TAX:
The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to
the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated to collect
the tax pursuant to section
3-4C-8 of this article on or before the payment due date of the public
utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the village finance
director on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month
in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has
been designated to collect the tax pursuant to section
3-4C-8 of this article or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a
public utility so designated. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4C-7: RESALES:
A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax
imposed by this article with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but
who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly
to the village finance director on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed. (Ord. 06-07, 3-
21-2006; amd. 2016 Code)
3-4C-8: COLLECTION OF TAX BY PUBLIC UTILITY:
The village president, village finance director, and village administrator are
each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by
this article with any public utility providing gas service in the village. The
contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions:
   A.   The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor;
   B.   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the village finance
director no more often than once each month;
   C.   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a
service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the village finance director; (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006; amd. 2016
Code)
   D.   The public utility shall not be responsible to the village for any tax
not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
   E.   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-
2006)
3-4C-9: CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENTS:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this article, whether as a result of mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be: a) credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; or b) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due;
provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to
the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited or refunded. (Ord. 06-07,
3-21-2006)
3-4C-10: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(Ord. 06-07, 3-21-2006)
3-4C-11: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source
documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption under this
article. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours,
be subject to and available for inspection by the village. (Ord. 06-07, 3-21-
2006)
3-4C-12: APPLICATION OF TAX TO LARGE USERS:
   A.   Effective with respect to the use or consumption of gas billed on or
after May 1, 2008, the village may enter into an agreement with any retail
purchaser that demonstrates to the village that it was billed for use or
consumption of over five hundred thousand (500,000) therms of gas in the
village in the prior calendar year, under which agreement the retail purchaser
shall pay the tax directly to the village finance director at a rate of five
cents ($0.05) per therm for the first five hundred thousand (500,000) therms of
gas used or consumed in the village that is billed during the calendar year and
no tax imposed on each therm of gas used or consumed in the village beginning
with the first therm of usage above five hundred thousand (500,000) therms
billed in a calendar year. The agreement may contain such additional terms and
conditions (including, without limitation, payment of estimated taxes) as are
negotiated between the village and the retail purchaser. The village president,
or such person as is designated by the village president, is authorized to
enter into such an agreement with a retail purchaser. (Ord. 07-38, 12-18-2007,
eff. 5-1-2008; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Unless otherwise waived by the public utility, at least forty five (45)
days prior to the effective date of any such agreement, the village shall
provide notice to the public utility that the retail purchaser is exempt from
collection of the tax by the public utility under the contract between the
village and the public utility for collection of the tax, if such a contract is
then in effect.
   C.   To avoid double taxation, any retail purchaser that enters into an
agreement with the village under this section shall receive a credit from the
village for any tax required to be paid by the retail purchaser under the
agreement that was paid by the retail purchaser to a public utility.
   D.   No public utility shall be required to provide gas usage information to
the village related to any retail purchaser that enters into an agreement with
the village under this section. (Ord. 07-38, 12-18-2007, eff. 5-1-2008)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE TAX
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Tax Imposed
3-5-3: Presumption Of Vehicle Ownership
3-5-4: Rate Of Tax
3-5-5: Use Of Funds
3-5-6: Violation
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
OWNER'S PREMISES: The same as the premises of a utility service customer.
SITUS: The owner's premises where the motor vehicle is principally garaged,
dispatched or where the movement of the vehicle originates. (Ord. 14-23, 8-19-
2014, eff. 5-1-2015)
3-5-2: TAX IMPOSED:
Effective May 1, 2015, a village fiscal year vehicle tax is imposed upon the
owner of a motor vehicle as defined in the Illinois vehicle code, except as
provided in subsection 3-5-4B of this chapter, which is registered with the
Illinois secretary of state to a premises located within the village or has its
situs in the village notwithstanding the owner's residency. It shall constitute
prima facie evidence that a motor vehicle is operated on the streets of the
village when registered or it has its situs in the village. (Ord. 14-23, 8-19-
2014, eff. 5-1-2015)
3-5-3: PRESUMPTION OF VEHICLE OWNERSHIP:
There is established a rebuttable presumption that each vehicle owner is a
utility customer and has one motor vehicle registered or with situs to the
owner's premises in the village. This presumption may be rebutted by the owner
filing a sworn affidavit with the village finance department that there is no
motor vehicle registered or with situs on the premises in the village. The
finance department will investigate the facts in the affidavit, and if found to
be true, the vehicle tax shall not be imposed. (Ord. 14-23, 8-19-2014, eff. 5-
1-2015)
3-5-4: RATE OF TAX:
   A.   Established: The owner shall pay an annual vehicle tax on one motor
vehicle registered or with situs to the owner's premises in the village of two
dollars ($2.00) per month per dwelling unit and eight dollars ($8.00) per month
for each business or commercial establishment that shall be billed as part of
the owner's utility service bill. (Ord. 14-23, 8-19-2014, eff. 5-1-2015)
   B.   Reduction For Certain Owners:
      1.   For owners of a single-family attached or detached dwelling:
         a.   No tax shall be imposed where the owner is sixty two (62) years
of age or older;
         b.   No tax shall be imposed on an owner who is in active military
service pursuant to the soldiers' and sailors' civil relief act of 1940, as
amended; or
         c.   No tax shall be imposed where the owner is a disabled veteran who
has a state disabled veteran's license.
      2.   No tax exemption shall apply to a business, commercial or
manufacturing premises including a multiple-family dwelling; except an owner of
a multiple-family dwelling that lives in the building may obtain an exception
for the owner's dwelling unit if the owner meets an exception in subsection B1
of this section.
      3.   No tax shall be imposed for owners that are units of local
government or a school district. (Ord. 15-44, 6-16-2015)
3-5-5: USE OF FUNDS:
The revenue derived from the vehicle tax shall be used for the purpose of
improving, paving, repairing and maintaining the streets and other public
roadways within the village. (Ord. 14-23, 8-19-2014, eff. 5-1-2015)
3-5-6: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for a vehicle owner to not pay the village vehicle tax
herein imposed. (Ord. 14-23, 8-19-2014, eff. 5-1-2015)
CHAPTER 6
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM SURCHARGE
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Surcharge Imposed
3-6-3: Effective Date Of Surcharge
3-6-4: Exemptions From Surcharge
3-6-5: Collector Reimbursement
3-6-6: Surcharge Remittance And Return
3-6-7: Credit For Erroneous Payments
3-6-8: Disposition Of Revenues
3-6-9: Statute Of Limitations
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
NETWORK CONNECTION: The number of voice grade communications channels directly
between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier's public switched
network, without the intervention of any other telecommunications carrier's
switched network, which would be required to carry the subscriber's
interpremises traffic and which connection either: a) is capable of providing
access through the public switched network to a
9-1-1 emergency telephone system if one exists; or b) if no system exists at
the time a surcharge is imposed under this chapter which would be capable of
providing access through the public switched network to the local
9-1-1 emergency telephone system if one existed.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of the subscriber's telecommunications facilities
accessing the network connection or connections that are subject to the
surcharge. If this is not a defined location, "service address" shall mean the
location of subscriber's primary use of the network connection as defined by
telephone number and authorization code for location in Illinois where bills
are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity. (1976
Code § 3.40.020; amd. 2016 Code)
3-6-2: SURCHARGE IMPOSED:
A surcharge is imposed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per month per "network
connection", as defined in section
3-6-1 of this chapter, upon the monthly billed subscribers of
telecommunications carriers residing within the village for funding of a
9-1-1 emergency telephone system. A monthly billed subscriber shall be deemed
to reside within the village if the "service address", as defined in section
3-6-1 of this chapter, is located within the village. (1976 Code § 3.40.010)
3-6-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF SURCHARGE:
The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the month following the
expiration of ninety (90) days from the date the village clerk certifies to any
of the telecommunications carriers who are required to collect the surcharge
that the referendum proposing the surcharge has passed. (1976 Code § 3.40.010)
3-6-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM SURCHARGE:
The village clerk shall provide any telecommunications carrier collecting the
surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to the
village to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge. The certified list may
be revised by the village on sixty (60) days' prior written notice provided to
the telecommunications carriers. (1976 Code § 3.40.030)
3-6-5: COLLECTOR REIMBURSEMENT:
Each telecommunications carrier is authorized and instructed to deduct three
percent (3%) from the gross amount of surcharge collected prior to remittance
under subsection 3-6-6A of this chapter in reimbursement for the expense of
accounting and collecting the surcharge. (1976 Code § 3.40.040)
3-6-6: SURCHARGE REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
   A.   Payment Of Surcharge: Every telecommunications carrier shall remit to
the village clerk the amount of surcharge collected for each calendar month
within thirty (30) days following expiration of each month to which the
surcharge applies, net of any network or other
9-1-1 or sophisticated
9-1-1 system charge then due to the particular telecommunications carrier as
shown on an itemized bill and the three percent (3%) accounting and collection
charge described in section
3-6-5 of this chapter. (1976 Code § 3.40.050; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Report Required: Simultaneously, with the remittance described in
subsection A of this section, each telecommunications carrier shall make a
report to the village clerk for the period to which the remittance applies
stating as follows: (1976 Code § 3.40.060; amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   The name of the telecommunications carrier.
      2.   The telecommunications carrier's principal place of business.
      3.   The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies.
      4.   The amount of surcharge collected. (1976 Code § 3.40.060)
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the village board
of trustees may require. (1976 Code § 3.40.060; amd. 2016 Code)
3-6-7: CREDIT FOR ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any
surcharge due, or to become due, under this chapter; provided, that no amounts
erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited. Ninety (90) days' prior notice shall be given to
the emergency telephone system board established under title 2, chapter 3 of
this code on any credit against a surcharge due. (1976 Code § 3.40.070; amd.
2016 Code)
3-6-8: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
Any surcharge collected by or imposed on a telecommunications carrier pursuant
to this chapter shall be held to be a special fund in trust for the village.
Except for the three percent (3%) deduction provided in section
3-6-6 of this chapter, the special fund shall not be subject to the claims of
creditors of the telecommunications carrier. (2016 Code)
3-6-9: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
No action to recover any amount of surcharge due under the provisions of this
chapter shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount. (1976 Code § 3.40.080)
CHAPTER 7
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Short Title
3-7-2: Scope; Application Of Provisions
3-7-3: Definitions
3-7-4: Notice Requirements
3-7-5: Delinquent Notices, Payments, Remittances Or Other Filings
3-7-6: Application Of Tax Payments
3-7-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
3-7-8: Audit Procedure
3-7-9: Appeals
3-7-10: Payment Required; Interest And Penalties
3-7-11: Installment Contracts
3-7-12: Statute Of Limitations
3-7-13: Voluntary Disclosure
3-7-14: Publication Of Tax Ordinances; Copies
3-7-15: Review Of Liens
3-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
3-7-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village
procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   B.   Application Of Provisions; Conflicting Provisions: This chapter shall
be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village tax
ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or
inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 00-50,
12-19-2000)
3-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms used herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village clerk is charged with the administration
and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff,
employees or agents, to the extent they are authorized by the local tax
administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax
administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter
to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the
local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village and not an agency or
department of the state of Illinois and is not a tax on real property under the
Illinois property tax code 1  and is not a permit or other fee including, but
not limited to, any of the following taxes that may now, or in the future be
collected or administered by the village, including municipal gas utility tax,
simplified telecommunications tax, electric utility tax and/or hotel/motel tax.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley, Illinois. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000; amd. 2016
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.
3-7-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   A.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the person
concerned at the person's last known address; or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
3-7-5: DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date; or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. Any tax not paid on the date due shall accrue interest as set
forth in section
3-7-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
3-7-6: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period; second, to
the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the penalty for the
applicable period. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
3-7-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   Written Protest Required: The village shall not refund or credit any
taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the
event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
   B.   Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for
credit or refund shall be four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar
year in which payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit
or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to
a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
   C.   Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund, together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
3-7-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Information Required: Each notice of audit shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Time For Conducting Audit:
      1.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and if
the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within
thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
      2.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date within thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   C.   Taxpayer's Books And Records:
      1.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the village.
      2.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer
(or tax collector) fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within
the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination
and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best
estimate of the taxpayer's liability.
   D.   Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30)
days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   E.   Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to
the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall
notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-
2000)
3-7-9: APPEALS:
   A.   Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The local tax administrator
shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's
issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a
notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the
following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   Request For Hearing: A taxpayer who receives written notice from the
local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file
with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing,
setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator
within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
   C.   Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for
hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written
protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date
convenient to all parties.
   D.   Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and
petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the
tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
   E.   Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable
cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along
with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax
administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest
and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days
after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period.
   F.   Conduct Of Hearing; Decision:
      1.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under this section, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
      2.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
      3.   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
      4.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
3-7-10: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax
is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   B.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five
percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   C.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to ten percent (10%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
   D.   Abatement Of Penalties: The local tax administrator shall have the
authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or
failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine
reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 00-50, 12-
19-2000)
3-7-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If a
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
3-7-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   B.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than two (2)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
   C.   If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed,
whichever occurs later.
   D.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000; amd. 2016 Code)
3-7-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due
under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which
case, the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-
2000; amd. 2016 Code)
3-7-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 00-50, 12-19-2000)
3-7-15: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 00-
50, 12-19-2000)
CHAPTER 8
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY AND RULES FOR TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
SECTION:
3-8-1: Authority To Create Registry
3-8-2: Registration Rules Adopted
3-8-1: AUTHORITY TO CREATE REGISTRY:
The village clerk or her designee is hereby authorized and directed to create
an "interested parties" registry in accordance with section 11-74.4-4.2 of the
tax increment allocation redevelopment act for each redevelopment project area
created under said act. (Ord. 14-43, 12-16-2014)
3-8-2: REGISTRATION RULES ADOPTED:
In accordance with section 11-74.4-4.2 of the tax increment allocation
redevelopment act, the village hereby adopts the registration rules attached as
exhibit A to ordinance 14-43 as registration rules for each such interested
parties registry. The village clerk, with the consent of the village attorney
as to form and legality, shall have the authority to amend such registration
rules from time to time as may be necessary or desirable to comply with and
carry out the purposes intended by the act. (Ord. 14-43, 12-16-2014)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Compliance With Provisions; Purpose
4-1-2: Definition
4-1-3: License Required; Restrictions On Issuance
4-1-4: Application For License
4-1-5: Investigation Of Applicant
4-1-6: Approval Or Disapproval Of License; Appeals
4-1-7: License Fees
4-1-8: Term Of License; Expiration; Renewals
4-1-9: Nontransferability, Unlawful Use Of License
4-1-10: Posting License; Seizure Of Unauthorized Licenses
4-1-11: Building And Premises Requirements
4-1-12: Location Requirements
4-1-13: Nuisance Conditions Prohibited
4-1-14: Investigations And Inspections
4-1-15: Municipal Misrepresentation Prohibited
4-1-16: Twenty Four Hour Business Operations
4-1-17: Enforcement
4-1-18: Suspension Of Business Operations; Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-1-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; PURPOSE:
   A.   Compliance Required: Because each commercial establishment located in
the village is a basic part of and affects the physical and economic well being
of the village necessitating services from the village in the form of building,
health, fire, and police inspections and other services, such commercial
establishments shall in all respects be in full compliance with the provisions
contained in this chapter.
   B.   Purpose: This chapter is designed to provide for the means whereby the
village may render the necessary inspections and services to commercial
establishments and commercial activities in order to promote, protect, and
safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and consumers
of the village and to enable the effecting of an accurate record of commercial
establishments located and carrying on commercial activities or commerce within
the village. (2016 Code)
4-1-2: DEFINITION:
   A.   The term "commercial establishments", when used in this chapter,
includes the following commercial uses as defined in the village zoning
ordinance that are located in the village:
    FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: A building or premises, or a portion thereof, the
principal use of which is for the sale or dispensing or distribution or serving
or storage of food, foodstuff, or drink for consumption on or off the premises
or in or out of the building.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or premises, or a portion thereof, the
principal use of which is for manufacturing, including assembly, processing,
fabrication, storage or warehousing, including manufacturing research,
engineering and development.
   RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENT: A building or premises, or portion thereof, the
principal use of which is for the retail sale or distribution of merchandise,
goods or chattels not included with or related to the sale of material goods or
chattels or the provision of services of food establishments or service
establishments.
   SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A building or premises, or a portion thereof, the
principal use of which is for the rendering of personal or material services to
consumers for profit including, but not limited to, the wholesale distribution
or storage of material goods or chattels whether or not a commodity or material
good is worked upon or exchanged.
   B.   The term "commercial establishment" shall not include:
      1.   A "home occupation" as defined in this code;
      2.   A governmental unit; and
      3.   A public utility or cable television company which is subject to
regulation by the federal communications commission or the state commerce
commission and which operates in the village pursuant to a franchise agreement
with the village. (2016 Code)
4-1-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE:
   A.   License Required:
      1.   No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct, engage in, or
maintain, operate, carry on, or manage any commercial establishment or
activity, either by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee, or
partner, without first having obtained a license for such activity or
commercial establishment.
      2.   A license is required for the maintenance, operation, or conduct of
any commercial establishment or activity, and any person, firm, or corporation
shall be subject to the requirement, if, by himself or itself, or through an
agent, employee, or partner, or if it is held forth as being engaged in the
activity or commercial establishment, or if he or it solicits patronage
therefor, actively or passively, or if he or it performs or attempts to perform
any part of such activity or commercial establishment in the village.
   B.   Restrictions On Issuance: No license required by this code shall be
issued or renewed to any person who is indebted to the village for any fine,
penalty, fee or charge due the village unless and until the indebtedness for
the fine, penalty, fee or charge due the village has been paid. (2016 Code)
4-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for all licenses required by this chapter shall be made to the
village clerk or designees in writing on a form prepared by the village. If the
applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the application shall contain
his name, date of birth, residential address, and residential telephone number.
If the applicant is a partnership or other noncorporate business entity, the
application shall contain the name, date of birth, and residential address and
residential telephone number of each partner, principal, or member. If the
applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the name, date of
birth, and residential address of each principal officer and the registered
agent thereof. Each application also shall contain:
   A.   A designation of the type or kind of license desired;
   B.   The location or proposed location of the commercial establishment or
activity;
   C.   The applicable fee to be paid including any village costs for outside
consultant review. All fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license;
   D.   The number of the certificate of registration required under the
retailers' occupation tax act 1 , service occupation tax act 2 , and/or use tax
act 3 , if applicable; and
   E.   Such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of
village officials in the evaluation of such application including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Emergency contact person and/or key holder for the building.
      2.   Proof of any insurance policy or bond if required.
      3.   Identity of management employees and their position with the
applicant.
      4.   Applicant's businesses in other communities.
      5.   Whether the applicant has ever had a previous license denied,
revoked, or suspended.
      6.   Whether the applicant has ever voluntarily withdrawn a license or
application for a license during or pending an investigation for the suspension
or revocation of that license.
      7.   Whether the applicant has ever been arrested or convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony.
      8.   Proof of corporate good standing.
   F.   Any change to the information provided in the application shall be
reported to the village clerk within fourteen (14) days of the change. (2016
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2 2. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
3 3. 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
4-1-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   Where this chapter requires, or when it is deemed reasonably necessary
or appropriate, an investigation or inspection by any department or official of
the village before the issuance of a license shall be made, and requires the
approval of such department or official regarding the property location or
condition of the premises in which the commercial establishment or activity for
which a license is applied is to be managed, conducted, operated, or carried
on, or regarding the condition and nature of the equipment and methods intended
to be used by the applicant in such activity or commercial establishment. The
village clerk shall transmit to the appropriate official or department such
information necessary for the required investigation or inspection.
   B.   If it shall appear to the village clerk that the matters and
circumstances relating to an application require further information before a
proper determination can be made, such application shall be returned to the
applicant for the inclusion of such additional information as may be specified
by the village clerk.
   C.   The designated official or department, in a reasonable time after
receiving a copy of the application:
      1.   Shall make all necessary investigations and inspections, and the
results thereof shall be reported in writing to the village clerk; and
      2.   Shall indicate on the application a recommendation for the approval
or disapproval thereof. (2016 Code)
4-1-6: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF LICENSE; APPEALS:
   A.   Approval Or Disapproval:
      1.   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative and inspection reports, the village clerk
determines that the applicant meets the standards set forth, the village clerk
shall approve the application. The village clerk shall notify the applicant
that the application has been approved and shall issue a license. All licenses
shall be subject to the provisions of this code which may be in force at the
time of the issuance thereof or which may subsequently be passed by the village
board.
      2.   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative and inspection reports, the village clerk
determines that matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory, the
village clerk shall disapprove the application, indicating the reasons
therefor. Thereupon, the village clerk shall notify the applicant that the
application has not been approved and that no license will be issued, and the
license fee paid shall be refunded.
   B.   Appeals:
      1.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the village clerk in regard
to the denial of an application for a business license, as provided in this
section, shall have the right to appeal to the village president. Such appeal
shall be taken by filing with the village clerk within five (5) days after
notice of a denial of an application, a written statement setting forth
specifically the grounds for appeal. The village president shall thereupon set
the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the applicant or licensee in the same manner as provided in
subsection 4-1-18C of this chapter. The decision of the village president on
such appeal shall be final.
      2.   The acceptance of the license, upon reversal by the village
president, shall constitute a waiver of all claims against the village, the
village clerk, or any other officer or employee arising out of the original
refusal to issue the license. The burden shall be upon the applicant to show
wherein the village clerk has failed to meet the standards set forth in this
subsection B. (2016 Code)
4-1-7: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Established: License fees shall be as established in the annual fee
schedule, as amended, adopted by the village board.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees
and charges for licenses shall be paid in advance at the time of application.
   C.   Disposition Of Fees: Except as otherwise provided, all license fees
shall become a part of the general corporate fund to reimburse the fund for the
costs incurred in investigations and processing applications for the licenses
required herein and for the costs of regulating the subject businesses. In no
event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license fee, or part thereof,
by reason of death or departure of the licensee; nor shall any rebate or refund
be made by reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance of the operation
or conduct of the licensed establishment, business, or activity. (2016 Code)
4-1-8: TERM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION; RENEWALS:
   A.   All annual licenses shall commence on January 1 each year. No license
shall be granted for a period longer than one year. Except where otherwise
provided herein, every license shall expire on December 31 following the date
of issuance. Applications received for new licenses between November 1 and
December 31 of each year shall be issued licenses for the ensuing year.
   B.   The village clerk shall endeavor to notify each annual licensee of the
expiration of time of the license held by the licensee at least twenty one (21)
days prior to such expiration date; provided, that a failure to make such
notification or the licensee's failure to receive it shall not relieve the
licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or renewal.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon
proper application and payment of the required fee. The requirements and
procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be the same as the
requirements and procedures for granting a new license. (2016 Code)
4-1-9: NONTRANSFERABILITY, UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Nontransferability: No license may be assigned, sold, loaned,
transferred, used as collateral, or otherwise encumbered. No person, firm, or
corporation shall use or display any license certificate, tag, badge, or
sticker which has been improperly acquired.
   B.   Unlawful Use Prohibited: No person, firm, or corporation shall alter,
deface, forge, or counterfeit any license, certificate, plate, tag, badge, or
sticker issued by the village. (2016 Code)
4-1-10: POSTING LICENSE; SEIZURE OF UNAUTHORIZED LICENSES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed commercial
establishment or activity in the village to keep his license displayed at all
times in a prominent place on the premises, machine, or vehicle used for such
commercial establishment or activity.
   B.   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove, or carry away
without the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate, or sticker
which has been discontinued or the licensed premises has been abandoned.
Nothing herein shall prevent the village clerk or his or her duly authorized
representative from removing any license, certificate, plate, or sticker from
the possession of a former licensee, the premises, any vehicle, or any machine
when said license has been revoked under the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   In addition to the posting of licenses, unattended service oriented
businesses, such as coin operated laundries and car washes, are required to
display a sign that properly informs their customers of the appropriate
telephone number to contact in case of emergency situations. The sign
displaying the telephone number shall be conspicuous, unobstructed, permanent
in nature, and contained in a heavy plastic type framing device securely
mounted to the wall. (2016 Code)
4-1-11: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for any commercial establishment or activity if the
premises and building to be used do not fully comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the village and the state. (2016 Code)
4-1-12: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
No license for the operation of a commercial establishment or activity in the
village shall be construed to permit its operation in more than one location in
the village. A separate license shall be required for each location. For the
purpose of this chapter, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced
by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall
be:
   A.   Connected or shall be located on the same lot or zoning lot; and
   B.   Operated and managed by the same person or owner; and
   C.   An establishment with the same classification. (2016 Code)
4-1-13: NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No commercial establishment or activity, whether or not licensed, shall
be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof shall be
used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business so as to
occasion any nuisance, or otherwise threaten the public health, safety, morals,
or welfare. Any charge of conducting or operating a nuisance may be made under
this chapter or under the provisions of any other village ordinance.
   B.   No building or structure utilized, constructed, or maintained in
connection with any commercial establishment or activity shall evidence an
unsanitary, unsafe, or any other dangerous or unlawful condition. (2016 Code)
4-1-14: INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Whenever an investigation or a hearing pursuant to this chapter by any
department or official of the village requires additional information from the
licensee, the licensee shall be given written notice by the village of what
additional information from the licensee is required, and the licensee shall
fully and completely comply with that request.
   B.   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed commercial establishment or activity are provided for
or required by this chapter, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance
with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the village or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in
charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making the
inspection any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to
make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is
requested, or the village may obtain an administrative search warrant.
   C.   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any
ordinance or regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty
of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly
authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient
samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon official request.
(2016 Code)
4-1-15: MUNICIPAL MISREPRESENTATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensed business in the village subject to the
municipal retailers' occupation tax 1  or municipal service occupation tax 2
in sections
3-2-1 and
3-2-2 of this code to represent or advertise that its building or premises is
located in a municipality other than the village. It is not a violation of this
section if the name of another municipality is a part of the name of the
licensed business. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2 2. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
4-1-16: TWENTY FOUR HOUR BUSINESS OPERATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any commercial establishment or activity in
the village to have its premises open to the public for business anytime
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
without obtaining a business license endorsement in addition to their business
license. Open for business shall not include the operation of a drive-through
or vending machine accessed without entry into the building.
   B.   A late night business supplemental endorsement shall be applied for on
forms from the village clerk which shall contain a late night security plan
prepared by the applicant based on the police department's current business
security checklist and must be approved by the chief of police. An approved
security plan shall only be valid during the term on the business license and
may be amended by the chief of police based on security issues arising during
the prior year. (2016 Code)
4-1-17: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The village administrator shall take all necessary and appropriate
action to compel compliance with the regulatory provisions of this chapter.
   B.   All municipal employees duly authorized and acting as license
inspectors shall be conservators of the peace with police powers for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and other village
ordinances relating to the licensing of commercial establishments and
activities and their regulations. (2016 Code)
4-1-18: SUSPENSION OF BUSINESS OPERATIONS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Suspension Of Business Operations:
      1.   When the conduct or operation of any commercial establishment or
activity, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact
and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety, or general
welfare, the village administrator shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business and the closing of the premises for a period not to
exceed ten (10) days.
      2.   Unless: a) waived by the affected business; or b) the nuisance is
substantially abated in the opinion of the village administrator and the
business is allowed to resume and reopen, within eight (8) days after a license
is suspended, the village president shall call a hearing as provided in
subsection C of this section for the purpose of determining whether or not the
license should be revoked or further suspended.
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation Of License:
      1.   Licenses issued by the village may be suspended for up to thirty
(30) days or revoked in addition to any fine imposed by the village president
after notice and hearing as provided in subsection C of this section for any of
the following causes:
         a.   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the license;
         b.   Failure by the applicant to comply with any provision of this
code or any statutes of the state relating to the business, occupation, or
activity of the license;
         c.   Conviction of the applicant of any felony or of a misdemeanor
where such conviction indicates the applicant's inability to operate a safe,
honest, and legitimate business operation within the village;
         d.   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine, penalty, charge or debt
owed the village;
         e.   Any deceptive trade practices as defined by state or federal law
or regulation and shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations
regarding consumer protection and deceptive trade practices;
         f.   Compliance with all village zoning, building, fire and health
codes and ordinances, as well as all other applicable village codes,
ordinances, rules, and regulations, and the premises shall be maintained in
good repair, free of litter and debris and kept in a safe condition for
employees, customers, and other persons present therein or thereon;
         g.   Any other violation of any village ordinance, resolution, or
regulation; or
         h.   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference
with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the reasonable
performance of his duties in making such inspections.
      2.   Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the village. No
person whose license has been revoked shall be eligible for a new license
during the period for which the original license was originally issued.
   C.   Hearing Procedures:
      1.   Notice Of Hearing:
         a.   Notice of a hearing shall set forth specifically the grounds of
the complaint and the time and place of the hearing.
         b.   Such notice shall be served by certified mail (return receipt
requested) to the licensee at his last known residence or business address, at
least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing or personally served
on the licensee at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
         c.   If the licensee shall request a continuance in the date of the
hearing, any suspension in effect shall be continued until the continued
hearing date.
         d.   All pleadings, motions, notices, and orders shall be filed with
the village clerk.
      2.   Procedural Rules:
         a.   Prior to the beginning of any hearing, the village president may
adopt additional procedural rules as may be necessary for that hearing.
         b.   At the hearing, the licensee shall be permitted counsel and shall
have the right to respond, present evidence, and cross examine witnesses.
         c.   All proceedings shall be stenographically or electronically
recorded.
         d.   Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded. The rules of evidence as applied in civil cases in the circuit courts
of the state shall be followed. Evidence not admissible under those rules of
evidence may be admitted, however, if it is of a type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. Objections to
evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record.
         e.   No discovery procedure shall be used prior to a hearing except by
leave of the village president who shall supervise all or any part of any
discovery procedure.
         f.   The standard for proof for hearings shall be by the preponderance
of the evidence.
         g.   The village president shall preside and render the decision
within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not later
than twenty one (21) days after such conclusion. The decision shall be in
writing and shall summarize the evidence and state the reasons for the
decision.
      3.   Hearing Costs:
         a.   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked, or a business
that operates without a license, shall pay to the village the costs of the
hearing before the village president. The village president shall determine the
costs incurred by the village for said hearing including, but not limited to,
court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the
cost of preparing the mailing of notices and orders, and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the
village president may allow.
         b.   The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty
(30) days of notification of the costs by the village president. Failure to pay
said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this
section and may be cause for license suspension or revocation or the levy of a
fine. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Interpretation And Application Of Provisions
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
4-2-4: License And Compliance Required
4-2-5: Application For License
4-2-6: Bond Requirements
4-2-7: Grounds For Nonissuance, Nonrenewal, Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-2-8: License Classifications And Fees
4-2-9: Privilege Granted By License
4-2-10: Termination Of License; Transfer Of Interest; Renewals
4-2-11: Change Of Location
4-2-12: Licensee Regulations Generally
4-2-13: Regulations Regarding Video Gaming Terminals
4-2-14: Prohibited Conduct Generally
4-2-15: Prohibited Conduct Relating To Minors
4-2-16: Unlicensed Premises Prohibitions
4-2-17: Nuisances Declared
4-2-18: Emergency Closing Of Business
4-2-19: Enforcement Proceedings
4-2-20: Violations; Penalties
4-2-1: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Interpretation: This chapter shall be liberally construed, to the end
that the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the village shall be
protected and temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be
fostered and promoted by sound and careful control and regulation of the sale
of alcoholic liquor. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preempt the
Illinois liquor control act of 1934 ("act"), 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
1-1 et seq., except to the extent allowed by the Illinois constitution, or
where the regulations in this chapter are more restrictive than those in the
act, in which case, the regulations in this chapter shall be controlling.
Except in those instances where the act has been preempted by this chapter,
enforcement of the act and this chapter shall be concurrent.
   B.   Application: On the effective date hereof, new applicants for liquor
licenses shall be subject to the license classifications, fees and regulations
set forth in this chapter. Existing license holders who apply for renewals for
their liquor licenses shall be subject to all regulations on the effective date
hereof except for license classifications and fees which shall be effective
upon their renewal. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and phrases used in
this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ACT: The Illinois liquor control act of 1934, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
1-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, including synthetic ethyl
alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOL SALES AND SERVICE TRAINING PROGRAM: BASSET, TIPS or such other alcohol
sales and service training program approved in writing by the chief of police.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, or other liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol
by volume which is capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BARTENDER: A person employed by a licensee whose duties include preparing or
pouring, and serving alcoholic beverages to customers for on site consumption.
A waiter/waitress is not considered a bartender for purposes of this chapter.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BREWPUB: See definition of Microbrewery.
CATERER: A person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption at private
functions either on site or off site as an incidental part of food service.
CLUB: A "not for profit club" or "private club" as defined in this section.
COMMISSION: The local liquor control commission of the village of Berkeley,
Illinois.
COMMISSIONER: The village president of the village of Berkeley, Illinois.
DEDICATED EVENT SPACE: A room or rooms or other clearly delineated space within
a retail licensee's premises that is reserved for the exclusive use of party
package invitees during the entirety of a party package. Furniture, stanchions
and ropes, or other room dividers, may be used to clearly delineate a dedicated
event space.
DISTRIBUTOR: A person, other than a manufacturer, who is engaged in the
business of purchasing, storing, possessing, or warehousing any alcoholic
liquors for resale or reselling at wholesale, whether within or without the
village.
ESTABLISHMENT WHERE THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IS NOT THE PRINCIPAL BUSINESS:
Any licensed premises or business where less than fifty percent (50%) of its
gross sales or revenues in the preceding twelve (12) months were derived from
the sale of alcoholic liquors.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed
and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and
guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five (25)
or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings,
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.
LICENSED PREMISES: The permanent structure housing a licensed business
described in the application for the license, or the place where the business
to be covered or covered by the license is to be, or is carried on, but not
including parking lots and property outside such permanent structure unless
otherwise specified in the license. Said premises may include designated
outdoor areas such as decks and patios adjacent to said permanent structure
with the approval of the local liquor control commissioner.
LICENSEE: A person holding a license under the provisions of this chapter, and
all persons required to be listed on the license application for any license
issued, and all persons who are owners or are in control of any place where the
sale of alcoholic liquor is carried on, including, without limitation,
individuals, clubs, partnerships, corporations, partners, managers,
fiduciaries, officers, directors, and stockholders owning more than fifty
percent (50%) of any corporation or more than five percent (5%) of nonpublicly
traded corporations. This definition excludes an employee or bartender who is
not otherwise an owner or in control of the licensed premises.
MANAGER: A person employed by a licensee who has authority to oversee the
operation of a licensed business and exercise discretionary authority on behalf
of the licensee.
MEAL PACKAGE: A food and beverage package, which may or may not include
entertainment, where the service of alcoholic liquor is an accompaniment to the
food including, but not limited to, a meal, tour, tasting, or any combination
thereof for a fixed price by a retail licensee or any other licensee operating
within a sports facility, restaurant, winery, brewery, or distillery.
MICROBREWERY: Any public place or establishment that engages in the production,
manufacturing, or brewing of beer on the premises by means of adequate and
sanitary equipment designed and maintained to facilitate the brewing process
and dispenses that beer produced on the premises for consumption on the
premises and packaged for retail sale.
NOT FOR PROFIT CLUB: A patriotic or veterans society organized under the laws
of the United States or the state of Illinois, or a corporation organized under
the laws of this state: a) solely for the promotion of a common object other
than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor and not for pecuniary profit;
b) kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues;
c) owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building, of such extent
and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and
comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests; d) provided
with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and
maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking,
preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; and e)
whose affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, barrel, keg, hogshead or other
receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled
by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and convey any alcoholic
liquor.
PACKAGE SALES: The retail sale or offering for sale of alcoholic liquor in the
original package, not to be consumed in whole or in part on the premises where
sold.
PARTY PACKAGE: A private party, function, or event for a specific social or
business occasion, either arranged by invitation or reservation for a defined
number of individuals, that is not open to the general public and where
attendees are served both food and alcohol for a fixed price in a dedicated
event space.
PERSON: Includes corporation(s), copartnership(s), partnership(s), association
(s), club(s), individual(s), trustee(s), receiver(s), assignee(s), executor(s),
administrator(s), or other personal representatives of decedent(s).
PREMISES OR PLACE OF BUSINESS: The place or location where alcoholic beverages
are stored, displayed or offered for sale, or where drinks containing alcoholic
beverages are mixed, concocted and served for consumption including the
interior of the building, sidewalks, streets, parking areas and grounds
adjacent to any such place or location or any other area within the control of
the licensee.
PRIVATE CLUB: An establishment where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the
principal business, and where the sale of alcohol is available only to its
members and their guests and not to the general public.
PRIVATE FUNCTION: A prearranged private party, function, or event for a
specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation and
not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served in a
room or in areas designated and used exclusively for the private party,
function, or event.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public to be a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number of the kind of
employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange, or barter, in any manner or means whatsoever, for
a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by a person, whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.
SELL AT RETAIL: Sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SPECIAL EVENT: Event lasting five (5) days or less organized by an educational,
fraternal, political, civic, religious or nonprofit organization where the sale
of alcoholic liquor, only for consumption at the location, is incidental to the
main purpose or function of the event.
TO SELL: To solicit or receive an order for a sale, to advertise for sale, or
to keep on premises with intent to sell.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion
of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game including,
but not limited to, video poker, line up and blackjack utilizing a video
display and microprocessor in which the player may receive free games or
credits that can be redeemed from cash. The term does not include a machine
that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens, or is for amusement purposes
only.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL OPERATOR: An individual, partnership, corporation, or
limited liability company that is licensed under the Illinois Video Gaming Act,
230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., as amended, that owns, services,
and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed video gaming
locations in the Village.
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley, Illinois. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016
Code; Ord. 20-50, 10-6-2020)
4-2-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   A.   Village President Serve As: The village president shall be the local
liquor control commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the
appropriate provisions of the liquor control act of the state of Illinois
within the village, and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to
alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the corporate authorities. For purposes
of this chapter, the local liquor control commissioner shall be and shall
constitute the local liquor control commission of the village.
   B.   Powers: The commissioner shall have the following powers:
      1.   To receive applications and to grant, renew or deny such licenses in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
      2.   To receive license fees and forward the same forthwith to the office
of the finance director. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   To authorize one or more deputies or agents to act on his behalf,
with or without compensation as determined by the corporate authorities, for
the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the commissioner or
to assist the commissioner in the exercise of the powers and the performance of
his duties.
      4.   To make or cause to be made by the various village departments such
investigations as may aid him in the performance of his duties.
      5.   To enter, or to authorize any law enforcement officer or peace
officer to enter, at any time upon any licensed premises, to examine any
licensed premises to determine whether any law, order, or regulation of the
village or the local liquor control commissioner, or any federal or state law,
rule or regulation with respect to alcoholic liquor, or any liquor license, has
been or is being violated.
      6.   To require fingerprints of any licensee or employee or agent of a
licensee or any applicant for a liquor license or for a renewal thereof to
examine or cause to be examined under oath any applicant for a license or for a
renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of a violation of this
chapter has been served, and to examine, or cause to be examined, the books
and/or records of any such applicant or licensee.
      7.   To require the attendance of witnesses and/or the production of
documents and records at any hearing before him, to administer or cause to be
administered oaths to hear testimony and take proof on any matter in the
performance of his duties within this chapter, and for such purpose, to issue
subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the state of Illinois.
      8.   To compel any licensee or applicant to submit to any examination
and/or to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the
commissioner, may be material to the determination of whether an applicant is
qualified to receive a license, whether the licensed premises is lawful, and/or
whether a licensee is in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations under the provisions of this chapter. The failure of any licensee
or applicant to comply with this subsection, unless for good cause shown, shall
be deemed to be an admission that the licensee or applicant is not qualified to
maintain or receive a license.
      9.   To require any licensee or applicant to answer any charges made in
any objection to the issuance of the license. The failure of any licensee or
applicant to comply with this subsection, unless for good cause shown, shall be
deemed to be an admission that the licensee or applicant is not qualified to
maintain or receive a license.
      10.   To receive, investigate and act upon any complaint from any person
that any of the provisions of this chapter or the act or any rules or
regulations adopted by the commissioner or by the state commission have been or
are being violated. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
      11.   Pursuant to this chapter, to suspend for not more than thirty (30)
days, or revoke for cause any license issued under this chapter, or levy a fine
against any licensee, for each violation of any federal, state or local law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the sale of alcoholic liquor, and for
any of the following reasons: (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
         a.   The wilful making of any false statement in an application for a
license, permit or certificate.
         b.   Refusal of any licensee to testify under oath to all relevant and
material questions propounded to him at any hearing conducted by the local
liquor control commissioner.
         c.   Refusal of any licensee or his employee or agent to produce for
inspection by the commissioner any document requested which may be relevant to
any hearing or investigation of alleged violations of the state liquor control
act, this chapter, or any rule or regulation of the commissioner.
         d.   The state commission has suspended or revoked the license of the
licensee.
         e.   Within sixty (60) days of the granting of a license, the licensee
has failed to operate the business at the location in the license except upon
petition to and an order issued by the local liquor control commission granting
an extension period.
         f.   Failure to notify the commissioner of the hiring of any new
managers within fourteen (14) days after any such manager begins working, and/
or failure to provide all information necessary to keep the licensee's
application accurate and current.
         g.   Failure to obey any lawful order of the commissioner.
         h.   The licensed premises constitutes a nuisance as defined by
village ordinance including this chapter.
         i.   Suspension or revocation is required pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
      12.   To keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses
issued by him, and to furnish, upon request, to the office of the village
administrator, finance director, and/or chief of police a copy thereof, and to
inform the board of trustees from time to time of any changes including the
issuance of new licenses and the revocation of old licenses. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-
2013; amd. 2016 Code)
      13.   To make recommendations to the village board regarding the number
of licenses available for each license classification and the appropriate fees
to be charged for those licenses.
      14.   To make, promulgate, alter, amend, repeal, and enforce such rules
and regulations relating to the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter as are consistent with this chapter and which may be
deemed by him to be desirable to facilitate his functions and duties, to the
end that the health, safety and welfare of the village shall be protected and
temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and
promoted. Such rules and regulations shall become effective to be adopted only
after being placed on file in the office of the village administrator for a
period of thirty (30) days after notice to the public and all licensees
affected thereby.
      15.   To hold public hearings at any time concerning any matters embraced
within this chapter. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-4: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person, either by himself or
through an agent, or any person acting as an agent, employee, bartender, clerk,
or servant of another, to sell, dispense, or offer for sale at retail or give
away any alcoholic beverage or engage in any sale of alcoholic beverage within
the village without first having obtained a license to do so as provided in
this chapter or during any period that the license has been suspended or
revoked. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Compliance Required:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or
engage in any sale of any alcoholic beverage in violation of the terms and
conditions of any license issued pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a business license
within the village to knowingly allow any customer to consume alcoholic
beverages on the property where the business license has been issued unless the
premises has been licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
      3.   Each sale on a given date shall be deemed a separate violation.
(Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   The commissioner shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, an application
form, in accordance with this chapter, and shall require such other additional
information, records or background investigations as the commissioner or chief
of police shall from time to time determine to be advisable and/or necessary to
confirm the information provided in the application.
   B.   Any person desiring a license authorized by this chapter shall make
application to the commissioner. A separate application shall be made for each
license by the applicant. Such application shall be typed or legibly
handwritten on forms prepared and furnished by the commissioner. Each
application shall be signed and verified by oath or affidavit by each person so
required, and shall be filed with the office of the village administrator. The
following persons shall be listed on the application:
      1.   If the applicant is an individual or individuals, each individual
shall sign and verify the application.
      2.   If the applicant is a general partnership, all partners shall sign
and verify the application.
      3.   If the applicant is a limited partnership, all general partners and
any limited partner owning more than a five percent (5%) interest in such
limited partnership and any person entitled to share in more than five percent
(5%) of the profits of the partnership who shall sign and verify the
application and specify the percentage of interest owned or profit to which he
is entitled.
      4.   If the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability corporation
(LLC), all officers, directors and managing members and any stockholders owning
more than fifty percent (50%) of the corporate stock of a publicly traded
corporation and more than five percent (5%) of the corporate stock of a
nonpublicly traded corporation shall be listed, and their official position and
percentage of stock owned shall be specified. The application shall be signed
and verified by the president, secretary, managing member and site manager.
      5.   If the applicant is a club, all local officers and directors shall
be listed, and their official position shall be specified. The application
shall be signed and verified by the president, secretary and site manager.
      6.   Any person who acts as the manager or agent of the licensee shall
submit information and documentation as required of him by the commissioner.
   C.   Applications shall contain the following information and statements:
      1.   The name, address, date of birth and social security number of all
persons required to be listed on the application.
      2.   A statement whether each person required to be listed on the
application is a resident of the state of Illinois. In the case of
corporations, officers, directors, or stockholders and in the case of
partnerships, partners do not have to be residents of Illinois if the licensee
employs a resident manager to operate the licensed premises.
      3.   A statement of the citizenship of all persons required to be listed
on the application, and if any person is a naturalized citizen of the United
States, the date and place of naturalization and a copy of said naturalization
documents. If any person is not a citizen of the United States, a statement
that the person has the legal authority to reside in the United States and a
copy of all documents granting said authority.
      4.   The name and address of the applicant's prospective business, and if
applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the business with
the county clerk.
      5.   If the applicant is an Illinois corporation, a copy of the articles
of incorporation and a certificate of good standing.
      6.   If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate from the
secretary of state of Illinois to conduct business in Illinois as a foreign
corporation.
      7.   If the applicant is an Illinois limited partnership, a copy of the
filed certificate of limited partnership and a certificate of good standing
from the Illinois secretary of state.
      8.   If the applicant is a foreign limited partnership, a copy of the
filed certificate of limited partnership in the state of filing, and a copy of
the filed application for admission to transact business as a foreign limited
partnership in Illinois.
      9.   If the applicant is an individual, a statement as to the nature of
the business of the applicant.
      10.   If the applicant is a club, a copy of its charter, the date it was
formed, and state of its headquarters, and a statement as to the nature of its
business and activities within the state of Illinois. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
      11.   A statement whether the proposed location is within one hundred
feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent
persons or for veterans, their spouses or children. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd.
2016 Code)
      12.   A statement whether food for human consumption is to be sold at the
event conducted or in the licensed premises if the license is granted. A
statement whether the business will be in combination with a restaurant, and
whether fifty percent (50%) of the gross receipts of the licensed business will
be or has been from the sale of such food, and documentation substantiating
this statement if requested by the local liquor control commissioner.
      13.   A statement as to the ownership of the licensed premises. If the
applicant is not the owner of the licensed premises, the name, address, and
phone number of the owner, and the duration of the lease. Documentation showing
proof of ownership (deed, tax bill or like document) or a copy of the lease.
      14.   A statement whether any person required to be listed on the
application previously applied for, holds, or held a liquor license of any type
issued by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government, that
was rejected, suspended or revoked, and all pertinent information detailing the
reason for and circumstances of any such rejection, suspension or revocation.
      15.   A statement whether or not any person required to be listed on the
application or any agent, bartender, limited partner or stockholder has ever
been convicted of being the keeper or an inmate of a house of prostitution, or
pandering, or of any other crime or misdemeanor, with the exception of traffic
offenses not connected with the misuse of alcoholic beverages.
      16.   A statement whether any person required to be listed on the
application is not at the time of making the application connected directly or
indirectly with a house of ill fame and verification that no such connection
will occur during the existence of the license.
      17.   A statement whether any person required to be listed on the
application has ever been convicted of a felony, or is disqualified to receive
the license sought by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter,
the laws of this state, or the ordinances of the village. If any such person
has been convicted of a felony, a statement indicating the state and county in
which the conviction occurred and explaining the nature of the charges which
led to the conviction and other relevant information pertaining to the
conviction.
      18.   A statement that should the licensed premises become or constitute
a nuisance, the license, permit or certificate may be suspended or revoked or
the licensee may be fined by the commissioner.
      19.   A statement that any person required to be listed on the
application will testify under oath and subscribe to the truth in response to
all relevant and material questions propounded to him, in any hearing conducted
by the commissioner, either before or after the issuance of a license.
      20.   A statement that any person required to be listed on the
application will provide, on receipt of a lawfully authorized subpoena by the
commissioner, any book or record of his licensed business in connection with
any investigation conducted by the commissioner.
      21.   A statement that any person required to be listed on the
application, and any manager, bartender, agent or employee, if requested by the
commissioner, will permit a record of his or her fingerprints to be made by the
village police department.
      22.   In the case of the purchase of an existing business, a statement
listing the value of the physical assets if purchased and proof of purchase and
a statement setting forth the amount paid for the business as a going concern
having value.
      23.   In the case of a new business, a statement listing all persons and
corporations financing the purchase or construction of the business to be
licensed and, if requested, a statement detailing the financial background of
the applicant and business to be licensed.
      24.   A statement that all persons required to be listed on the
application have paid all taxes, fees or other debts owed to the village.
      25.   A statement that no person required to be listed on the
application, and no person interested in any way, directly or indirectly, in
relation to the license applied for, the premises or the profits or proceeds
from the sale of alcoholic liquor, nor any member of his or her household is an
elected official or a full time employee of the village.
      26.   A statement authorizing the commissioner to cause to fingerprint
all persons required to be listed on the application and all managers and key
employees pursuant to subsection G of this section.
      27.   A statement that all persons required to be listed on the
application will not violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois, or of
the United States, or any ordinance of the village in relation to the license
or the licensed premises.
      28.   Proof that all managers of the licensed premises and each employee
who will be engaged in the selling, mixing, preparing, serving, or delivering
alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the licensed premises has
successfully completed an alcohol sales and service training program.
      29.   A copy of the licensee's village business license and state liquor
license (when available) and the licensee's federal employer identification
number.
      30.   All information required must be supplied at the time of
application and clearly typed or legibly handwritten. It is the applicant's
responsibility to supply on the application the name and address of each
manager or bartender to be employed and to ensure that a background
investigation is completed on each, including the submission of fingerprints.
   D.   The requirement of supplying all of the information in subsection C of
this section is a continuing one. If any supplied information or statements
become invalid or if a new manager or bartender is employed, it is the duty of
the licensee to provide updated information in writing to the commissioner and
the chief of police. This includes changes in the makeup or control of
partnerships or corporations as follows:
      1.   If the licensee is a partnership, the commissioner must be informed
within seven (7) days of the dissolution of the partnership, and within thirty
(30) days of the sale or acquisition of a five percent (5%) interest in the
partnership by any person, or upon any partner acquiring a fifty percent (50%)
or greater interest in the partnership if such partner was not shown to own a
fifty percent (50%) or greater interest on prior applications or renewals, or
of the resignation or replacement of any managing partner or site manager.
      2.   If the licensee is a corporation, the commissioner must be informed
within seven (7) days of the dissolution of the corporation, and within thirty
(30) days of the resignation or replacement of any officer, managing member or
site manager, or of the sale or acquisition or transfer of five percent (5%) of
the corporate stock by or from any one stockholder, or if any stockholder
acquires fifty percent (50%) or more of the stock if such stockholder was not
shown to own fifty percent (50%) or more of the stock on prior applications or
subsequent renewals.
      3.   In the case of clubs, the commissioner must be informed within
thirty (30) days upon the election or appointment of a new officer or director,
and annually if the membership roster changes.
      4.   The commissioner must be informed within seven (7) days of the
death, insolvency, bankruptcy or conviction of a felony of any licensee or
person required to be listed on the license application.
   E.   No license shall be issued, renewed, or allowed to continue, unless the
applicant files, seven (7) days before the issuance of a license, a certificate
from an insurance company, licensed to do business in the state of Illinois
with an A.M. Best's rating of "B" or better, that said company shall issue to
the applicant its certificate of insurance of a liquor liability policy with a
minimum combined single limit coverage of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00). Such certificate shall name and include within its coverage as
additional insured the village and its officers, employees and agents, shall
have an effective term not less than the term of the license and that the
village liquor control commissioner shall receive thirty (30) days' prior
written notice of any proposed cancellation of such liquor liability policy;
except, applicants for a class H, K or L license may have the required
insurance for a term less than the license year but shall provide proof of
renewal not less than seven (7) days before the expiration of said prior
certificate of insurance. If at any time during the period of the license said
insurance is not maintained or a current certificate of insurance is not on
file with the commissioner, said license shall be suspended or revoked.
   F.   It is unlawful for a licensee to attempt to pay a license fee, transfer
fee, late fee, settlement, or fine pursuant to this chapter with a negotiable
instrument that is dishonored on presentation, and said negotiable instrument
shall not be considered payment and shall be cause for disciplinary action.
   G.   Prior to the initial approval and issuance of a license, or whenever a
transfer of any interest in the license pursuant to this section or this
chapter, or at the request of the commissioner, all persons required to be
listed on the application and at the request of the commissioner, and all
managers and bartenders shall submit their fingerprints to the village police
department in the form and manner prescribed by chief of police. These
fingerprints shall be checked against law enforcement records and criminal
history records databases. The licensee or applicant shall pay a fee for
conducting the criminal history records check, as determined by the chief of
police.
   H.   An application for renewal of any previously issued license shall be
filed prior to December 1 each year. The application shall be accompanied by
payment of all the requisite fees, shall be verified, and shall include the
same information and documentation as shown above, which shall be current and
accurate as of the date of filing said renewal application as well as the
following documentation and information:
      1.   A copy of the applicant's current state liquor license number;
      2.   The date the applicant first obtained a license for the sale of
liquor at his place of business;
      3.   The applicant's retailer's occupation tax (ROT) registration number;
      4.   Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the retailer's
occupation tax (sales tax), and if so, the reasons therefor;
      5.   Proof of completion of alcohol sales and service training program
required by this chapter for each manager and employee who is or will be
engaged in the selling, mixing, preparing, serving, or delivering of alcoholic
liquor to customers, guests, or patrons for consumption on or off the licensed
premises. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
Any application for renewal of a liquor license submitted after December 1 must
be accompanied by a late filing fee as established in the annual fee schedule.
The failure to renew a license or to pay all requisite fees before the
expiration of the license shall render the license nonrenewable unless all
required information, documentation, and fees, including a late fee in the
amount as established in the annual fee schedule, are filed with the village
administrator within ten (10) working days of the expiration of the license.
(Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   I.   Applications for classes H, K and L licenses need not follow the formal
process set forth in this section, but shall be made by a written
correspondence to the local liquor control commissioner at least thirty (30)
days before the event, and shall identify the date and time of the event, the
type of license requested, and the location of the event, and shall include
proof of insurance, proof that all persons selling or serving alcoholic liquor
have completed an alcohol sales and service training program pursuant to this
chapter, and such other information required from time to time by the local
liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-6: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
A licensee who has had a liquor license revoked or suspended within the last
three (3) years shall, as a condition of obtaining or retaining a liquor
license from the village, obtain a surety bond in the sum of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) with a solvent surety company licensed to do business in
the state of Illinois and approved by the commissioner. The bond shall be made
payable to the village and conditioned on the faithful observance by the
licensee of the provisions of this chapter, all ordinances and laws of the
state of Illinois and of the United States Of America applying to the sale and
possession of alcoholic liquor and shall be further conditioned on the payment
of all fines and costs which may be assessed against the licensee by the local
liquor control commissioner for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter. If a licensee shall be fined and fails to pay the fine, or the license
shall be revoked by the commissioner and no appeal is taken from such, the
order or any appeal taken therefrom is decided adversely to the licensee, the
bond shall be forfeited and the commissioner may institute suit on such bond in
the name of the village for the entire amount of the bond. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-
2013)
4-2-7: GROUNDS FOR NONISSUANCE, NONRENEWAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF
LICENSE:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the
commissioner shall refuse the issuance or renewal of a license or suspend or
revoke the license of any licensee or applicant for any of the following
conditions with respect to an owner, licensee, applicant, manager or bartender:
         a.   A person under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 13-22, 6-
4-2013)
         b.   A person who is not a resident of the village except as allowed
by this chapter. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
         c.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
village and the community in which he resides.
         d.   A person who has not submitted a complete, accurate and truthful
application and all required documentation for a license as provided in this
chapter.
         e.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or
state law, unless the commissioner determines that such person has been
sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering
matters set forth in such person's application and the commissioner's
investigation with the burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation to be on
the applicant. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
         f.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is
keeping a house of prostitution or juvenile prostitution. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-
2013; amd. 2016 Code)
         g.   A person who has been convicted of pandering, or any other crime
(s) or misdemeanor(s) opposed to decency and morality or of a sexual nature, or
is determined to be a "sex offender" as defined by statute and/or is required
to register as such. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
         h.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as
proscribed by any village ordinance, subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of
section 28-1, or section 28-1.1 or section 28-3 of the criminal code of 2012,
or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
         i.   A person who is licensed by the state of Illinois as distributor.
         j.   A partnership or copartnership, if any person owning more than
five percent (5%) thereof would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder
for any reason other than the citizenship or residency requirements of this
chapter, so long as the partnership employs a resident manager to operate the
licensed premises. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
         k.   A corporation or limited liability company, if any officer or
director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate
more than five percent (5%) of the stock in such corporation would not be
eligible to receive a license for any reason hereunder other than the
citizenship or residency requirements of this chapter so long as the
corporation employs a resident manager to operate the licensed premises.
         l.   A corporation or limited liability company, unless it is
incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is
qualified under the "business corporation act of 1983" to transact business in
Illinois. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
         m.   A club, if any of its officers or directors would not be eligible
to receive a license for any reason hereunder other than the residency
requirements of this chapter.
         n.   A person that is not an individual(s), partnership, corporation
or "club" as defined in this chapter, except for persons applying for a class G
license.
         o.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager who is
not qualified to hold a license under this chapter.
         p.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon, or written permission from
the owner of the licensed premises for the period for which the license is to
be issued. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
         q.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee or premises, or have a lease for the term of the
license. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
         r.   Any person not eligible to receive a license under the Illinois
liquor control act or subsequent relevant liquor regulations as may be amended
from time to time.
         s.   Any person who is an elected official or full time employee of
the village and no such official or employee shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor within the village; except, that a license may be granted to
the village president or any member of the village board of trustees in
relation to a premises located within the village if the sale of alcoholic
liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food, the
issuance of the license is approved by the state commission, the issuance of
the license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances in effect
where the premises is located, and the official granted a license abstains on
all votes on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the village board.
         t.   A person who does not have liquor liability insurance coverage
for the licensed premises in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum
liability amounts required by the act or this chapter, whichever is greater.
         u.   A person who sells or intends to sell alcoholic liquor at any
premises or place of business where the majority of customers are minors or
where the principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school
supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such minors.
         v.   A person who sells or intends to sell alcoholic liquor within one
hundred feet (100') of any church, school other than an institution of higher
learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
spouses or children, or any military or naval station, but this prohibition
shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized
clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where the sale of
alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried. In the case of a
church, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the
nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs
and not to property boundaries. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the
issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic
liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on
the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale
or consumption of alcoholic liquors, or where a church locates within one
hundred feet (100') of a preexisting licensed premises.
         w.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
         x.   A person who fails to so testify or provide such books or records
for inspection as required by the local liquor control commissioner.
         y.   Where the licensed premises constitutes a nuisance as defined by
this chapter or elsewhere in this code or by any state or federal law.
         z.   Where the licensee or his employees or agents have failed to
submit their fingerprints in violation of this chapter.
         aa.   In cases of a renewal application, a licensee who is delinquent
in paying any amount owed to the village, until the finance director confirms
that all delinquencies and obligations have been satisfied and, if requested,
the applicant provides documentation that all taxes, fees, obligations or debts
owed to the village by the licensee have been satisfied.
         bb.   In cases of a renewal application, if the department of revenue
has reported to the Illinois liquor control commissioner that such licensee is
delinquent in filing any required tax returns or paying any amounts owed to the
state of Illinois until the licensee is issued a certificate by the department
of revenue stating all delinquent returns or amounts owed have been paid by
guaranteed remittance or the payment agreement to pay all amounts owed has been
accepted by the department.
         cc.   A person whose license under this chapter or the act has been
revoked for cause within the past twelve (12) months.
         dd.   A person whose license under this chapter or the act has been
revoked unless the commissioner determines it is unlikely the person will
violate any provision of this chapter.
      2.   A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the
denial, suspension, or revocation of a license applied for or held by the
corporation if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any
federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor, the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any
financial gain to the corporation and the corporation has terminated its
relationship with each director, officer, employee, or controlling shareholder
whose actions directly contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The
commissioner shall determine if all provisions of this subsection have been met
before any action on the corporation's license is initiated.
   B.   Violation Of State Tax Acts:
      1.   In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the
commissioner, on complaint of the department of revenue of the state of
Illinois, shall refuse the issuance or renewal of a license, or suspend or
revoke the license, of any person, for any of the following violations of any
tax act administered by the department:
         a.   Failure to make a tax return.
         b.   The filing of a fraudulent return.
         c.   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally
determined to be due.
         d.   Failure to keep books and records.
         e.   Failure to secure and display a certificate of registration, if
required.
         f.   Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the department
relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
      2.   Upon receiving notice from the department that a violation of any of
the items in subsection A1 of this section have been corrected or otherwise
resolved to the department's satisfaction, the commissioner may vacate an order
of revocation. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-8: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Classes Established: Licenses shall be divided into the following
classes:
      1.   Class A, Full Liquor: Class A licenses shall authorize the retail
sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquors for consumption on said
premises, and package sales for consumption off the premises where sold.
      2.   Class A1, Full Liquor On Premises: Class A1 licenses shall authorize
the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption only on the premises
specified.
      3.   Class B, Beer/Wine: Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale
of beer and wine for consumption only on the premises specified.
      4.   Class C, Club Consumption On Premises: Class C licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption only on the
premises in any "club", as defined in this chapter.
      5.   Class D, Full Package Sale (Liquor Store): Class D licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors only in original packages for
consumption off the premises and not for consumption on the premises where
sold.
      6.   Class D1, Full Package Sale (Food And Convenience Store): Class D1
licenses are issued only to establishments where the sale of alcoholic liquor
is not the principal business as defined in this chapter which shall authorize
the retail sale of alcoholic liquors only in original packages for consumption
off the premises and not for consumption on the premises where sold.
      7.   Class E, Beer And Wine Package Sale (Liquor Store): Class E licenses
shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only in original packages for
consumption off the premises and not for consumption on the premises where
sold.
      8.   Class E1, Beer And Wine Package Sale (Food And Convenience Store):
Class E1 licenses are issued only to establishments where the sale of alcoholic
liquor is not the principal business as defined in this chapter which shall
authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only in original packages for
consumption off the premises and not for consumption on the premises where
sold.
      9.   Class F, Restaurant Full Liquor: Class F licenses are issued only to
establishments where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business
as defined in this chapter which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption only on the premises and only when such sale is
incidental to the sale and service of food eaten on the premises.
      10.   Class G, Restaurant Beer And Wine: Class G licenses are issued only
to establishments where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
business as defined in this chapter which shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine for consumption only on the premises and only when such sale is
incidental to the sale and service of food eaten on the premises. It shall be
unlawful for any holder of a Class G license to sell or give alcoholic liquor
to a patron who does not also order food.
      11.   Class H, Special Event: Class H licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor only for consumption on the premises for special
events as defined by this chapter.
      12.   Class I, Caterers Full Liquor: Class I licenses shall authorize the
sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises where served and
limited to invited guests at private functions. Such licenses shall be issued
only to caterers as defined by this chapter and having a current Village
business license. Catering establishments must have food service available when
liquor is being served.
      13.   Class J, Caterers Beer/Wine: Class J licenses shall authorize the
sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises where served and limited
to invited guests at private functions. Such licenses shall be issued only to
caterers as defined by this chapter and having a current Village business
license. Catering establishments holding Class J licenses must have food
service available when beer and wine are being served.
      14.   Class K, Temporary Off Premises: Class K licenses shall authorize a
holder of a license to sell alcohol for consumption at a designated premises
other than the licensee's licensed premises for a specific period not to exceed
three (3) days.
      15.   Class L, Temporary Tasting: Class L licenses shall authorize a
holder of a license to provide small quantity samplings of alcoholic liquor for
on premises tasting purposes only in conjunction with a sales promotional
effort. Said license shall not exceed more than a six (6) hour period, and no
more than one license per week shall be issued to any licensee. All such
tastings must take place in a designated area of the licensed premises and
shall be supervised by a person who has completed an alcohol sales and service
training program.
      16.   Class M, BYOB: Class M licenses authorize a restaurant to allow the
consumption of wine not purchased from the restaurant but brought to the
restaurant by a customer under the provisions set forth in this chapter.
   B.   License Fees And Number Established: No more than the maximum number of
licenses set forth below shall be issued for any class of license. Each
applicant for a license shall pay the fee as established in the annual fee
schedule.
Class Maximum Number Of Licenses Which May Be Issued
Class                                  Maximum Number Of Licenses Which May Be
                                       Issued
Class A, full liquor on premises       2
Class A1, full liquor on premises only 0
Class B, beer/wine on premises         2
Class C, club consumption on premises  0
Class D, full package sale (liquor     1
store)
Class D1, full package sale (food and  2
convenience store)
Class E, beer and wine package sale    2
(liquor store)
Class E1, beer and wine package sale   0
(food and convenience store)
Class F, restaurant full liquor        0
Class G, restaurant beer and wine      2
Class H, special event                 3 for any location at the same time;
                                       minimum 5 per organization per year
Class I, caterers full liquor          0
Class J, caterers beer/wine            0
Class K, temporary off premises        6 per year per licensee
Class L, temporary tasting             1 per week per licensee
Class M, BYOB                          0
 
   C.   Supplemental Permits And Fees:
      1.   Beer Gardens And Live Entertainment: For Classes A, B, C, F, G, and
H license holders, a supplemental permit to allow beer gardens shall require an
annual fee as established in the annual fee schedule and/or for a supplemental
permit to allow live entertainment, an annual fee as established in the annual
fee schedule shall be required. No licensee shall operate a beer garden or have
live entertainment unless a supplemental permit is issued.
      2.   Video Gaming:
         a.   It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
         b.   Only licensees licensed to sell alcoholic liquor with a Class A,
A1, B, C, D2, F or G liquor license are authorized to obtain a supplemental
video gaming establishment permit to operate video gaming terminals at the
licensed location and only when licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board pursuant
to the provisions of the Illinois Gaming Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes
40/1 et seq., as amended, and in accordance with this chapter.
         c.   Liquor licensees with supplemental video gaming establishment
permits shall comply with the regulations contained in section
4-2-13 of this chapter.
         d.   There shall be no more than seven (7) supplemental video gaming
establishment permits issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner as part
of the liquor license process.
   D.   Payment Of Fees; Proration: All application, investigation,
fingerprinting and annual license fees shall be paid at the filing of the
application. If a new license (other than a Class H, K or L license) is applied
for after October 1, the first year's annual fee shall be reduced by fifty
percent (50%). In the event a license is not issued, any annual license fee
prepaid with an application shall be refunded to the applicant less a
processing fee as established in the annual fee schedule. All application and
investigation fees shall be retained by the Village regardless of whether or
not the person is granted a license.
   E.   Classes D1 And E1 License Conditions: Classes D1 and E1 licenses shall
require:
      1.   That the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be less than fifty
percent (50%) of the sale of all goods and services;
      2.   That not more than twenty percent (20%) of the total retail display
area shall be devoted to the sale of alcoholic beverages;
      3.   That the retail display area shall be as compact and contiguous as
possible, shown on a diagram of the premises and approved by the Village Liquor
Control Commissioner;
      4.   That no alcoholic liquor shall be stocked in a public area other
than the approved display area; and
      5.   That a sign shall be conspicuously posted at or in the approved
display area stating the hours of sale.
   F.   Reduction In Number Of Licenses: If a license of any class is revoked,
expires without renewal, or is surrendered by the licensee or if the licensee
fails to operate its business for more than thirty (30) days without approval
of the village liquor control commissioner, the total number of licenses in
that class shall be reduced by that license unless thereafter the number of
licenses is increased by the village board. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. Ord.
14-4, 5-20-2014; Ord. 14-37, 12-2-2014; Ord. 15-55, 10-20-2015; 2016 Code; Ord.
16-25, 6-21-2016; Ord. 17-08, 2-7-2017; Ord. 17-41, 7-18-2017; Ord. 17-42, 7-
18-2017; 20-50, 10-6-2020; Ord. 21-17, 4-6-2021; Ord. 21-45, 6-15-2021)
4-2-9: PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY LICENSE:
A liquor license granted pursuant to this chapter is solely a personal
privilege and, unless sooner revoked pursuant to this chapter or by federal or
state law, shall last for no more than one year, from January 1 (or later for
an initial application) through December 31, except for classes H, K, and L
licenses which shall expire on the date specified thereon. A license shall not
constitute property and may not be transferred. It shall not be used as
collateral, nor be subject to voluntary or involuntary attachment, assignment,
garnishment, or execution, encumbrance or hypothecation, nor shall it descend
by the laws of testate or intestate devolution. Renewal of the license is a
privilege and shall not be construed as a vested right which shall limit or
prevent the decreasing of the number of licenses to be issued within the
village. No license shall be renewed under this section unless the manager of
the licensed establishment, and each employee of the licensee who is or will be
engaged in the selling, mixing, preparing, or serving of alcoholic liquor at
the licensed premises, have successfully completed an alcohol sales and service
training program. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-10: TERMINATION OF LICENSE; TRANSFER OF INTEREST; RENEWALS:
   A.   Except as provided herein, a license shall automatically terminate upon
the death, dissolution, or the insolvency of the licensee; upon the sale or
transfer of any interest in the license by an individual or club licensee; upon
the sale or transfer or assignment of more than fifty percent (50%) of the
outstanding shares of a corporation or interest in any partnership holding a
license; or upon the filing of a petition for adjudication of bankruptcy by or
as to the estate of the licensee. A transfer of a deceased licensee's interest
to a father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, son, or daughter shall be
permitted; provided, that such person meets all qualifications required to hold
the license and shall be bound by all conditions of the license.
   B.   In the event of the death of a licensee, the executor of the will or
administrator of the estate of any deceased licensee pursuant to the
appropriate court order, or if none, the spouse or any child of the licensee
upon the written approval of the commissioner, may exercise the privileges of
the deceased licensee until the expiration of such license or until six (6)
months after the death of the licensee, whichever is the shorter period of
time, provided such person meets all qualifications required to hold the
license and shall be bound by all conditions of the license.
   C.   The trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate
consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of
alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the
privileges of the insolvent or bankrupt licensee until the expiration of such
license but not longer than six (6) months after the bankruptcy or insolvency
of such licensee, whichever is the shorter period of time, provided such
trustee meets all qualifications required to hold the license and shall be
bound by all conditions of the license.
   D.   No refund shall be made of any portion of the license fees paid for any
period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such
license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Upon the termination of a license pursuant to subsection A or B of this
section, the successor in interest may apply for the issuance of the license
pursuant to this chapter and shall pay all applicable initial application and
license fees.
   F.   A licensee whose license has not been terminated prior to the
expiration of its term may apply for the renewal of the license at the
expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose.
However, the renewal privilege herein provided shall not be construed as a
vested right which shall in any case prevent the corporate authorities from
decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction. (Ord.
13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-11: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Any license issued under this chapter shall apply only to the premises
described in the application and in the license issued thereon. After a license
has been granted for a particular premises, the commissioner, upon the filing
of a written request and payment of an investigation fee in the amount as shall
now or may be required by this chapter, and upon a proper showing, including
the applicant's statement under oath that the premises to which said relocation
is to be made complies in all respects with the requirements of this chapter,
may endorse upon said license permission to abandon the premises therein
described and relocate to another premises approved by the commissioner. The
request shall be rejected if the applicant has not operated his business at the
original licensed premises for at least ninety (90) days prior to the
application for change of location. No change of location shall be permitted
unless the proposed new location is a lawful location and premises for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to Illinois law and all applicable
village ordinances. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit any
licensee to change the location of his business or operate his business or a
portion thereof as a subtenant or otherwise at a site or place of business
which would be prohibited or denied to an original applicant. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-
2013)
4-2-12: LICENSEE REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
   A.   Condition Of Licensed Premises: All licensed premises shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition and shall be governed by the ordinances of the
village regulating the condition of the premises used for the storage or sale
of food for human consumption. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
   B.   Hours For Sale Or Consumption: It shall be unlawful to keep open for
business or admit or allow the public, patrons and customers on the premises,
or sell or permit to be sold, offer for sale, give away or permit to be
consumed any alcoholic liquor, nor shall any alcoholic liquor be exposed upon
such premises in any open individual serving container including, but not
limited to, glasses and bottles beyond fifteen (15) minutes after the
prescribed closing time for such licensed premises during the following hours:
      1.   Classes A, A1, B and C: Monday through Thursday, from ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on the following day; Friday and
Saturday, from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. through two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the
following day; Sunday, from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. through one o'clock (1:
00) A.M. on the following day.
      2.   Classes D and E: Monday through Saturday, from eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. through eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.; Sunday, from eleven o'clock (11:00)
A.M. through eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Ord. 13-27, 8-20-2013)
      3.   Classes F, G, I, J, and M: Monday through Thursday, from ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. through eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.; Friday and Saturday, from ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. through twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight; Sunday, from
eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. through eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Ord. 13-27, 8-
20-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
      4.   Class H: As approved by the liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 13-
27, 8-20-2013)
   C.   Lights And Illuminated Signs: All lights of all outside advertising
display or illuminating signs of licensed premises shall only be illuminated
during the hours of sale and as restricted in section 12-13-20C of this code.
   D.   Posting License: Each licensee shall cause his license to be framed and
hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
   E.   Books And Records: Each licensee shall make his books and records
available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control
by the commissioner. Such books and records shall be maintained in the state of
Illinois, unless access to the records is available electronically.
   F.   Warning Sign Required; Violation: Every licensee shall post in plain
view on the licensed premises an eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2"
x 11") sign with the following message: "Government Warning: According To The
Surgeon General, Women Should Not Drink Alcoholic Beverages During Pregnancy
Because Of The Risk Of Birth Defects". The local liquor control commission
shall furnish a copy of this sign upon request. If the licensee fails to post
said sign within seven (7) days after receiving a written warning, he shall be
fined in accordance with title 1, chapter 4 of this code for each such
violation, and each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   G.   Outdoor Areas Adjacent To Licensed Premises: Subject to all applicable
village ordinances, the local liquor control commissioner may allow the sale
and consumption of alcoholic liquor in completely enclosed outdoor areas such
as decks and patios adjacent to the permanent structure of a licensed premises
so long as he determines said sale and consumption shall not adversely impact
the peace, health, safety or welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. Said
determination is subject to review and reconsideration on an annual basis.
(Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
   H.   Video Recording And Monitoring: Unless waived in writing by the
commissioner, the holder of a class D or E license and any licensee who has
video gaming terminals on the licensed premises shall install and maintain in
good working order video recording and monitoring equipment pursuant to
specifications as determined from time to time by the chief of police and shall
maintain video recordings for a period of at least fourteen (14) days after
each sale. Video recordings must be accessible remotely to the chief of police
upon request at any time. A written notice that "All Sales Of Alcohol Are Video
Recorded" shall be posted near the point of sale. Holders of class D or E
licenses shall record all persons entering and leaving the building and all
sales of alcohol. Licensees who have video gaming terminals shall record all
persons entering or leaving the building, the operation and playing of all
video gaming terminals, and all payouts/distributions of winnings from gaming
activities. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   I.   Responsible Alcohol Service Training Required:
      1.   Each manager of a licensed premises, and each employee of a licensee
who will be engaged in selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering
alcoholic liquor to customers, guests or patrons for consumption on or off the
licensed premises, shall, within ten (10) days after beginning employment with
the licensee, successfully complete an alcohol sales and service training
program.
      2.   Each licensee shall maintain on the licensed premises and with the
commissioner proof of completion of the alcohol sales and service training
required pursuant to this subsection in a manner that will allow inspection,
upon demand, by any designee of either the state of Illinois liquor control
commission or the local liquor control commissioner.
      3.   No person shall sell, mix, prepare, serve, or deliver alcoholic
liquor in the village, for consumption on or off the licensed premises, unless
that person has successfully completed an alcohol sales and service training
program, and that proof of such training is available for inspection at the
licensed premises.
      4.   No local liquor licensee shall allow alcoholic liquor to be sold,
served, or delivered except by a person who has successfully completed an
alcohol sales and service training program.
   J.   BYOB Licensees: The following provisions apply to holders of class M
(BYOB) licenses, and are in addition to all other requirements set forth in
this chapter:
      1.   No more than one bottle of wine per patron over the age of twenty
one (21) shall be permitted to be consumed at any table or booth.
      2.   The licensee shall only permit BYOB service to occur on the premises
in conjunction with the purchase and consumption of a full meal on the licensed
premises.
      3.   Patrons must be seated at a table or booth to consume wine.
      4.   The licensee may provide glassware and ice to the patron and may
uncork the wine and pour it and shall control its consumption.
      5.   The licensee may, but is not required to, charge a corkage fee.
      6.   All employees who perform corkage duties shall successfully complete
an alcohol sales and service training program and shall serve the wine as if it
was purchased in the establishment complying with all state and local laws.
      7.   235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-33 is hereby incorporated by
reference with respect to prohibitions against any persons carrying or
transporting or possessing liquor in an unsealed and open condition.
      8.   The licensee shall be liable for violations of this chapter in the
same manner as the holder of any other classification of liquor license
including, but not limited to, violations for service to minors and the
overserving of patrons.
   K.   Access: The chief of police or his designees and/or any peace officer
of the village police department wearing a uniform or displaying a badge or
other sign of authority shall have unobstructed/unhindered immediate access to
the licensed premises including, but not limited to, all outdoor areas during
the business hours and/or any time the licensed premises is occupied. The
licensee, his agents and/or employees shall allow and/or facilitate said access
and shall not hinder or obstruct said access in any manner. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-
2013; amd. Ord. 21-17, 4-6-2021)
4-2-13: REGULATIONS REGARDING VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
   A.   State Approval And County And Village Permit Stickers Required:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the licensee of any licensed premises to
operate a video gaming terminal who has not also obtained approval for the
operation of the video gaming terminals from the State of Illinois, from Cook
County, and who has not obtained a video gaming terminal establishment permit
sticker and a video gaming terminal operator permit sticker for each video
gaming terminal from the village.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for a video gaming terminal operator to own,
service, maintain or place a video gaming terminal in the village who has not
also obtained a license for the ownership, service, maintenance and/or
placement of each video gaming terminal in the village from the State of
Illinois, and who has not also obtained a video gaming terminal operator permit
sticker from the village for each video gaming terminal.
   B.   Regulations For Licensed Establishments: Regulations governing licensed
establishments operating video gaming terminals are as follows:
      1.   A valid village video gaming terminal establishment permit sticker
and a valid village video gaming terminal operator permit sticker shall be
clearly displayed at all times on each video gaming terminal.
      2.   No more than the lesser of the maximum amount of video gaming
terminals allowed by Illinois law or the amount of video gaming terminals
allowed in the village-issued supplemental video gaming establishment permit
may be located on the licensed establishment's premises.
      3.   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons twenty one (21) years of age or older. The entrance to such an area
must at all times be within the view of at least one employee who is at least
twenty one (21) years of age. Video gaming terminals must not be visible from
any area outside of the building.
      4.   No licensed establishment may cause or permit any person under the
age of twenty one (21) to use, play or operate a video gaming terminal.
      5.   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the legal hours
of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed
premises.
      6.   The licensed establishment must fully comply with the Illinois video
gaming act and all rules, regulations, and restrictions imposed by the Illinois
gaming board, as may be amended from time to time, which are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter.
      7.   The licensed premises shall be video recorded pursuant to this
chapter.
      8.   Any violation of this section shall be cause for the immediate
suspension of the liquor license for the licensed premises, and such suspension
shall remain in effect until the licensee demonstrates that he is in full
compliance with this section.
      9.   Any licensee that has had his or her license revoked or suspended by
the village or by the Illinois State Liquor Control Commission or has his or
her video gaming license revoked or suspended by the Illinois gaming board
shall automatically have his or her village-issued supplemental video gaming
establishment permit and village-issued video gaming terminal establishment
permit stickers revoked or suspended for the same time period as his or her
liquor and/or gaming board permit sticker suspended, whichever the case may be.
      10.   Every video gaming terminal that does not have a valid video gaming
terminal establishment permit sticker issued by the village, a valid video
gaming terminal operator permit sticker issued by the village, and
authorization from the state of Illinois, or that is operated in violation of
this section or is otherwise unlawful, shall be considered a gambling device
subject to seizure and shall be turned over to the Illinois Gaming Board in
accordance with Board regulations and applicable laws unless otherwise ordered
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
      11.   Every licensee shall submit a written statement to the village with
the identities and addresses of the video gaming terminal operators owning,
placing, serving and/or maintaining video gaming terminals at the licensed
premises prior to the video gaming terminal operator owning, placing, serving
and/or maintaining any video gaming terminal at the licensed premises.
   C.   Regulations For Video Gaming Terminal Operators: Regulations governing
video gaming terminal operators are as follows:
      1.   A valid village video gaming terminal operator permit sticker shall
be clearly displayed at all times on each of the video gaming terminal
operator's video gaming terminals in the village.
      2.   A video gaming terminal operator must fully comply with the Village
Code, the Illinois Video Gaming Act and all rules, regulations, and
restrictions imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board, as may be amended from time
to time, which are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter.
      3.   Any violation of this section shall be cause for the immediate
suspension of any license issued to the video gaming terminal operator and any
video gaming terminal operator permit stickers issued by the village to the
video gaming terminal operator.
      4.   Any video gaming terminal operator that has had his or her video
gaming license revoked or suspended by the Illinois Gaming Board shall
automatically have his or her village-issued supplemental video gaming operator
permit and village-issued video gaming terminal operator permit stickers
revoked or suspended for the same time period as his or her Illinois Gaming
Board revocation or suspension, as the case may be. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd.
2016 Code; Ord. 20-50, 10-6-2020)
4-2-14: PROHIBITED CONDUCT GENERALLY:
   A.   No person shall gamble and no licensee shall permit gambling on any
licensed premises except where such gambling activity is permitted and licensed
by state statute and is conducted under the rules and regulations provided by
the state for that particular type of gambling activity.
   B.   No person shall peddle alcoholic liquor in the village.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that the
conduct and activities of any employee having a disease or medical condition
are in compliance with the ordinances of the village regulating employee health
in food service establishments. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
   D.   No licensee shall directly or indirectly sell, give, or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016
Code)
   E.   No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor
in, upon or about any motor vehicle, except in the original package with the
seal unbroken.
   F.   No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in an area adjacent
to a licensed premises, including the parking area, or in any public right of
way.
   G.   Any owner of a licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee
derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or
person, who knowingly permits the licensee to use said licensed premises in
violation of the terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of
this chapter to the same extent as said licensee and be subject to the same
punishment.
   H.   Every act or omission of any nature constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or other
agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in
the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally.
   I.   No licensee shall discharge or in any way retaliate against any person
because the person reported a violation of any provision of this chapter to the
local liquor control commissioner or other law enforcement official.
   J.   No person shall offer anything of value to any village official or
employee, directly or indirectly, to influence the issuance of a license or the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter.
   K.   No licensee shall deny or permit his agents and employees to deny, in
violation of any federal, state or local law, any person the full and equal
enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any
premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to
the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all
citizens.
   L.   No person except a manufacturer or distributor or importing distributor
shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic
liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale at retail
any bottles, casks or other containers containing alcoholic liquor except in
original packages.
   M.   Safety provisions are as follows:
      1.   A licensee shall not permit the use of any pyrotechnic device within
its licensed premises without the prior authorization of the Illinois state
fire marshal or the village fire chief or his designee. A licensee, or any
agent or employee of that licensee, may not use or permit mace, pepper spray,
or any other toxic air released compound within its licensed premises.
      2.   No person may impede any person who is attempting to exit a licensed
premises due to an emergency that constitutes a threat to the health or safety
of persons within the licensed premises. For the purpose of this subsection,
the term "impede a person who is attempting to exit" includes physically
restraining the person or blocking or locking an exit while the licensed
premises is open to the public.
      3.   A licensee of a licensed premises with an authorized capacity of at
least two hundred fifty (250) persons, as set by the state fire marshal or the
fire chief or his designee or as set by local ordinance, whichever is lowest,
must place a panic bar on each exit of its licensed premises. A licensee of a
licensed premises with an authorized capacity of at least five hundred (500)
persons that conducts live entertainment within its licensed premises must,
before the commencement of the live entertainment, make an announcement to the
patrons of the licensed premises that generally informs those patrons of the
locations of exits and fire escapes at the licensed premises. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-
2013)
   N.   Happy hour regulations are as follows:
      1.   No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
         a.   Sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one
drink of alcoholic liquor;
         b.   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public or as provided in
235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-28.5;
         c.   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or
the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
         d.   Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
         e.   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under this subsection N1.
      2.   A retail licensee may:
         a.   Offer free food or entertainment at any time;
         b.   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
         c.   Sell or offer for sale a party package only if the retail
licensee:
            (1)   Offers food in the dedicated event space;
            (2)   Limits the party package to no more than three (3) hours;
            (3)   Distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts, or any other such
wearable items to identify party package attendees so the attendees may be
granted access to the dedicated event space; and
            (4)   Excludes individuals not participating in the party package
from the dedicated event space;
         d.   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
         e.   Negotiate drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
         f.   Provide room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
         g.   Sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to,
buckets of bottled beer), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are
customarily sold in such manner, or sell bottles of spirits;
         h.   Advertise events permitted under this subsection N2;
         i.   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of an entertainment
package where the licensee is separately licensed by a license that:
            (1)   Restricts dates of operation to dates during which there is
an event at an adjacent stadium;
            (2)   Restricts hours of serving alcoholic liquor to two (2) hours
before the event and one hour after the event;
            (3)   Restricts alcoholic liquor sales to beer and wine;
            (4)   Requires tickets for admission to the establishment; and
            (5)   Prohibits sale of admission tickets on the day of an event
and permits the sale of admission tickets for single events only; and
         j.   Discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time
period only if:
            (1)   The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not changed
during the time that it is discounted;
            (2)   The period of time during which any drink of alcoholic liquor
is discounted does not exceed four (4) hours per day and fifteen (15) hours per
week; however, this period of time is not required to be consecutive and may be
divided by the licensee in any manner;
            (3)   The drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and the licensed premises' closing hour; and
            (4)   Notice of the discount of the drink of alcoholic liquor
during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the licensee's
publicly available website at least seven (7) days prior to the specified time.
      3.   All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged
for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multiuse
establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises
more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at
retail, the hotel or multiuse establishment shall maintain at each such
establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that
establishment. (2016 Code)
   O.   No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor on the premises described
in the license unless such alcoholic liquor has been purchased on the premises
unless in a class M licensed premises. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   P.   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale or exhibit any items of intimate
apparel, including lingerie, undergarments, sleepwear or swimsuits on the
premises.
   Q.   No licensee shall permit any employee, entertainer or patron to engage
in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the licensed premises
which:
      1.   Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region.
      2.   Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic hair region.
      3.   Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below areola thereof.
(Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
   R.   No licensee or through his agents or employees shall do any of the
following:
      1.   Commit any violation of any federal law, state law or ordinance of
the village.
      2.   Suffer or permit a violation of any federal law, state law or
ordinance of the village.
      3.   Harbor or permit any intoxicated person(s) to loiter on the
premises.
      4.   Sell alcoholic liquor in excess of or contrary to the authority
granted by the license for the premises or in violation of the laws of the
state or ordinances of the village. (Ord. 13-27, 8-20-2013)
      5.   Permit any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on the premises,
unless such alcoholic liquor has been purchased on the premises or authorized
by a BYOB license. (Ord. 13-27, 8-20-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
      6.   Permit the business on the licensed premises to be conducted in a
manner inconsistent with the representations on the licensee's application or
by the licensee's comments before the commissioner and made a condition of the
license.
      7.   Failure to immediately report any criminal activity or that any
person has lost consciousness or is in a state of stupor so as not to be
competent.
      8.   Allow the property on which the premises is located and any adjacent
property owned by the licensee including the licensee's parking lot(s) and
adjacent public ways to create a nuisance while the licensed premises is open
for business or within one hour of the time the business is opened or closed
for business. The nuisance shall have a nexus to the operation of the business
and be any conduct or activity described in section
4-2-17 of this chapter or that violates any federal or state law or village
ordinance. (Ord. 13-27, 8-20-2013)
4-2-15: PROHIBITED CONDUCT RELATING TO MINORS:
   A.   No person or licensee, nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of such licensee, shall sell, give, or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16.1. (Ord. 13-22, 6-
4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   No person or licensee, nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of such licensee, shall sell alcoholic
liquor to any person who appears to be under the age of thirty five (35)
without first requiring said person to furnish a valid state of Illinois
picture ID or driver's license or U.S. passport.
   C.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall purchase, obtain
or consume alcoholic liquor.
   D.   A licensee shall display a sign at the licensed premises at all times
in a prominent place which shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS ($1,000) UNDER TITLE 4,
CHAPTER 2 OF THE BERKELEY VILLAGE CODE IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, OR
MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR. ALL UNLAWFUL ATTEMPTS TO PURCHASE ALCOHOL SHOULD BE REPORTED TO THE
BERKELEY POLICE DEPARTMENT
9-1-1.
   E.   No person shall permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) to
be or remain at any establishment where the sale of alcoholic liquor is the
principal business unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or any
lawful employee eighteen (18) years of age or older.
   F.   No parent or guardian shall permit his or her child to violate any of
the provisions of this section.
   G.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall falsely
represent that he or she is at least twenty one (21) years of age, or present
or offer to any licensee, his agent or employee, any proof or evidence of age
and identity that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own for the
purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring
or attempting to procure any alcoholic beverage.
   H.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall have in his or
her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of age and identity. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
   I.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall have any
alcoholic liquor in his or her possession on any street or highway or in any
public place or in any place open to the public. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd.
2016 Code)
   J.   No person shall rent a hotel or motel room for the purpose of or with
the knowledge that such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   K.   No person shall permit a person under the age of twenty one (21) to
consume alcoholic liquor at his residence or property. A person is deemed to
violate this subsection if he knowingly authorizes, enables, or permits his
property to be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under
the age of twenty one (21) or by failing to control access to either the
residence or the alcoholic liquor maintained in the residence.
   L.   No person shall have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession on
public school district property on school days or at events on public school
district property when children are present unless the alcoholic liquor is in
the original container with the seal unbroken and is in the possession of a
person who is not otherwise legally prohibited from possessing the alcoholic
liquor, unless the alcoholic liquor is in the possession of a person in or for
the performance of a religious service or ceremony.
   M.   No licensee shall permit any employee or any person under the age of
twenty one (21) to sell, serve, handle, draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor
on the licensed premises.
   N.   The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under twenty
one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious
service or ceremony, or the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under
twenty one (21) years of age under the direct supervision and approval of a
parent or guardian or person standing in loco parentis of such person under
twenty one (21) years of age in the privacy of a home is not prohibited by this
chapter. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-16: UNLICENSED PREMISES PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   No person shall provide nor sell at retail for consumption on an
unlicensed premises any nonalcoholic beverages or ice, knowing same to be
intended to be mixed with or consumed with any alcoholic liquor on the
premises. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   No person shall frequent or patronize any house, building, store, place
or premises where such person knows or has reason to believe the sale of
alcoholic liquor without a license as required by this chapter is occurring.
(Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-17: NUISANCES DECLARED:
Every lot, parcel, and tract of land, and every building, structure,
establishment, or place whatsoever, together with all furniture, fixtures, and
ornaments located thereon, wherein any unlawful sale of alcoholic liquor is
conducted, or wherever alcoholic liquor is kept, stored, concealed, allowed or
intended for illegal sale or is to be sold, disposed of, or in any other manner
used in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any place where
alcoholic liquor is sold or served and which is also used for illegal purposes
including, but not limited to, the following as defined by federal or state law
or village ordinance:
   A.   Mob action;
   B.   Unlawful assembly;
   C.   Assault;
   D.   Battery;
   E.   Unlawful use of weapons or firearms;
   F.   Unlawful discharge of a firearm;
   G.   Prostitution;
   H.   Soliciting or patronizing a prostitute;
   I.   Keeping a house of prostitution;
   J.   Pandering;
   K.   Obscenity;
   L.   Sexual assault and sexual abuse;
   M.   Public indecency;
   N.   Disorderly conduct;
   O.   Unlawful production, sale, distribution, possession, or use of
cannabis;
   P.   Illegal gambling;
   Q.   Keeping or maintaining a place of illegal gambling;
   R.   Unlawful possession of gambling devices;
   S.   Arson;
   T.   Criminal damage to property;
   U.   Illegal consumption, sale, or possession of alcohol;
   V.   Theft;
   W.   Interference with a public/peace officer;
   X.   Harassment;
   Y.   Indecent exposure;
   Z.   Public urination;
   AA.   Loitering;
   BB.   Unlawful possession, sale, distribution, or use of fireworks;
   CC.   Aiding and abetting;
   DD.   Conspiracy;
   EE.   Drug paraphernalia;
or is otherwise detrimental to the peace and well being of the neighborhood is
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated and may be enjoined as
provided by the village ordinances and laws of this state for the abatement of
public nuisances. (Ord. 13-27, 8-20-2013)
4-2-18: EMERGENCY CLOSING OF BUSINESS:
   A.   If the commissioner has reason to believe any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for
such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises
closed for not more than seven (7) days; except, that if the licensee shall
also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the
licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or
businesses. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard during that
period.
   B.   The chief of police, upon the issuance of a written order stating the
reasons therefor, without notice or hearing, may order a licensed premises to
be closed without a hearing for a period of twenty four (24) hours if the
premises was the scene of a disturbance involving injury or threat to any
person or the use of firearms, or if the premises constitutes a crime scene and
such closing could prevent the loss or destruction of evidence and facilitate a
police investigation, for up to seven (7) days or longer if necessary to
preserve the integrity of evidentiary collection procedures. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-
2013)
4-2-19: ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Authority To Suspend Or Revoke License Or Impose A Fine: The
commissioner, after conducting an administrative hearing, may revoke or suspend
any license issued by him or impose a fine upon a licensee if he determines
cause exists for such action by a preponderance of the evidence.
   B.   Complaints: Any resident(s) of the village may file a complaint with
the chief of police stating any licensee has been or is violating the
provisions of this chapter. Such complaint shall be in writing and shall be
signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the
particular provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the
facts in detail upon which belief is based. If the chief of police is satisfied
the complaint substantially charges a violation, he shall conduct an
investigation. If, after conducting an investigation, the chief of police has
reason to believe a violation did occur, he shall refer the matter to the
commissioner who shall conduct a hearing to determine whether action should be
taken against the licensee in accordance with this section.
   C.   Hearings And Rehearings: The following procedures shall apply to all
hearings and rehearings for the suspension or revocation of licenses, or
impositions of fines by the commissioner, or to review an order for an
emergency closing, or a denial of a request for the issuance, transfer or
renewal of a license:
      1.   All hearings shall be open to the public.
      2.   Except for hearings related to emergency closures, all licensees and
persons charged with a violation pursuant to this chapter shall be given at
least a three (3) day written notice of the proceeding affording the licensee
or such person an opportunity to appear and defend. This notice provision may
be waived by the licensee or other person so charged.
      3.   Notice of the hearing may be served by personal delivery to the
person so charged, or the licensee or his manager, by certified mail to the
known address of the licensee or person charged or to the licensee by posting
on the licensed premises.
      4.   A certified official record of the proceedings shall be taken by a
certified court reporter.
      5.   Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be
excluded.
      6.   The rules of evidence and privilege as applied in civil cases in the
circuit courts of Illinois shall be generally followed. However, evidence not
admissible under such rules of evidence may be admitted if it is deemed
reasonably reliable by the commissioner.
      7.   The commissioner shall reduce his findings to writing.
      8.   The commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if
he determines after such hearing the license should be revoked or suspended or
the licensee should be fined, state the reason or reasons for such
determination in a written order, and either the amount of the fine, the period
of suspension, or the license has been revoked, and shall serve a copy of such
order within the five (5) days upon the licensee by regular mail to the
licensee's or person's last known address, or to the licensed premises. Failure
to follow this provision shall not constitute a jurisdictional defect and shall
not impair the legal effect of or enforcement of an order issued by the
commissioner within any reasonable time after the hearing.
      9.   In the event the liquor control commissioner shall find a person or
a licensee guilty of violating any provision of this chapter, he may:
         a.   Levy a fine on the person or licensee for such violation. The
fine imposed shall be in accordance with this code. Each day on which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines under this section may be
imposed against any licensee during any annual period of his license. Proceeds
from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund.
         b.   In addition to any fine, order the suspension of any license for
up to thirty (30) days. During any period of suspension, the licensee shall
remove all alcoholic liquor from the premises or, with the written consent of
the commissioner, conceal said alcoholic liquor from public view. The licensee
shall also prominently display a sign provided by the commissioner which shall
advise the public that the sale of alcohol is prohibited during the period of
suspension.
         c.   In addition to any fine, order the revocation of the license.
Unless specified otherwise, a revocation shall be entered as to the licensee
only and not to the licensed premises.
         d.   In addition to or in lieu of any fine, suspension, or revocation,
order the licensee to successfully complete an alcohol sales and service
training program.
         e.   In addition to any fine, suspension, or revocation, order the
licensee to pay reasonable attorney fees incurred by the village.
         f.   In addition to any fine, suspension, or revocation, order the
licensee to pay reasonable costs incurred at the hearing, including court
reporter fees and police personnel and inspector fees.
   D.   Provisions And Sanctions Are Additional: The aforesaid proceedings and
sanctions imposed by the commissioner are not exclusive and shall be in
addition to all other rights of prosecution, actions or remedies available to
the village, state commission and the state.
   E.   Appeals To State: Any order or action of the commissioner levying a
fine or refusing to levy a fine on a licensee, granting or refusing to grant a
license, revoking or suspending or refusing to revoke or suspend a license or
refusing for more than thirty (30) days to grant a hearing upon a complaint to
revoke or suspend a license may, within twenty (20) days after notice of such
order or action, be appealed by any interested person or resident of the
village to the state liquor commission subject to the following:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection E3 of this section, in any case
where a licensee timely appeals to the state liquor commission from an order or
action of the commissioner having the effect of suspending or revoking a
license, or denying a renewal application, the licensee may continue the
operation of the licensed business pending the decision of the state liquor
commission and the expiration of the time allowed for an application for
rehearing.
      2.   Except as provided in subsection E3 of this section, if an
application for rehearing is filed, the licensee may continue the operation of
the licensed business until the decision on rehearing.
      3.   In any case in which a licensee applies for a rehearing, or appeals
to the state liquor commission on a suspension or revocation by the
commissioner that is the second or subsequent such suspension or revocation
placed on that licensee within the preceding twelve (12) month period, the
provisions of subsections E1 and E2 of this section shall not apply, and the
appeal or rehearing shall not stay the order of the commissioner. During the
period of suspension or revocation or until the state liquor commission
overturns the order of the commissioner and all rehearings have concluded, or
if none, upon the expiration of the time allowed for an application for
rehearing, the licensee shall remove all alcoholic liquor from the premises or,
with the written consent of the commissioner, conceal said alcoholic liquor
from public view. During said period, the licensee shall also prominently
display a sign provided by the commissioner which shall advise the public that
the sale of alcohol is prohibited.
An appeal of any decision of the commissioner shall be limited to a review of
the official record of the proceedings.
      4.   A certified official record of the proceedings taken and prepared by
a certified court reporter shall be filed by the commissioner within five (5)
days after notice of the filing of such appeal, provided the appellant licensee
pays for the cost of the transcript.
      5.   The state liquor commission shall review the propriety of the order
or action of the commissioner subject only to consideration of the following
questions:
         a.   Whether the commissioner has proceeded in a lawful manner.
         b.   Whether the order is supported by the findings.
         c.   Whether the findings are supported by substantial evidence in
light of the whole record.
      6.   The only evidence which may be considered in the review shall be the
evidence found in the certified official record of the proceedings of the
commissioner. No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or considered.
(Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
4-2-20: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   The village administrative adjudication hearing officer and/or the
county circuit court is authorized to hear and determine proceedings against
any person for violations of this chapter.
   B.   No person shall be charged or prosecuted for any violation of this
chapter if he is a law enforcement officer or an agent of the chief of police
in the investigation or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or the
act, and his activities are approved in writing by the county state's attorney,
the director of state police, or the village chief of police.
   C.   Any person who sells alcoholic liquor at any place within the village
without having first obtained a valid and current license to do so under the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined in accordance with this code. Each
day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   D.   Any person who makes any false statement or otherwise violates any of
the provisions of this chapter in attempting to obtain any license hereunder
shall be fined in accordance with this code, and said application or license
may be rejected or revoked.
   E.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who buys, accepts,
receives, consumes or, for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving
alcoholic liquor, represents that he is twenty one (21) years of age in
violation of this chapter shall be fined in accordance with this code for each
violation. In lieu or in addition to any fine, said person may be required to
perform community service or participate in a drug or alcohol education or
treatment program.
   F.   Except as specified otherwise in this chapter, any person other than a
licensee who violates any provision of this chapter not specified above shall
be fined in accordance with this code for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   G.   Any licensee who violates any provision of this chapter not specified
above shall be fined in accordance with this code. Each day on which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Said fine shall be
in addition to any sanction imposed by the commissioner pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 13-22, 6-4-2013)
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: License And Compliance Required
4-3-3: Application For License; Investigation
4-3-4: License Fees
4-3-5: Liability Insurance
4-3-6: Term Of License; Nontransferability
4-3-7: License And Capacity To Be Posted
4-3-8: Persons On Duty
4-3-9: Conduct Of Business
4-3-10: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-3-11: Requirements For Specific Amusement Establishments
4-3-12: Additional Requirements
4-3-13: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BILLIARD CENTER: A place of amusement or entertainment in which one or more
persons are invited to play and participate in the game of billiards, including
pocket table billiards or snooker table billiards, or wherein one or more pool
tables or billiard tables are kept, used or operated for profit or in the
course of a business enterprise.
BOWLING ALLEY: A place of amusement or entertainment in which one or more
persons are invited to play and participate in the game of bowling or wherein
one or more bowling lanes are used or operated for profit or in the course of a
business enterprise.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm or corporation who keeps or allows billiard or pool
tables to be kept on premises owned by him or under his control where the same
may be played by members of the public legally upon such premises upon payment
of the charge therefor.
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation who owns and places billiard or pool
tables, by whatever arrangements, on the operator's premises.
PUBLIC SKATING RINK: Any room, place or space in which skating, either on
roller skates or ice skates, is carried on and to which admission can be had by
the public by payment, either directly or indirectly, of a fee, or by payment
of a charge for any service auxiliary to skating, or by purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket or token; but the term "skating" shall not be held to
apply to exhibitions or performances in which the persons paying for admission
do not participate.
THEATER: Any room, place or space for the showing of motion pictures, plays,
musicals, concerts or other entertainments to which admission can be had by the
public by payment, either directly or indirectly, of an admission price. (2016
Code)
4-3-2: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: No person shall engage in the following acts in the
village without having first obtained an amusement license:
      1.   Operate a theater.
      2.   Operate a billiard center.
      3.   Operate a bowling alley.
      4.   Conduct or operate a public skating rink.
   B.   Compliance With Provisions: The licensee, agent or employee shall
comply with the provisions of this code. (2016 Code)
4-3-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   All applications for an amusement license shall conform to the
following requirements:
      1.   Be made in writing to the village clerk, verified by the applicant
and accompanied by the license fee required.
      2.   State the name, age and address of the applicant and, if the
applicant is a corporation, the name of its officers and directors.
      3.   State the location of the place where the amusement device or
facility is to be located and operated.
      4.   State the number of amusement devices, alleys, tables, screens,
etc., as may be applicable to the particular business to be conducted.
      5.   Include a detailed scale layout of the operation, showing the
location of the tables, alleys, screens, lighting, buildings, structures and
other equipment.
      6.   State the name(s) of the manager(s) hired to supervise the
particular operation.
      7.   Include such other and further information as may be required by the
village clerk.
   B.   The application for a license or renewal of a license shall be made
upon forms furnished by the village clerk and shall include the date and place
of conviction of any person named therein for any crime other than minor
traffic violations committed during the period of ten (10) years prior to the
date of application, including a statement of the crime of which such person
was convicted.
   C.   The village chief of police shall investigate any and all applications
for a license and shall submit a report to the village clerk. (2016 Code)
4-3-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Established: The annual fees for amusement licenses shall be as
established in the annual fee schedule.
   B.   Waiver Of Fees: The license fees may be waived upon application to the
board of trustees in the case of limited performances or engagements by a
nonprofit organization.
   C.   Nontransferability Of Fees: The license fees are not transferable.
(2016 Code)
4-3-5: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Each licensee shall keep in force liability insurance of a minimum of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit liability coverage for
injury to or death of any one person or persons or damages/destruction of
property in any one accident by a corporation or corporations authorized to
write insurance in the state during the license year. It shall appear on such
policy that the village shall be notified, in writing, at least thirty (30)
days prior to the cancellation of such policy of insurance. (2016 Code)
4-3-6: TERM OF LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
Each license shall expire on December 31 next after its issuance and shall not
be transferable from one person to another. (2016 Code)
4-3-7: LICENSE AND CAPACITY TO BE POSTED:
Every entertainment license shall be conspicuously posted about the place for
which the license is issued and shall be exhibited to any person upon request.
All amusement facilities shall post the capacity limitation for their premises
in a conspicuous place. (2016 Code)
4-3-8: PERSONS ON DUTY:
There shall be on duty at all times that the operation of a billiard center,
bowling alley, public skating rink, or theater is open to the public an adult
operator or manager who understands the operation of all equipment used on the
premises. It shall be the duty of the licensee and his manager to remain on the
premises at all times and enforce the provisions of subsection 4-3-9A of this
chapter. (2016 Code)
4-3-9: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Code Of Conduct:
      1.   The licensee, under this chapter, shall follow and enforce the
following code of conduct for the licensed premises:
         a.   Truants from school shall not be permitted to enter or remain on
the premises.
         b.   No person violating any curfew law or ordinance shall be
permitted to enter or remain on the licensed premises.
         c.   No person soliciting to vice or any other unlawful purpose shall
be permitted to enter or remain on the licensed premises.
         d.   No person selling, transferring, giving, using or in possession
of any "controlled substance", as defined by Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall
be permitted to enter or remain on the premises or remain in the area directly
adjacent to the premises.
         e.   No person shall be permitted to harass, threaten or annoy any
persons.
         f.   No person shall loiter inside or outside a billiard center.
Persons not engaging in billiard or pool play or waiting their turn to play
shall be prohibited from the billiard center except in cases of an owner
sanctioned tournament or contest. Persons shall be prohibited from loitering on
the property outside the billiard center, including the parking lot.
      2.   The licensee under this chapter shall post in plain view a copy of
the above rules of conduct as well as a copy of the house rules and hours of
operation in a minimum of one inch (1") letters.
   B.   Maintenance Of Order: It shall be the responsibility of the licensee
under this chapter to maintain order on the licensed premises at all times.
(2016 Code)
4-3-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverages On Licensed Premises: No person shall, in any
licensed premises or in any anteroom, corridor, cloakroom, hallway or dressing
room thereof or in any room connecting therewith, drink any alcoholic
beverages; nor shall any licensee hereunder suffer or permit any person to
drink any alcoholic beverages in or on any licensed premises over which such
licensee has control.
   B.   Gambling In Billiard Centers:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any licensed
billiard center to permit the same to be used for gambling or for the making of
bets or wagers.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for the licensee or the owner or operator of a
billiard center to give any money, token, merchandise or any other thing of
value or any reward or prize in lieu of free games.
      3.   No person shall keep, maintain, sell or permit to be operated in his
billiard center any billiard table, pool table or other equipment which has
been converted into an automatic payoff device which shall discharge coins,
checks or other tokens to the operator or player of such table or equipment. No
person shall convert any billiard table, pool table or other equipment into an
automatic payoff device.
      4.   Any billiard or pool table which has been utilized in violation of
this subsection B may be seized and destroyed in compliance with the provisions
of the state statutes relating to gambling devices. (2016 Code)
4-3-11: REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Skating Rinks, Billiard Centers And Bowling Alleys:
      1.   Lighting: Every skating rink, billiard center, and bowling alley
shall be illuminated while in public use, and operation thereof while the
lights are extinguished or turned so low as to not give proper vision is hereby
prohibited.
      2.   Open View: The operations of a skating rink, billiard center, and
bowling alley shall at all times be conducted in open view of the public. Such
amusements shall not be enclosed from the public in private rooms.
      3.   Hours Of Operation For Billiard Centers: A billiard center shall be
closed by one o'clock (1:00) A.M. each night and may not be open until nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays or until twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon on Sundays.
   B.   Theaters:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit in a public
place or in a place to which the public is admitted any motion picture, whether
an admission is charged or not, without exhibiting a classification notice
therefor as provided in this subsection. The classification notice required in
this subsection shall designate the rating applied to the motion picture to be
exhibited. Such classification notice shall contain one of the ratings used by
the Motion Picture Association Of America, Inc.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit or cause to
be shown or exhibited to any person under the age of seventeen (17) any picture
designated R unless accompanied by a parent or adult guardian. It shall be
unlawful for any person to show or exhibit or cause to be shown or exhibited to
any person under the age of seventeen (17) any picture designated X.
      3.   Any person who admits a person not qualified to view a motion
picture under the provisions of this subsection B to a performance of a picture
designated R or X shall be presumed to have violated the provisions of this
subsection B. Such prima facie case of violation may be rebutted by a showing
that the motion picture in question has been improperly classified.
      4.   The rating provided by this subsection B shall be that imposed upon
such motion picture by the Motion Picture Association Of America, Inc., if the
motion picture has been classified by that organization. In the event no
classification has been imposed by such motion picture organization, the person
or organization showing or exhibiting such motion picture shall be responsible
for designating the classification in accordance with standards prescribed by
the Motion Picture Association Of America, Inc., and shall restrict admission
to persons under the age of seventeen (17) in accordance with the standards set
forth in the ratings as provided in this subsection B.
      5.   The notice of classification provided for in this subsection B shall
be posted at or near the entrance of the theater, hall, room or place where any
motion picture is being exhibited, at such a place and in such a position that
it may easily be read by any person entering such theater, hall, room or place,
at any time when any such motion picture is being exhibited. Film ratings shall
be included in all advertising.
      6.   When motion pictures having a different rating are being shown
together as double or triple features, they shall all be assigned the rating of
the picture carrying the most restrictive rating.
      7.   No licensee shall display on the exterior of an indoor theater or
show or exhibit at any drive-in theater in such a manner that passersby view or
are likely to view any picture, photograph, drawing or similar visual
representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts
sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse. (2016 Code)
4-3-12: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The village may impose other reasonable restrictions or conditions as it deems
necessary to provide for public health, safety, and welfare. (2016 Code)
4-3-13: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
All licenses granted hereunder shall be revocable for cause at any time. Said
licenses may be suspended for such period as the village president may
prescribe or may be revoked by the village president, and such revocation or
suspension shall be made on reasonable hearing. "Cause" shall include any
violations of this chapter. If there shall be two (2) convictions for
violations of this chapter, whether such violations are the same or different
provisions of this chapter, the second such conviction shall be cause for
revocation of the license after hearing. No refund fee shall be paid on
revocation. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
COIN OPERATED DEVICES; VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: License Required
4-4-3: License Fees
4-4-4: Licensing Procedure
4-4-5: Display Of Notice
4-4-6: Restrictions On License
4-4-7: Inspections
4-4-8: Violations; Penalties
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
AMUSEMENT COIN OPERATED DEVICE: A machine or device for games of skill,
amusement and science which return the player thereof no money or property or
right to receive money or property, and which are governed or controlled by the
insertion of a coin, token, or similar object.
BUSINESS: Any person, firm, corporation or other business entity doing business
anywhere in the village.
COIN OPERATED DEVICE: A. Any device operated by means of the insertion of coin,
token or similar object for the purpose of amusement or skill, the purchase of
any commodity of merchandise, or the storage of goods or other service for
which a fee is charged.
   B.   The term shall also include any noncoin operated device where the
operators or users of the noncoin operated device pay or give the operator or
proprietor any consideration of the privilege of using the noncoin operated
device for amusement purposes; provided, that the noncoin operated device
otherwise meets this definition save for the insertion of coin, token or
similar object.
   C.   The term does not include coin operated devices designed for gambling
including video gaming terminals authorized pursuant to the video gaming act 1
, and specifically excludes coin operated devices used for the laundering and
drying of clothes or the dispensing of vehicle fuel or use of air pumps or
vacuums at a fueling station.
LICENSE: The license required by this chapter for a coin operated device or
license for video gaming device(s) authorized pursuant to the video gaming act
and this code.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets up
for the operation by another or leases or distributes for the purpose of
operation by another, any device as herein defined, whether such setting up for
operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the
basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise.
PROPRIETOR: Any individual, firm, corporation or other business that owns the
establishment where the coin operated machine is located. (Ord. 15-10, 2-3-
2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
4-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, or corporation shall install, maintain, operate, use, or
permit to be used any coin operated device or video gaming terminal in the
village authorized pursuant to this chapter and the video gaming act 1  without
first having obtained a license. (Ord. 15-10, 2-3-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
4-4-3: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Established: The various kinds of coin operated devices for which a
license shall be required, and the annual license fee for such devices, shall
be as established in the annual fee schedule.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: The license fee shall be payable annually in advance;
provided, that where the application is made after the expiration of any
portion of any license year, a license may be issued for the remainder thereof
upon payment of a proportionate part of the annual fee.
   C.   Exemptions From Fees: No license fee shall be charged to any
governmental entity that applies for a coin operated device license(s);
however, all other provisions relative to the licensing process as set forth in
this chapter shall be applicable to governmental entities. (Ord. 15-10, 2-3-
2015, eff. 5-1-2015; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 20-50, 10-6-2020; Ord. 22-03, 2-1-
2022)
4-4-4: LICENSING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application For License:
      1.   Application for a license hereunder shall be filed in writing with
the village clerk, on a form to be provided by the village, and shall specify:
         a.   The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm,
corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and
their addresses;
         b.   The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices
are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on
at such place;
         c.   The trade name and general description of the device or devices
to be licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number and, if the
applicant is a proprietor, the number of devices to be licensed;
         d.   The name and address of the operator of the device or devices if
other than the proprietor.
      2.   The proper license fee and investigation fee shall accompany the
application.
      3.   Licenses are not transferable without an application and approval by
the village.
   B.   Investigations And Inspections:
      1.   Upon receipt of an application for a license, the village clerk
shall provide a copy of the application and refer the matter to the chief of
police for an investigation of the character of the individuals whose names and
addresses are required to be furnished by subsection A of this section.
      2.   The village clerk shall furnish a copy of the application and refer
the matter to the code enforcement officer to determine whether the proposed
business will violate any provision of the zoning code or the building code of
the village.
      3.   The chief of police and the code enforcement officer shall report
within two (2) weeks of receipt of a complete application.
      4.   The application, together with the report of the chief of police and
the report of the code enforcement officer, shall be delivered to the village
clerk for action.
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of License: If it appears that the applicant
complies with all applicable laws and ordinances, the license application shall
be approved and the license shall be issued by the village clerk. If the
license is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
   D.   Evidence Of Ownership: Evidence of ownership must be filed with the
village clerk. Any proprietor who owns such device or devices shall file with
the village clerk evidence of such ownership prior to the issuance of a
license, and any proprietor purchasing a device or devices shall file with the
village clerk evidence of ownership thereof before exhibiting or placing said
device or devices for use or play.
   E.   Expiration, Posting, Nontransferability Of License: All licenses under
this chapter shall expire on December 31 following their issuance. The license
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee.
Such license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and, in the case of a
proprietor, shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued.
A licensee may apply for a transfer of a license for a replacement device if
the following conditions are met:
      1.   The original device is permanently removed from display for public
patronage and is made unavailable for operation by patrons; and (Ord. 15-10, 2-
3-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
      2.   A transfer fee as established in the annual fee schedule is paid to
the village.
   F.   No Refunds Of Fees: Except as provided in subsection C of this section,
in no case shall any portion of said license fee be refunded to the licensee.
(Ord. 15-10, 2-3-2015, eff. 5-1-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
4-4-5: DISPLAY OF NOTICE:
Every coin operated device for which a license is issued pursuant to the terms
of this chapter shall bear and have attached thereto in a prominent place the
following notice:
This device is for amusement purposes only. The use of this device for gambling
purposes or other purposes which may be illegal shall be prosecuted to the full
extent of the law.
(Ord. 15-10, 2-3-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
4-4-6: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE:
   A.   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of any coin
operated amusement device at any place or in any manner which will disturb the
peace or quiet of persons outside the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful
for a licensee to allow a degree of noise to develop which would cause a
disturbance to the adjacent or surrounding uses such that normal use of said
adjacent or surrounding uses would be damaged or unreasonably disturbed.
   B.   All coin operated devices must be kept in good repair and operating
condition.
   C.   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of any coin
operated amusement device unless the premises where the coin operated amusement
device(s) is located has a distinct and primary business use other than the
offering of coin operated amusement devices.
   D.   Any coin operated amusement device installed in the business
establishment for which a license is issued pursuant to the terms of this
chapter shall be located within the main business area of the establishment and
shall specifically not be located in any foyer, vestibule, entranceway or other
portion of the establishment appurtenant to the main business area. (Ord. 15-
10, 2-3-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
4-4-7: INSPECTIONS:
Any person, firm, corporation or association who files an application for a
coin operated amusement device, or renewal thereof, agrees to an inspection of
the premises to ascertain whether or not the device is in compliance with this
code. (Ord. 15-10, 2-3-2015, eff. 5-1-2015)
4-4-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a
nuisance.
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The village shall have the right
to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder or take such appropriate and
necessary action pursuant to this code as may be warranted for the violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter or for any other ordinance or statutory
violations. Any licensee that has its license revoked or canceled under this
chapter shall not be eligible to apply for any other license under this chapter
for a period of one year. (Ord. 15-10, 2-3-2015, eff. 5-1-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: License Required; Exemptions
4-5-4: License For Sponsoring Juvenile Peddlers
4-5-5: Application For License
4-5-6: License Fee
4-5-7: Review Of Application; Issuance Of License; Records Kept
4-5-8: Denial Of License
4-5-9: Expiration Of License
4-5-10: Identification Badges; License Exhibited
4-5-11: Nontransferability Of License
4-5-12: Uninvited Canvassing, Peddling Or Soliciting
4-5-13: Prohibited Hours
4-5-14: Street Solicitations
4-5-15: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
4-5-16: Appeals
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect against criminal activity,
including fraud and burglary, minimize the unwelcome disturbance of residents
and the disruption of privacy, and to otherwise preserve the public health,
safety, and welfare by regulating, controlling, and licensing door to door
solicitors and peddlers. (2016 Code)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases and their derivations, when used in
this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANVASSER: Any person who goes from door to door to engage in purely expressive
speech, such as advocacy for a particular religion, philosophy, ideology,
political party, issue, candidate, or other cause.
CHARITABLE: Means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social
service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural, or
fraternal, either actual or purported.
CONTRIBUTIONS: Means and includes the words alms, money, subscription,
property, or any donations under the guise of loan or money or property.
PEDDLER: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the
village, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature, and
offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as
part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this chapter. Peddler does not
include a person who distributes handbills or fliers for a commercial purpose,
advertising an event, activity, good, or service that is offered to a resident
for purchase at a location away from his/her residence or at a time different
from the time of the visit.
PEDDLING: Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a "peddler" as
defined in this section.
PERSON: A natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club, society,
or other organization.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in
the village, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose
of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise,
wares, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for
services to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any
person who, without invitation, goes upon private property to request
contribution of funds or anything of value, or to sell goods or services for
political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes. (2016 Code;
amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or older
to engage in peddling or solicitation activities within the village without
first obtaining a license issued by the village clerk; provided, however, that
the following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
      1.   Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an
organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made;
      2.   Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely
from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such
solicitation;
      3.   Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting,
assembly, or service of a charitable person;
      4.   Any solicitation for the relief of any individual specified by name
at the time of the solicitation where the solicitor represents in each case
that the entire amount collected shall be turned over to the named beneficiary;
or
      5.   A "canvasser".
   B.   Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth
in this chapter or from the payment of a license fee shall cite to the village
clerk the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and
shall present to the village clerk proof of qualification for such exemption.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-4: LICENSE FOR SPONSORING JUVENILE PEDDLERS:
   A.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to engage
in peddling except as provided in this section.
   B.   A license shall be obtained by a sponsoring person, company, or
organization for the conduct of any peddling or solicitation activities
involving, in whole or in part, a sales force of one or more persons under
eighteen (18) years of age.
   C.   The sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling the
conduct of all persons, including juveniles, peddling under the sponsor's
license.
   D.   The sponsor shall provide to each individual in its sales force a badge
or other easily readable form of identification which identifies the name of
the sponsor and the name of the individual. The sponsor shall require all
individuals in its sales force to wear such identification so that it is
clearly visible at all times when the individuals are peddling or soliciting.
   E.   The sponsor shall comply with the requirements of the state of Illinois
child labor law 1 . (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
4-5-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall file with the
village clerk an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the
village, which shall provide the following information:
   A.   Proof of age, address, and identification of the applicant, to be
provided through the applicant's driver's license or state identification,
articles of incorporation (for sponsors), or another legally recognized form of
identification and make and license number of the applicant's motor vehicles
used during the peddling or solicitation activities;
   B.   A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted;
   C.   The dates, hours, and location for which the right to peddle or solicit
is desired;
   D.   If employed, the name, address, and telephone number of the employer;
or if acting as an agent, the name, address, and telephone number of the
principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form
establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act
for the employer or principal, as the case may be;
   E.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation (other than traffic violations),
the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, the
date when and place where such offense occurred, and other pertinent details
thereof; and
   F.   Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal,
state, or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order
to conduct the proposed businesses, or which, under any such law or regulation,
would exempt the applicant from the license requirements of this chapter. (2016
Code; amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-6: LICENSE FEE:
At the time the application is filed with the village clerk, the applicant
shall pay a fee to cover the cost to the village of processing the application
and investigating the facts stated therein. The license fee shall be as
provided in the annual fee schedule. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-7: REVIEW OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; RECORDS KEPT:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application, the village clerk, or authorized
representative, shall review the application as deemed necessary to ensure the
protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. A determination
shall be made within two (2) business days.
   B.   If the village clerk finds the application to be satisfactory, the
village clerk shall endorse his approval on the application and shall, upon
payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the required license to the applicant.
   C.    The license shall show the name of the applicant, the date of
issuance, and the length of time the license will be in effect. (2016 Code;
amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019))
4-5-8: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.    Upon the village clerk's review of the application, the village clerk
may refuse to issue a license to the applicant under this chapter for any of
the following reasons:
      1.   Incomplete applications will not be reviewed;
      2.   An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on
the application;
      3.   The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of a
felony or class A misdemeanor, the nature of which is related to the
applicant's fitness to engage in door to door activities under this chapter.
The applicant shall be of good character and reputation without a conviction
related to fraud, dishonesty, deceit, misrepresentation, sexual misconduct,
trafficking in controlled substances, violent acts against persons or property,
or offense involving moral turpitude.
      4.   In reviewing fitness under subsection A3 of this section, the
following shall be considered:
         a.   The extent and nature of the applicant's past criminal activity;
         b.   The age of the applicant at the time of the commission of the
crime;
         c.   The amount of time that has elapsed since the applicant's last
criminal activity;
         d.   The conduct and work activity of the applicant prior to and
following the criminal activity;
         e.   Evidence of the applicant's rehabilitation or rehabilitative
effort while incarcerated or following release; and
         f.   Other evidence of the applicant's present fitness;
      5.   There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as
an agent to the principal; or
      6.   The applicant has been denied a license under this chapter within
the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the
satisfaction of the village clerk that the reasons for such earlier denial no
longer exist.
   B.   The village clerk's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall
be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his
application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. Notice shall be
given to the applicant at the phone number or address shown on the application
form, or at the applicant's last known address. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-
7-2019)
4-5-9: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire thirty
(30) days from the date of issuance, unless an earlier or later expiration date
is noted on the license. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-10: IDENTIFICATION BADGES; LICENSE EXHIBITED:
   A.   Identification Badges:
      1.   At the same time the license is issued, the village clerk shall
issue to each licensee a badge, which shall be worn by the licensee in such a
way as to be conspicuous at all times while the licensee is soliciting or
peddling in the village.
      2.   A canvasser otherwise exempt from the provisions of this chapter may
request the issuance of an identification badge from the village for the
purpose of assuring village residents of the canvasser's identity.
   B.   License Exhibited: Every person required to obtain a license under the
provisions of this chapter shall exhibit the license when requested to do so by
any prospective customer or police department employee. (2016 Code; amd. Ord.
19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-11: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the licensee to use or wear any
license or badge issued under the provisions of this chapter. (2016 Code; amd.
Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-12: UNINVITED CANVASSING, PEDDLING OR SOLICITING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while
conducting the business of a canvasser, peddler, or solicitor, to enter upon
any residential premises in the village where the owner, occupant, or person
legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or
at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the
words "No Peddlers" or "No Solicitors" or words of similar import. (2016 Code;
amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-13: PROHIBITED HOURS:
No person, while conducting the activities of a peddler or solicitor, whether
licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any private property, knock on doors,
or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. the following day, Monday
through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or a state holiday. (2016 Code; amd.
Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-14: STREET SOLICITATIONS:
   A.   Commercial Street Solicitations: It shall be unlawful to engage in
commercial solicitation on any street or highway right of way within the
village.
   B.   Charitable Street Solicitations: It shall be unlawful to engage in
charitable solicitation on street or highway rights of way within the village
before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or later than six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. during the months of September through March or before the hour of six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. during the
months of April through August.
   C.   Further Limitations On Charitable Street Solicitations:
      1.   The soliciting agency shall be registered with the attorney general
as a charitable organization as provided by the solicitation for charity act 1
and engaged in a statewide fundraising activity.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in charitable
solicitation on any street or highway within the village for more than a period
of two (2) consecutive days or more than two (2) such two (2) day periods a
year.
      3.   No vehicles of the solicitors or related to the solicitation shall
be permitted to be parked within the village rights of way.
      4.   The village reserves the right to impose any condition or
restriction on the solicitation to take into account the orderly flow of
traffic and prevent interference with official traffic control devices, as
determined by the chief of police or his designee, taking into account road
conditions, accident rates, traffic volumes, or other unsafe conditions.
      5.   A certificate of insurance shall also be provided from an insurance
company licensed to do business in Illinois, insuring the solicitors and
organizations for liability for damages causally related to an act of ordinary
negligence of the soliciting agent. The certificate must state that it shall
not be canceled during the period of solicitation and will provide at least the
following coverage:
         a.   Personal injury: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
person; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
         b.   Property damage: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
      6.   It shall be unlawful to solicit on any highway or street within the
village except at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full
stop.
      7.   It shall be unlawful for any individual to solicit on any highway,
street, or sidewalk within the village who is under sixteen (16) years of age
and who is not wearing a high visibility vest.
      8.   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any highway or
street without a solicitation license. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq.
4-5-15: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended, after notice
and hearing, for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for a license;
   B.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by the licensee in
the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities;
   C.   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the
provisions contained in the license;
   D.   Conviction for any crime involving moral turpitude; or
   E.   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner as to
create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace, or endanger the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 19-16,
5-7-2019)
4-5-16: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the village clerk to
deny, suspend, or revoke a license applied for under the provisions of this
chapter shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the village
president within fifteen (15) days after the notice of the action or decision
has been mailed to the person's address as shown on the license application
form, or to his last known address.
   B.   An appeal shall be taken by filing with the village clerk a written
statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal.
   C.   The village clerk shall transmit the written statement to the village
president within ten (10) days of its receipt, and the village president shall
set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal as provided in this chapter.
   D.   A hearing shall be set not later than twenty (20) days from the date of
receipt of the appellant's written statement. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 19-16, 5-7-
2019)
CHAPTER 6
TAXICABS; VEHICLES FOR HIRE
SECTION:
4-6-1: License Required
4-6-2: Ineligibility For License
4-6-3: Application For License; Investigation
4-6-4: License Fee
4-6-5: Bond Or Insurance Required
4-6-6: Register Kept
4-6-7: Vehicle Requirements
4-6-8: Meters And Fares
4-6-9: Operation Of Taxicab
4-6-10: Conduct Of Drivers
4-6-11: Use Of Stands Restricted
4-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to conduct or operate the business of hackman, cabman, or to
conduct a taxicab business, or to operate a public passenger vehicle for hire
which does not follow a fixed route without having first obtained a license
therefor as provided in this chapter. (1976 Code § 5.90.010)
4-6-2: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No such license shall be issued to any person who is not a person of good
character, or to any person who has been convicted of a felony. (1976 Code §
5.90.020)
4-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the clerk and shall
comply with the license provisions of chapter 1 of this title. Each application
shall state the name of the applicant, the number of vehicles to be operated,
the estimated number of drivers to be employed, and such other items as may be
required by the village board. Upon receiving such application, the clerk shall
cause an investigation to be made of the character of the applicant. (1976 Code
§ 5.90.020)
4-6-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for such licenses shall be as established in the annual fee
schedule. Whenever a licensee under this chapter adds to the number of vehicles
which he operates in the village, he shall notify the clerk of this fact, and
shall pay the fee for each additional vehicle. (1976 Code § 5.90.030; amd. 2016
Code)
4-6-5: BOND OR INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Each applicant for a license shall file either a bond, with sureties to be
approved by the village, conditioned that the licensee will pay all final
judgments recovered against him by reason of injury to any person from the
negligence of the licensee, or shall file a policy of insurance in a solvent
company authorized to do business in the state, which shall provide for the
payment and satisfaction of any final judgment rendered against the licensee
for any such negligence. (1976 Code § 5.90.040; amd. 2016 Code)
4-6-6: REGISTER KEPT:
Each licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall keep a register
showing the name of every driver in his employ and showing which vehicle was
operated by each driver. (1976 Code § 5.90.060)
4-6-7: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sanitary Condition; Required Equipment: All vehicles used for taxicabs
or for the conveyance of passengers for hire must be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, and must be properly equipped with brakes, lights, and
warning signals.
   B.   Identification:
      1.   The name of the owners of such vehicle shall be printed or painted
in a prominent place on the right hand side of the vehicle, in letters at least
two inches (2") high.
      2.   If any licensee operates more than one such vehicle, each vehicle
shall be numbered, with figures not less than two inches (2") high, but no two
(2) vehicles operated by the same licensee shall bear the same number.
      3.   The names and numbers shall be of such size and color as to be
readily visible from a distance of twenty five feet (25'). (1976 Code §
5.90.050)
4-6-8: METERS AND FARES:
   A.   Meters:
      1.   It is unlawful to operate any vehicle unless the same is equipped
with an accurate meter in good condition to register the distance covered and
the charge for each trip. (1976 Code § 5.90.080)
      2.   Meters shall be inspected by the police chief before being used on a
cab and at least once each six (6) months while in use. (1976 Code § 5.90.080;
amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   Meters shall be placed so as to be readily visible to passengers in
the cab, and shall show thereon the amount of the charge for each trip in such
a way that the passenger can see the same during and at the end of the trip.
(1976 Code § 5.90.100)
   B.   Advance Payment May Be Required: Every owner or driver shall have the
right to demand his fare from the person or persons so employing him on
entering his vehicle, and may refuse to convey any person who does not comply
with the demand. (1976 Code § 5.90.080)
   C.   Receipt For Fare: Any passenger paying a fare shall be entitled to a
receipt showing the amount paid. (1976 Code § 5.90.070)
4-6-9: OPERATION OF TAXICAB:
   A.   Parking On Streets:
      1.   No person in charge of any public taxi or vehicle carrying
passengers for hire shall permit the taxi, except when receiving or discharging
passengers or when instructed by their passengers to do so, to stand on any of
the streets, avenues, or alleys in the village for any period longer than five
(5) minutes except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (1976 Code §
5.90.120)
      2.   No motor vehicles or other vehicles licensed under this chapter
shall be permitted to use any of the public streets of the village as a station
or stand for the carrying on of such business except those portions of the
street designated as a taxi stand. Interurban autobuses may be parked at
reasonable places designated by the village board so as not to impede or block
traffic for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes to receive and
discharge passengers. (1976 Code § 5.90.120; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Soliciting Business Prohibited: It is unlawful for the owner or driver
of any vehicle licensed under this chapter to solicit by word, gesture, or
otherwise the patronage of any person. (1976 Code § 5.90.130; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Refusal To Carry Passenger Prohibited: Except as provided in subsection
4-6-8B of this chapter, no owner or driver of any vehicle licensed under this
chapter shall refuse to convey in the village any person with or without
baggage as provided in this chapter, when applied to for that purpose or,
having undertaken to convey such person, omit or neglect to do so. (1976 Code §
5.90.090; amd. 2016 Code)
4-6-10: CONDUCT OF DRIVERS:
It is unlawful for any person driving a taxicab or public passenger vehicle to
conduct himself in other than a cordial manner at all times while so occupied
or while in charge of a vehicle. It is unlawful for any such driver to shout or
yell to prospective passengers or to drivers or operators of other vehicles, or
to use profane or boisterous language. (1976 Code § 5.90.140; amd. 2016 Code)
4-6-11: USE OF STANDS RESTRICTED:
No vehicle of any kind shall stand upon, be parked upon, or make use of any
public taxi or hack stand in the village unless the owner thereof has obtained
a license as provided for in this chapter. (1976 Code § 5.90.110)
CHAPTER 7
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definition
4-7-2: Registration Requirements
4-7-3: Bond And Insurance Requirements
4-7-4: Registration Fee
4-7-5: Exemptions; Determination Of Applicability Of Provisions
4-7-1: DEFINITION:
A "contractor" is any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the construction,
repair or alteration of any building, structure, accessory object, site or
street or sidewalk pavement within the village. For purposes of this chapter,
contractors shall include, but not be limited to, companies engaged in the
business of asphalt, carpentry, concrete, drain laying, electrical, excavating,
fencing, fire control and suppression, general contracting, heating and air
conditioning, landscaping, lawn sprinklers, masonry, plumbing, roofing, sewers,
siding, signs, private alarm installation, water well and pump installation,
irrigation, tank installation and servicing, wrecking, and similar businesses.
Subcontractors shall be considered as contractors for the purpose of this
chapter. The term contractor does not include any architect or engineer acting
within the scope of his or her license. (2016 Code)
4-7-2: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Generally: No contractor may undertake work within the village for
which a permit is required without first being registered with the village.
Registration shall be accomplished by providing the building official or his or
her designee the name of the business, the type of contracting activity, the
address of the business, evidence of relevant state of Illinois issued or
mandated license or registration, telephone number and name of principal. The
contractor shall also provide evidence of the surety bond and certificate of
insurance required under this chapter. Registration may be accomplished at the
time of application for permit.
   B.   Additional Requirements For Specific Contractors:
      1.   Plumbing Contractors:
         a.   Every contractor performing plumbing work within the village
shall submit a copy of its state of Illinois plumbing license showing an
expiration date not earlier than the application date for the permit for which
it is applying.
         b.   All work of plumbing within buildings in the village shall be
performed by a master plumber or a journeyman plumber under the direction of a
licensed master plumber.
         c.   All work of tile drain laying underground and the building of
masonry catch basins or cesspools shall be performed by a drain layer licensed
to engage in the business of drain laying.
         d.   All work of laying sanitary waste sewers and connecting to
sanitary sewer lines shall be performed by a person licensed and qualified to
engage in the business of laying sanitary sewer lines.
      2.   Electrical Contractors:
         a.   Every electrical contractor performing work within the village
shall submit a copy of his electrical license certified from an established
commission or a certifying municipality in the state of Illinois showing an
expiration date not earlier than the expiration date of the application date
for the permit for which it is applying.
         b.   All electrical work performed within buildings or other
structures in the village shall be performed by persons employed, supervised
and directed by a licensed electrical contractor.
      3.   Roofing Contractors: Every roofing contractor performing work within
the village shall submit to the building official or his designee a certified
copy of his state of Illinois roofing certificate showing an expiration date
not earlier than the expiration date of the application date for the permit for
which it is applying.
      4.   Irrigation Contractors: Irrigation contractors shall submit a copy
of their current state of Illinois department of public health certificate of
registration.
      5.   Sprinkler/Fire Suppression Contractors: Sprinkler/fire suppression
contractors shall submit a copy of their current state of Illinois fire
sprinkler contracting license.
      6.   Alarm Contractors: Alarm contractors shall submit a copy of their
current state of Illinois alarm contractor license. (2016 Code)
4-7-3: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Surety Bond: Each contractor performing work within the village must
provide a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) at the
time of registration. The bond must be issued by a surety approved by the
village and authorized to do business in Illinois, conditioned to indemnify and
hold the village harmless from any loss, damage, claim or liability arising out
of or resulting from the doing or failure to do any act required by the
ordinances of the village, or from any other loss, damage or liability suffered
by the village resulting from the work performed by the contractor. Homeowners
acting as their own contractor will not be required to post a surety bond
unless the permit work has the potential to impact the public right of way or
public easement.
   B.   Insurance: Each contractor performing work within the village shall
submit a current certificate(s) of insurance evidencing the following coverage
in not less than the following amounts:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance: Five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence covering liability arising from premises, operations, independent
contractors, products-completed operations, and personal injury and naming the
village as an additional insured.
      2.   Workers' compensation insurance: In the amounts and coverage
required under Illinois law. (2016 Code)
4-7-4: REGISTRATION FEE:
The registration fee shall be as established in the annual fee schedule based
on a calendar year. (2016 Code)
4-7-5: EXEMPTIONS; DETERMINATION OF APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not require a homeowner to be registered
as a contractor to rehabilitate, alter or repair his or her own home. If, upon
inspection, the village determines that the work is not progressing
satisfactorily in a workmanlike manner with the applicable codes as determined
solely by the village, the village may require that the homeowner immediately
hire a licensed contractor to complete the work in conformance with the
applicable codes. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 8
OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
SECTION:
4-8-1: Definition
4-8-2: License Required; Restrictions
4-8-3: Application For License
4-8-4: License Fee
4-8-5: Posting Advertisements; Consent Of Property Owner Required
4-8-6: Billboards
4-8-7: Advertiser Information Required
4-8-8: Maintenance Of Premises
4-8-9: Advertisements Near Highways And Freeways
4-8-10: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-8-11: Exemptions
4-8-1: DEFINITION:
The term "outdoor advertiser", as used in this chapter, means any person, firm,
or corporation engaged in the business of placing, posting, or painting any
advertisements, notices, or displays in or on any place for the purpose of
outdoor advertising so that the resultant display is visible from any street,
alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the village. (1976 Code § 5.78.010)
4-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to do business as such in the village
without having first secured a license therefor as required in this chapter. No
license issued under this chapter shall be construed so as to permit the use of
any structures, natural or artificial, which are located in any public street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place for advertising purposes. (1976 Code §
5.78.020)
4-8-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be accompanied by a list of all places,
including billboards or natural structures to be used, on which it is intended
to place signs or advertisements. This list shall be added to from time to time
by the licensee as the right to post or place advertisements or signs on
additional places is acquired. (1976 Code § 5.78.030)
4-8-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for such license shall be as established in the annual fee
schedule. (1976 Code § 5.78.040; amd. 2016 Code)
4-8-5: POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS; CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNER REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to post any advertisement on any premises without the consent of
the owner or occupant of such premises. Such consents must be in writing and be
filed with the village clerk. (1976 Code § 5.78.060)
4-8-6: BILLBOARDS:
   A.   Compliance With Village Regulations: No person shall post or maintain
any advertisement or sign on any billboard or signboard which does not fully
conform to the ordinances of the village. (1976 Code § 5.78.050)
   B.   Annual Engineering Inspection Required: It shall be the duty and
obligation of owners of billboard advertising signs located within the village
to have completed, at the owner's sole expense, a structural engineering
inspection of any such sign owned by such owner within twelve (12) months of
the effective date hereof and then every three (3) years thereafter, and to
provide and furnish to the village within two (2) weeks after said inspection a
copy of the engineering report.
   C.   Village Inspections: The village reserves the right to, from time to
time, conduct its own inspection of billboard advertising signs and either
require the owner of a sign to provide supplemental structural engineering
inspections if the village inspection reasonably reveals the possibility of
some structural deficiency or for the village to hire its own structural
engineer for the purpose of inspecting a billboard advertising sign if the
village reasonably believes such a supplemental inspection is required.
   D.   Insurance Required: Any and all owners of billboard advertising signs
located within the village shall be required to furnish to the village,
annually, at the owner's sole expense, a certificate of general liability
insurance issued by a AAA rated insurance company licensed to do business
within the state of Illinois evidencing that the village is an additional
insured on said policy. (Ord. 00-11, 3-21-2000)
4-8-7: ADVERTISER INFORMATION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to carry on his business unless the
name of such advertiser is attached, displayed, or printed on all billboards or
signboards used by said advertiser, or in any notice, placard, or advertisement
posted by said advertiser, in such lettering as to be visible from a distance
of at least five feet (5') from the notice or advertisement. (1976 Code §
5.78.100)
4-8-8: MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person engaged in the business of outdoor
advertising to permit any refuse resulting from this work to accumulate
anywhere in the village except by placing it in properly established refuse
receptacles. All refuse resulting from the operation of the business must be
carefully gathered up and properly disposed of.
   B.   It is unlawful to permit any loose or flapping combustible materials to
hang from or be attached to any billboard or signboard or other place used for
display or advertising purposes. (1976 Code § 5.78.070)
   C.   It shall be the duty of every outdoor advertiser to keep all grass and
weeds and other growths, except trees and ornamental shrubbery, cut down so
that the same shall not grow to a greater height than six inches (6") within
six feet (6') of any billboard or signboard used by said advertiser; provided,
that this obligation shall extend only to property controlled by the
advertiser. (1976 Code § 5.78.080; amd. 2016 Code)
4-8-9: ADVERTISEMENTS NEAR HIGHWAYS AND FREEWAYS:
   A.   No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, maintain, or permit to
remain upon any premises, site, or location within five hundred (500) yards
from the nearest boundary line of any through highway, speedway, or freeway
within the limits of the village any billboard, sign, pictorial, or other
display or other advertising device; provided, that this prohibition shall not
extend to or include official warning, direction, or informational signs
erected by municipal, county, township, state, or other governmental agencies,
nor to signs not exceeding four feet by four feet (4' x 4') in dimensions
advertising the sale of all or any part of the particular land on which they
are located or any product manufactured or sold upon the site upon which they
are located or to signs on village property. (1976 Code § 5.78.120; amd. 2016
Code)
   B.   For the purposes of this section, certain thoroughfares within the
village limits, commonly known and described as the Congress Street Highway and
Illinois State Toll Highway, are designated as through highways, speedways,
freeways, or parkways. (1976 Code § 5.78.130)
4-8-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Advertising Benches On Public Property: It is unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to install outdoor benches on parkways, at bus stops, or on
other public property or to decorate, paint or otherwise prepare said outdoor
benches located on public property, whether or not for purposes of advertising,
within the village. (1976 Code § 5.16.010)
   B.   Unlawful Advertising:
      1.   It is unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to post or display any
advertisement of an obscene or immoral character, or any advertisement tending
to promote or cause a riot or breach of the peace, or any advertisement for an
unlawful gathering, or advertisements for unlawful sales. (1976 Code §
5.78.090)
      2.   It is unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article in the
village.
   C.   Damage To Advertisements:
      1.   It is unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or
notice. (1976 Code § 5.78.140)
      2.   It is unlawful to mutilate or disfigure any lawful sign or
advertisement in the village. (1976 Code § 5.78.100)
4-8-11: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to the posting
of signs or notices by order of any court or by any public officer in the
performance of his duties. (1976 Code § 5.78.110)
CHAPTER 9
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
SECTION:
4-9-1: License Required
4-9-2: License Fees
4-9-3: Conduct Of Auctions
4-9-4: Fraudulent Statements Prohibited
4-9-5: Inspection Of Articles For Sale
4-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in the business
of auctioneer or to hold an auction in the village without first having
obtained a license therefor. (1976 Code § 5.36.010)
4-9-2: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for engaging in the business of auctioneer and the fee for holding a
single auction by one who does not have an annual license shall be as
established in the annual fee schedule. (1976 Code § 5.36.020; amd. 2016 Code)
4-9-3: CONDUCT OF AUCTIONS:
All auctions shall be conducted in an orderly manner, and it is unlawful to
create or permit any disturbance or disorderly conduct at any auction. (1976
Code § 5.36.030)
4-9-4: FRAUDULENT STATEMENTS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person selling goods at auction to make any fraudulent
or untrue statements concerning the goods or articles being sold. (1976 Code §
5.36.040)
4-9-5: INSPECTION OF ARTICLES FOR SALE:
Every article offered for sale at a public auction shall be open to the
inspection of any person wishing to purchase it at some time before or during
the bidding. (1976 Code § 5.36.050)
CHAPTER 10
FLEA MARKETS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Definitions
4-10-2: License Requirements
4-10-3: Records Kept
4-10-4: Construction And Location Standards; Parking And Access
4-10-5: Booth To Be Identified
4-10-6: Restroom Requirements
4-10-7: Trash And Refuse
4-10-8: Unlawful Transactions
4-10-9: Purchases From Minors
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
FLEA MARKET: A market where new or used items are sold from individual
locations, with each location being operated independently from other
locations. Items sold include, but are not limited to, household items,
antiques, rare items, decorations, used books and used magazines.
FLEA MARKET OPERATOR: A person, firm or corporation principally operating a
flea market either as a flea market seller or a renter of space to flea market
sellers.
FLEA MARKET SELLER: A subtenant or renter of space from a flea market operator
for the conduct of flea market business including sales and resales of
described items.
MARKET: A place where goods are sold to the public. (Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998)
4-10-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Operator's License Required; Fee; Application:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation shall operate the business of renting
space or allocating space to flea market sellers without first obtaining a
license therefor. The cost of the business license, good for a twelve (12)
month period from the date of acquisition, shall be as established in the
annual fee schedule. Applications for licenses shall be made to the village
clerk, and forms shall be provided by the village clerk. (Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998;
amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Any person, firm or corporation renting or allocating space to
individual flea market sellers in more than one place of business shall be
required to obtain a license for each place of business including one license
for each location that may be on the same lot or adjacent lots.
   B.   Tax Identification Number For Operators And Sellers: Each and every
flea market operator and flea market seller must provide to the village at time
of an application for a license, a federal tax identification number for their
respective business. (Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998)
   C.   Seller's Fee: The fee for each individual flea market seller shall be
as established in the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998; amd. 2016
Code)
4-10-3: RECORDS KEPT:
Each person required by this chapter to obtain a license shall keep accurate
records of the names and addresses of each flea market seller, together with a
brief description of the type or types of merchandise offered for sale by that
seller. The village reserves the right to require and be shown by the flea
market operator or flea market seller proof of purchase or acquisition of the
particular sale items. (Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998)
4-10-4: CONSTRUCTION AND LOCATION STANDARDS; PARKING AND ACCESS:
   A.   All individual selling areas (booths) shall be located on individual
stands. Each booth shall contain not more than one hundred (100) square feet of
area.
   B.   A flea market seller must provide adequate off street parking for use
by patrons of the flea market. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of six
(6) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross sales area.
   C.   All flea markets shall be provided with safe, convenient, all season,
dust free, pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use, durable and
convenient to maintain. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be
avoided.
   D.   The floor pavement of the flea market shall be constructed of materials
which will provide an adequate foundation for the placement of flea market
booths, securing against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. The flea
market pavement or flooring shall be so constructed and maintained that it will
not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the flea market booth
or table due to inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces.
   E.   The operation of flea markets shall be restricted to manufacturing
districts as defined in the village zoning code. In the event that the flea
market is an outdoor operation, same is prohibited within one thousand feet
(1,000') of a residential zoned district or of a school or church facility.
(Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998)
4-10-5: BOOTH TO BE IDENTIFIED:
Each booth or table shall be numbered. (Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998)
4-10-6: RESTROOM REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be a minimum of one central restroom facility for men and one
central restroom facility for women located on the premises, both being
handicapped accessible. Further, hot and cold water shall be furnished to every
restroom which shall contain the minimum number of fixtures as required by the
village building code. (Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998)
4-10-7: TRASH AND REFUSE:
There shall be enough trash cans, lined with plastic liners, to accommodate all
the trash thrown away on the premises. All trash shall be removed by a licensed
scavenger at least at the end of each day during which the flea market is open.
In addition, any flea market must comply with all sanitation requirements as
set forth by this code. (Ord. 98-02, 1-6-1998; amd. 2016 Code)
4-10-8: UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS:
No person shall sell or offer for sale at any flea market within the village
any goods known to such person to be stolen or illegally acquired. (Ord. 98-02,
1-6-1998)
4-10-9: PURCHASES FROM MINORS:
No flea market seller shall purchase any used household items, antiques or used
articles whatsoever from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years,
unless such person is accompanied by that person's parent or guardian. (Ord.
98-02, 1-6-1998)
CHAPTER 11
GARAGE SALES
SECTION:
4-11-1: Definition
4-11-2: Registration Requirements
4-11-3: Number Of Sales; Number Of Days For Sales
4-11-4: Signs
4-11-5: Outside Storage
4-11-6: Inspections
4-11-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the term "garage sale" includes all general sales of
goods open to the public, conducted from a residential premises, including, but
not limited to, all sales entitled "garage", "lawn", "yard", "attic", "porch",
"room", "backyard", "patio", "flea market", "rummage", "estate", or "moving"
sale. (2016 Code)
4-11-2: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
No person, firm, or corporation shall allow or conduct a "garage sale", as
defined in section
4-11-1 of this chapter, without registering his/its garage sale with the
village by filing an application with the dates, hours of operation and other
information required to show compliance with this code. The registration
placard issued by the village shall be posted on the property of the sale
visible from the village or state right of way. (2016 Code)
4-11-3: NUMBER OF SALES; NUMBER OF DAYS FOR SALES:
   A.   Not more than three (3) garage sales shall be allowed per calendar year
on any residentially zoned property.
   B.   A garage sale shall not be allowed for more than three (3) consecutive
calendar days. (2016 Code)
4-11-4: SIGNS:
   A.   Garage sale signs shall be considered temporary signs but not subject
to the regulations of subsection 12-13-11D or 12-13-12D of this code.
   B.   Garage sale signs shall not interfere with or obstruct the view of
authorized traffic or pedestrian signs, create a safety hazard nor be located
on governmental or utility signs, poles, trees, fences or other structures in
the public right of way.
   C.   The maximum height of a garage sale sign shall not exceed four feet
(4'), and the maximum sign area of a sign face shall not be more than six (6)
square feet.
   D.   No more than two (2) signs having two (2) sign faces shall be allowed
on the property where the sale is held.
   E.   No more than four (4) signs, each with two (2) sign faces, shall be
allowed on the village rights of way between the curb and sidewalk.
   F.   Garage sale signs shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after
the end of the sale. (2016 Code)
4-11-5: OUTSIDE STORAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person in conducting a garage or other occasional
sale on premises zoned or used for residential purposes to:
   A.   Display or store any goods or merchandise outside the dwelling in the
front, side, or corner side yard between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
   B.   Display any goods or merchandise on any public sidewalk or right of
way. (2016 Code)
4-11-6: INSPECTIONS:
A village inspector shall be allowed to inspect the property on which the sale
is held during the days of the sale, and if the sale is not in compliance with
the regulations of this chapter, the inspector may terminate the registration
and close the sale. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 12
SIDEWALK SALES
SECTION:
4-12-1: Definition
4-12-2: Permit Required; Exceptions
4-12-3: Minimum Requirements
4-12-1: DEFINITION:
The term "sidewalk sale", as used in this chapter, is the sale of goods,
materials and products which are normally sold by a commercial establishment.
(2016 Code)
4-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for a licensed commercial establishment to conduct a
sidewalk sale without first applying for, at least thirty (30) days in advance
of the sale, and thereafter obtaining a sidewalk sale permit as herein
provided. The outside sale and display along not more than fifty percent (50%)
of the store frontage of seasonal merchandise including, but not limited to,
salt, garden supplies and holiday decorations shall be allowed without a permit
but must comply with all other location requirements of subsection 4-12-3D of
this chapter. (2016 Code)
4-12-3: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The following regulations shall be the minimum requirements for the issuance
and maintenance of a sidewalk sale permit:
   A.   The applicant must have a valid license for the commercial
establishment, and the sidewalk sale shall be on the licensed property.
   B.   The location for the sale shall only be on the private sidewalks or
other areas of the property owned or controlled by the licensee excluding
required off street parking facilities.
   C.   The permit may be issued for up to five (5) consecutive days. A maximum
of two (2) permits may be issued per calendar year for each licensed commercial
establishment not within a shopping center. A maximum of five (5) permits may
be issued per calendar year for each shopping center, including all its
licensed commercial establishments.
   D.   The area permitted for the sidewalk sale shall:
      1.   Not occupy more than one-half (1/2) of the available width of the
sidewalk.
      2.   Not impede access to the entrance of any building.
      3.   Not be located within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant or fire
escape.
      4.   Have adequate refuse containers and be maintained in a clean and
sanitary manner.
   E.   The hours of operation shall not be allowed to begin before eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. or extended after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on the same day
unless approved by the village board. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 13
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES
SECTION:
4-13-1: Definitions
4-13-2: License Required; Application
4-13-3: Hours Of Operation; Attendant Required
4-13-4: Installation Of Equipment
4-13-5: Enforcement Officials
4-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
The term "self-service laundries" or "laundromat", as used in this chapter,
shall be used synonymously and shall mean any establishment in which coin
operated facilities are available for washing clothes or for drying clothes, or
both, and which is open and available to the general public for use. (Ord. 98-
04, 2-3-1998)
4-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate any self-service (laundromat)
laundries in the village without first having secured a license therefor as
otherwise provided for herein. Applications for such licenses shall comply with
the general provisions relating to applications for business licenses and
permits. (Ord. 98-04, 2-3-1998)
4-13-3: HOURS OF OPERATION; ATTENDANT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to keep any such establishment open for business between
the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
shall be further unlawful to keep such establishment open for business between
the hours of four o'clock (4:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
unless there is an adult attendant in charge of the premises at all times
during such hours. (Ord. 98-04, 2-3-1998)
4-13-4: INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT:
Installation of all equipment in such establishment shall be in conformity with
any and all ordinances and regulations of the village relating to such
installations. (Ord. 98-04, 2-3-1998)
4-13-5: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
It shall be the duty of the village clerk to issue licenses for self-service
(laundromat) laundries and of the village police department to see to the
enforcement of this chapter and to cause such inspection to be made of the
premises as may be necessary for that purpose. (Ord. 98-04, 2-3-1998; amd. 2016
Code)
CHAPTER 14
TOBACCO PRODUCTS SALES
SECTION:
4-14-1: Findings
4-14-2: Scope
4-14-3: Definitions
4-14-4: License Required
4-14-5: Application For License; Fee
4-14-6: Minors
4-14-7: Location
4-14-8: Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
4-14-9: Vending Machines
4-14-10: Responsibility Of Licensee For Agents And Employees
4-14-11: Use Of Premises After Revocation
4-14-1: FINDINGS:
The president and board of trustees expressly find and declare that:
   A.   Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health;
   B.   There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco
products causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical disorders;
   C.   The surgeon general of the United States has declared that nicotine
addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine, and is the most
widespread example of drug dependence in this country;
   D.   The director of the National Institute On Drug Abuse concluded that the
majority of the three hundred twenty thousand (320,000) Americans who die each
year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents before
the age of legal consent;
   E.   The National Institute On Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking
precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use; and
   F.   The present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco products
to persons under the age of eighteen (18) has proven ineffective in preventing
such persons from using tobacco products. (Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-1-
1999)
4-14-2: SCOPE:
The enactment of this chapter directly pertains to and is in furtherance of the
health, welfare and safety of the residents of the village, particularly those
residents under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-
1-1999; amd. Ord. 19-30, 7-2-2019)
4-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco, and any product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that
provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing,
smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or any other
means, including, but not way of limitation, what is commonly referred to as e-
cigarettes or vaping.
VENDING MACHINES: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products. (Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-1-1999; amd. Ord. 19-30, 7-2-
2019)
4-14-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver
or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering
tobacco products within the village without having first obtained a tobacco
dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter. Such license shall be in
addition to any other license required by this code. (Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998,
eff. 2-1-1999)
4-14-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the village
clerk and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 1 of
this title. The license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be as set
forth in the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-1-1999; amd.
2016 Code)
4-14-6: MINORS:
   A.   Sales And Delivery To Prohibited; Sign Posted: It shall be unlawful for
any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or
deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be
posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products and on or
upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale. Each such
sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW
   B.   Purchase By Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent
his identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the
purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
   C.   Possession By Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to possess any tobacco products; provided, that
the possession by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years under the
direct supervision of the parent or legal guardian of such person in the
privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
   D.   Employment: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to
engage, employ or permit any person under sixteen (16) years of age to sell
tobacco products in any licensed premises. (Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-1-
1999; amd. Ord. 19-30, 7-2-2019)
4-14-7: LOCATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or
deliver tobacco products within one hundred feet (100') of any school,
childcare facility or other building used for education or recreational
programs for persons under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 98-37, 12-
15-1998, eff. 2-1-1999; amd. Ord. 19-30, 7-2-2019)
4-14-8: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling
or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any
employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such
licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco
products free of charge to any person on any right of way, park, playground or
other property owned by the village, any school district, any park district or
any public library. (Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-1-1999)
4-14-9: VENDING MACHINES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away or
deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering
tobacco products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is
equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by the
licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of twenty one
(21) years. Any premises where access by persons under the age of twenty one
(21) years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of
the business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section. (Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-1-1999; amd. Ord. 19-30, 7-2-
2019)
4-14-10: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
licensee, and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 98-
37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-1-1999)
4-14-11: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the
conduct of the business of selling "tobacco products", as defined in section
4-14-3 of this chapter, in the premises described in such revoked license.
(Ord. 98-37, 12-15-1998, eff. 2-1-1999)
CHAPTER 15
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
4-15-1: Definitions
4-15-2: Licenses Required; Exemptions
4-15-3: Establishment Licensing Provisions
4-15-4: Posting Licenses
4-15-5: Employment Of Massage Therapists
4-15-6: Facilities Necessary
4-15-7: Operating Requirements
4-15-8: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-15-9: Sale, Transfer Or Relocation Of Establishments
4-15-10: Inspections
4-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them respectively:
APPROVED MASSAGE SCHOOL: A facility as defined in section 10 of the massage
licensing act 1 .
EMPLOYEE: Any person over eighteen (18) years of age, other than a massagist,
who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business
and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license has been issued to own or operate a
massage establishment.
MASSAGE: Massage or massage therapy as defined in section 10 of the massage
licensing act 2 .
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a source of income or
compensation derived from the practice of "massage" as defined in this section
and which has a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or
corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities as defined in this
section.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: A person as defined in section 10 of the massage licensing
act 3  and may be described in this chapter as massagist, masseur or masseuse.
PATRON: Any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is
reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other
consideration therefor.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of
any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 57/10.
2 2. 225 ILCS 57/10.
3 3. 225 ILCS 57/10.
4-15-2: LICENSES REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Licenses Required:
      1.   Business License: No person shall engage in or carry out the
business of massage for compensation unless he/she has a valid massage
establishment business license issued by the village for each and every
separate office or place of business conducted by such person.
      2.   Massage Therapist License: No person shall engage in massage for
compensation unless he/she has a valid license issued by the massage licensing
board of the state department of financial and professional regulation.
   B.   Exemptions:
      1.   The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not be applicable
to:
         a.   Hospitals, nursing homes and persons holding an unrevoked
certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the Illinois
department of financial and professional regulation including, but not limited
to, chiropractors, naprapaths, nurses, occupational therapists, physical
therapists and physicians.
         b.   Any barber, cosmetologist or nail technician lawfully carrying on
their respective business to the extent authorized under a valid unrevoked
license or certificate of registration issued by the state. Provided, this
exemption is only intended to permit normal and customary barber, cosmetologist
or nail technician services which involve incidental physical contact, such as
scalp rubs and facials, which otherwise qualify as massage activities. This
exemption is not intended to include, and does not permit, general massage
activities as part of any barber, cosmetologist or nail technician business
beyond that authorized by the state license or certification.
         c.   Any state registered athletic trainer who administers such
athletic related massage in the normal course of training duties.
      2.   A business which employs or includes not more than one massage
therapist shall not be required to apply for or obtain a massage establishment
license. Such exempt business must be located in a structure which contains no
more than one room where massage activities are performed. Except for
businesses which operate separate and distinct hours of operation, such exempt
businesses must also be the sole massage activity within such structure. Under
no circumstances shall more than two (2) exempt businesses be permitted in any
structure. Provided further, a state massage therapist's license shall be
required for the individual massage therapist performing massage activities in
such exempted business.
      3.   Where massage services are actually performed at the patron's
premises, including the patron's place of business or residence, a massage
therapy clinic license shall not be required for such patron's premises.
However, a state massage therapist's license shall be required for the massage
therapist performing massage activities in such patron's premises. (2016 Code)
4-15-3: ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application For License:
      1.   An application for a license required by this chapter shall be made
in writing under oath to the village clerk on a form prescribed by the village
clerk. All references to the village clerk in this chapter shall be deemed to
include the village clerk or his or her authorized designee. Each application
shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
         a.   The name of the individual, partnership, corporation or
association applying for a license.
         b.   The residence, phone number, date of birth and driver's license
number of the applicant or partners; or if a corporation or association, the
residence, phone number and driver's license number of the officers and all
shareholders owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of
stock.
         c.   The location for which the license is requested.
         d.   Whether the applicant, its partners, officers or listed
shareholders, have been convicted of any criminal offense or ordinance
violation (other than traffic or parking offenses) in any jurisdiction and, if
so, a list of such convictions, with date and prosecuting jurisdiction.
         e.   Such information as required by the chief of police in order to
conduct a criminal history background investigation on the applicant and its
partners, officers or listed shareholders owning more than five percent (5%) of
the outstanding shares of stock.
         f.   Whether the applicant, its partners, officers or listed
shareholders, have held a license or had an interest in a license issued by the
village or any other jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of used
property revoked for cause and, if so, list the date of revocation and
jurisdiction.
         g.   A statement whether the applicant has made application for a
similar or other license on premises other than described in the application,
and the disposition of such application.
      2.   The applicant for a massage establishment license required by this
chapter shall pay the village clerk at the time of filing an application a
license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per calendar year. If at the time
application is made for a license and less than six (6) months of the current
license year shall have expired, the full license fee shall be charged. If more
than six (6) months of such current year shall have expired, a license fee of
one-half (1/2) the full fee shall be charged.
      3.   Each applicant shall be required to submit to fingerprinting by the
police department in connection with the application for a license. The
applicant shall pay the fee as set by the Illinois state police for fingerprint
submissions.
      4.   Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, the
village clerk shall cause a copy thereof to be sent to the chief of police and
the building commissioner both of whom shall report back to the village clerk
in thirty (30) days whether the applicant is in accordance with applicable
village regulations. The investigation by the chief of police shall include,
but not be limited to, conducting a criminal history background investigation
on the applicant and its partners, officers or listed shareholders owning more
than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of stock.
   B.   Issuance Of License: Upon approval of the chief of police and building
commissioner, the village clerk shall issue a license for a massage
establishment if all requirements for a massage establishment described in this
chapter are met unless it finds:
      1.   The correct license fees have not been tendered to the village and,
in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation.
      2.   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if licensed, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the village
building, zoning, and health regulations.
      3.   a. The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders
holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation, any of the
officers and directors, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if
the applicant is a partnership, and the manager or other person principally in
charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted of any of the
following offenses or convicted of an offense outside the state that would have
constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state:
            (1)   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the
person of another that amounts to a felony.
            (2)   An offense involving sexual misconduct.
            (3)   An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs, or dangerous
weapons that amounts to a felony.
         b.   The village may issue a license to any person convicted of any of
the crimes described in subsection B3a of this section if it finds that such
conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the
application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any
nature and no subsequent misdemeanor or convictions for crimes mentioned in
this subsection B3.
      4.   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of fact in the license application or in any document
required by the village.
      5.   The applicant has had a massage business, masseur, or other similar
permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended by the village or any other
state or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of the
application.
      6.   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and
directors if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business is not over the
age of eighteen (18) years.
   C.   Time For Approval Or Denial Of Application: The village shall act to
approve or deny an application for the license under this chapter within a
reasonable period of time and in no event shall the village act to approve or
deny the license later than ninety (90) days from the date that the application
was filed with the village clerk.
   D.   Transfer Of License: No license shall be transferable except with the
consent of the village. An application for such transfer shall be in writing
and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in subsection A2 of this
section. The written application for transfer shall contain the same
information as requested for initial application for the license. (2016 Code)
4-15-4: POSTING LICENSES:
   A.   Every massage therapist shall post his or her state license in his/her
work area.
   B.   Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under
this chapter shall display such license in a prominent place. (2016 Code)
4-15-5: EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPISTS:
   A.   No person shall employ as a massage therapist any person unless the
employee has obtained and has in effect a license issued by the massage
licensing board of the department of financial and professional regulation.
   B.   The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage
establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time as
massage therapists and their state licenses. The register shall be available at
the massage establishment to representatives of the village during regular
business hours. (2016 Code)
4-15-6: FACILITIES NECESSARY:
No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an
inspection by the village reveals that the establishment complies with each of
the following minimum requirements:
   A.   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers
shall be made waterproof and shall be installed in accordance with the village
building code. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the
village plumbing code.
   B.   Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or
more floor drains properly connected to the sewer. Dry heat rooms with wooden
floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains.
   C.   A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity
of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
   D.   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. These nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron.
   E.   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linens, towels and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept in
properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be
kept separate from the clean storage areas.
   F.   All plumbing shall meet the requirements set forth in the Illinois
state plumbing code.
   G.   Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water
shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories or
washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary
towels.
   H.   All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the village electrical code. (2016 Code)
4-15-7: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
   B.   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
   C.   All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and
wear clean, nontransparent outer garments covering the sexual and genital
areas. These garments shall be restricted to the massage establishment. A
separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with
individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open
inward and shall be self-closing.
   D.   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
and stored in a sanitary manner.
   E.   No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this
chapter shall place, publish, or distribute any advertisement, picture, or
statement which is known or, through the exercise of reasonable care, should be
known to be false, deceptive, or misleading in order to induce any person to
purchase or utilize any professional massage services. (2016 Code)
4-15-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the
massage establishment under a name not specified in his/her license, nor shall
he/she conduct business under any designation or location not specified in his/
her license.
   B.   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide, or keep any alcoholic
beverage on the premises of any massage business.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to place his or
her hand or hands on, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in
any manner, or massage a sexual or genital part of another person.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose his
or her sexual or genital parts, or portion thereof, to any other person. It
shall also be unlawful for any person in a massage parlor to expose the sexual
or genital parts, or any portions thereof, of any other person.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other
person in a massage parlor, to fail to conceal, with a fully opaque covering,
the sexual or genital parts of his or her body.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage parlor to knowingly cause, allow, or permit, in or about the massage
parlor, any agent, employee, or any other person under his or her control or
supervision to perform such acts prohibited in this section. (2016 Code)
4-15-9: SALE, TRANSFER OR RELOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS:
Upon sale, transfer, or relocation of a massage establishment, the license
shall be null and void unless approved as provided in subsection 4-15-3C of
this chapter; provided, that upon the death or incapacity of the licensee or
any co-licensee of the massage establishment, any heir or devisee of a deceased
licensee, or any guardian of an heir or devisee of a deceased licensee may
continue the business of the massage establishment for a reasonable period of
time not to exceed sixty (60) days to allow for an orderly transfer of the
license. (2016 Code)
4-15-10: INSPECTIONS:
The chief of police or his authorized representatives shall, from time to time,
make inspection of each massage establishment for the purposes of determining
that there is full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow the inspection officer access to
the premises or hinder the officer in any manner. (2016 Code)
TITLE 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
ARTICLE A. FOOD STORES
SECTION:
5-1A-1: License And Compliance Required
5-1A-2: State Regulations Adopted
5-1A-3: Unwholesome Food, Unsanitary Conditions Prohibited
5-1A-4: Existing Stores
5-1A-5: New And Reconstructed Stores
5-1A-6: Food From Establishments In Other Jurisdictions
5-1A-1: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to operate a food store in the village without first having
obtained a license therefor or without full compliance with the provisions of
this article. (2016 Code)
5-1A-2: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The latest edition of the food service sanitation code, as published by the
Illinois department of public health (part 750 of 77 Ill. adm. code), together
with all appendices thereto and all subsequent editions or amendments, is
adopted as the regulations governing the sanitation procedures and controls for
the storage, preparation and display of food sold within the village with such
amendments as are hereinafter set forth in this article. (2016 Code)
5-1A-3: UNWHOLESOME FOOD, UNSANITARY CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
No food store licensee shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of selling
or offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human consumption which
is spoiled, tainted or unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for any
reason, or violate any rule or regulation as provided in the retail food store
sanitation code as adopted in section
5-1A-2 of this article. (2016 Code)
5-1A-4: EXISTING STORES:
No existing food store shall be operated within the village unless it is in
conformance with the requirements of this article; provided, that equipment and
facilities installed in a food store prior to the effective date hereof which
do not fully meet all of the design and construction requirements of this
article shall be deemed acceptable in that establishment if they are in good
repair, capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition, and the food
contact surfaces are nontoxic. (2016 Code)
5-1A-5: NEW AND RECONSTRUCTED STORES:
   A.   All food stores which are hereafter constructed, reconstructed or
extensively altered shall be in conformance in such construction with the
requirements of this article. New and replacement equipment shall meet the
requirements of this article as to construction and installation.
   B.   Properly prepared plans, including equipment specifications and
installation layouts, shall be submitted to the building commissioner for
review and approval before work is begun on the construction of new food stores
or the reconstruction or extensive alteration of existing ones. (2016 Code)
5-1A-6: FOOD FROM ESTABLISHMENTS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
Food from food service establishments or food stores outside the jurisdiction
of the village may be sold within the village if such food service
establishments or food stores are in conformance with the provisions of this
article or with substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of
compliance with such provisions, the building commissioner may accept reports
from the responsible authority in other jurisdictions where such food stores or
food service establishments are located. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE B. FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5-1B-1: License And Compliance Required
5-1B-2: State Regulations Adopted
5-1B-3: Definition
5-1B-4: Unwholesome Food Prohibited
5-1B-5: Existing Establishments
5-1B-6: New Or Reconstructed Establishments
5-1B-7: Food From Establishments In Other Jurisdictions
5-1B-1: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to operate a food service establishment in the village without
first having obtained a license therefor or without full compliance with the
provisions of this article. (2016 Code)
5-1B-2: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The latest edition of the food service sanitation code (part 750 of 77 Ill.
adm. code), as published by the Illinois department of public health, together
with all appendices thereto and all subsequent editions or amendments, is
adopted as the regulations governing the sanitation procedures and control for
the storage, preparation and serving of food within the village with such
amendments as hereinafter set forth in this article. (2016 Code)
5-1B-3: DEFINITION:
Food service establishments, as defined in the regulations adopted in section
5-1B-2 of this article, shall be amended to include daycare centers, nursing
homes, schools, rehabilitation centers, hospitals and retirement centers. (2016
Code)
5-1B-4: UNWHOLESOME FOOD PROHIBITED:
No food service establishment shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of
selling or offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human
consumption which is spoiled, tainted or unwholesome and unfit for human
consumption for any reason or violate any rule or regulation as provided in the
food service sanitation code as adopted in section
5-1B-2 of this article. (2016 Code)
5-1B-5: EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS:
No existing food service establishment shall operate within the village unless
it is in conformance with the requirements of this article; provided, that
equipment and facilities installed in a food service establishment prior to the
effective date hereof which do not fully meet all the design and construction
requirements of this article shall be deemed acceptable in that establishment
if they are in good repair, capable of being maintained in a sanitary
condition, and food contact surfaces are nontoxic. (2016 Code)
5-1B-6: NEW OR RECONSTRUCTED ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   All food service establishments which are hereafter established,
constructed, reconstructed or substantially altered shall conform in such
construction to the requirements of this article. New and replacement equipment
shall meet the requirements of this article as to design, construction and
installation.
   B.   Complete plans, including equipment specifications and installation
layouts, shall be submitted to the building commissioner for review and
approval before work is begun on the construction of new food service
establishments or the reconstruction or extensive alteration of existing ones.
   C.   The construction, enlargement, alteration or conversion of a building
for use as a food service establishment shall comply with the requirements of
the 2008 edition of the food service design and construction handbook published
in pamphlet form by the DuPage County health department, division of
environmental health. (2016 Code)
5-1B-7: FOOD FROM ESTABLISHMENTS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
Food from food service establishments or food stores located outside the
jurisdiction of the village may be sold within the village if such food service
establishments or food stores are in conformance with the provisions of this
article or with substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of
compliance with such provisions, the building commissioner may accept reports
from the responsible authority in other jurisdictions where such food service
establishments are located. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE C. FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-1C-1: License Required; Exceptions
5-1C-2: Regulations
5-1C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to use any vehicle, except vehicles licensed as food or
beverage vending vehicles, for the delivery or sale of food including
nonalcoholic beverages and milk intended for human consumption in the village
without first having secured a license therefor. No license or license fee
shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs from any
establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food store or food service
establishment in the village or licensed by another municipality, but there
shall be compliance with all provisions of this chapter in connection with such
vehicles. (2016 Code)
5-1C-2: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Clean, Sanitary Conditions: All vehicles delivering foodstuffs shall be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day
after their use.
   B.   Waste Accumulations Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to permit stale
food, decaying matter or any other waste material or product to accumulate in
or on any such vehicle.
   C.   Carrying Unwrapped Foodstuffs: If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported
in any such vehicle, such goods shall be carried in a portion or compartment of
the vehicle which is screened and protected against dust and insects. (2016
Code)
ARTICLE D. AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINES
SECTION:
5-1D-1: License Required
5-1D-2: Regulations Adopted
5-1D-3: Maintenance Information Posted
5-1D-4: Unwholesome Food, Violations Of Rules Prohibited
5-1D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall install, keep or maintain an automatic food vending machine in
the village, or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his
premises of an automatic food vending machine, without first having obtained a
license therefor. (2016 Code)
5-1D-2: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The greater standards (most restrictive standards) of the latest edition of the
rules and regulations pertaining to sanitary vending of food and beverages, as
published by the Illinois department of public health (part 743 of 77 Ill. adm.
code), published in pamphlet form, together with the following sections of the
U.S. food and drug administration, 2005 food code, with such subsequent
editions or amendments to either, are adopted as the regulations governing the
sanitation procedures and controls for the storage, preparation and display of
food sold within vending machines and food or beverage vending vehicles as the
regulations of the village. The sections of the U.S. food and drug
administration, 2005 food code, referenced above are as follows:
      (1)   Potentially Hazardous Food. Potentially hazardous food dispensed
through a vending machine shall be in the package in which it was placed at the
food establishment or food processing plant at which it was prepared.
Refrigerated, ready to eat, potentially hazardous food prepared in a food
establishment and dispensed through a vending machine with an automatic shutoff
control shall be discarded if it exceeds a temperature and time combination as
specified in the food code.
      (2)   Condiments. Condiments at a vending machine location shall be in
individual packages or provided in dispensers that are filled at an approved
location, such as the food establishment that provides food to the vending
machine location, a food processing plant that is regulated by the agency that
has jurisdiction over the operation, or a properly equipped facility that is
located on the site of the vending machine location.
      (3)   Vending Machine, Vending Stage Closure. The dispensing compartment
of a vending machine including a machine that is designed to vend prepackaged
snack food that is not potentially hazardous such as chips, party mixes, and
pretzels shall be equipped with a self-closing door or cover if the machine is:
         a.   Located in an outside area that does not otherwise afford the
protection of an enclosure against the rain, windblown debris, insects,
rodents, and other contaminants that are present in the environment; or
         b.   Available for self-service during hours when it is not under the
full-time supervision of a food employee.
            (4)   Can Openers On Vending Machines. Cutting or piercing parts of
can openers on vending machines shall be protected from manual contact, dust,
insects, rodents, and other contamination.
            (5)   Vending Machines, Automatic Shut-Off.
         a.   A machine vending potentially hazardous food shall have an
automatic control that prevents the machine from vending food:
            1.    If there is a power failure, mechanical failure, or other
condition that results in an internal machine temperature that cannot maintain
food temperature as specified in the food code.
            2.   If a condition specified under subsection (5)a.1. of this
section occurs, until the machine is serviced and restocked with food that has
been maintained at temperatures in the food code.
         b.    When the automatic shut off within a machine vending potentially
hazardous food is activated:
            1.   In a refrigerated vending machine, the ambient temperature may
not exceed any time/temperature as specified in the food code.
            2.   In a hot holding vending machine, the ambient temperature may
not be less than 135 degrees F for more than 120 minutes immediately after the
machine is filled, serviced, or restocked.
      (6)   Vending Machines, Liquid Waste Products.
         a.   Vending machines designed to store beverages that are packaged in
containers made from paper products shall be equipped with diversion devices
and retention pans or drains for container leakage.
         b.   Vending machines that dispense liquid food in bulk shall be:
            1.   Provided with an internally mounted waste receptacle for the
collection of drip, spillage, overflow, or other internal wastes; and
            2.   Equipped with an automatic shutoff device that will place the
machine out of operation before the waste receptacle overflows.
         c.   Shutoff devices specified under subsection (6)b.2. of this
section shall prevent water or liquid food from continuously running if there
is a failure of a flow control device in the water or liquid food system or
waste accumulation that could lead to overflow of the waste receptacle.
      (7)   Vending Machine Doors And Openings.
         a.   Vending machine doors and access opening covers to food and
container storage spaces shall be tight-fitting.
         b.   Vending machine service connection openings through an exterior
wall of a machine shall be closed by sealants, clamps, or grommets so that the
openings are no larger than 1/16 of an inch.
      (8)   Outdoor Food Vending Areas, Overhead Protection. Except for
machines that vend canned beverages, if located outside, a machine used to vend
food shall be provided with overhead protection.
(2016 Code)
5-1D-3: MAINTENANCE INFORMATION POSTED:
There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each machine the name, address
and telephone number of the person responsible for the maintenance of such
machine. (2016 Code)
5-1D-4: UNWHOLESOME FOOD, VIOLATIONS OF RULES PROHIBITED:
No licensee shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of selling or
offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human consumption which is
spoiled, tainted or unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for any reason,
or shall violate any rule or regulation as provided in the sanitary vending of
food and beverages rules and regulations as adopted in section
5-1D-2 of this article. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE E. FOOD OR BEVERAGE VENDING VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-1E-1: Definitions
5-1E-2: Insurance Requirements
5-1E-3: Vehicle Equipment
5-1E-4: Restrictions
5-1E-5: Disease Carrying Vendors Prohibited
5-1E-1: DEFINITIONS:
FOOD OR BEVERAGE VENDING VEHICLE: A vehicle from which the retail sale of food
or beverage for human consumption is conducted on private property.
OWNER: The titleholder of a food or beverage vending vehicle.
RETAIL SALE: The sale of food or beverage to the consumer thereof.
VEHICLE: Every motor vehicle which is mechanically propelled and designed to
transport one or more persons.
VENDING: The act of selling, or offering to sell, any food or beverage for
human consumption from a food or beverage vending vehicle on private property.
VENDOR: Any person who physically operates a food or beverage vending vehicle
or any person who physically conducts vending from such a vehicle. (2016 Code)
5-1E-2: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All food or beverage vendors shall furnish a certificate to the village
clerk showing that the vendor is carrying the following minimum amounts of
insurance: public liability insurance in an amount of not less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injuries, including those resulting
in death, resulting from any one occurrence and on account of any one accident;
property damage insurance in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for damages on account of any one accident or occurrence.
   B.   Certificates shall contain an agreement signed by the insurance company
that prior to modification, cancellation or termination of the subject policy,
written notice shall be sent to the village clerk by said insurance company.
(2016 Code)
5-1E-3: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Required Equipment:
      1.   All food or vending vehicles shall have the following equipment:
         a.   A litter or trash container, visible and available to customers
of the vending vehicle. In addition thereto, each licensee shall clean up any
debris or litter which may occur as a result of the vendor's business prior to
leaving any given area of sale.
         b.   Equipment that will keep all potentially hazardous food on the
vehicle at a temperature below forty one degrees Fahrenheit (41°F).
         c.   If providing hot potentially hazardous foods, equipment that will
keep all such foods at one hundred thirty five degrees Fahrenheit (135°F) or
above.
      2.   In addition to other equipment required by law, every food or
beverage vending vehicle shall be equipped with:
         a.   Signal lamps mounted at the same level and as high and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable. These lamps shall be five inches (5") to seven
inches (7") in diameter and shall display two (2) alternately flashing red
lights on the front of the vehicle and two (2) alternately flashing red lights
on the rear of the vehicle, both lights visible at five hundred feet (500') in
normal sunlight upon a straight level street.
         b.   A stop signal arm that can be extended horizontally from the left
side of the truck duplicating the design and size of a standard thirty inch
(30") octagonal stop sign as set forth in the state "Manual Of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices". This arm shall be red and white in color and contain two (2)
alternately flashing lights three inches (3") to five inches (5") in diameter
at the top and bottom thereof, visible at three hundred feet (300') to the
front and rear in normal sunlight upon a straight level street. The color of
the two (2) lights facing to the front shall be red, and the two (2) lights
facing to the rear shall be red. The bottom of the signal arm shall be forty
two inches (42") above the highway.
         c.   A convex mirror mounted on the front so the driver in his normal
seating position can see the area in front of the truck by the hood.
   B.   Use Of Equipment: The driver of a food or beverage vending vehicle
stopped on the streets for the purpose of vending shall actuate the special
flashing lights and extend the stop signal arm required by subsection A2 of
this section. These lights and the stop signal arm shall not be used when the
truck is in motion nor at any time the truck is stopped for a purpose other
than vending. (2016 Code)
5-1E-4: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   A person shall vend only when the food or beverage vending vehicle is
lawfully stopped.
   B.   A person shall vend only from the side of the vehicle away from moving
traffic and as near as possible to the curb or side of the street.
   C.   A person shall not vend to a person standing in the roadway.
   D.   A person shall not stop on the left side of a one-way street to vend.
   E.   The following shall not be performed from a vending vehicle:
      1.   Emitting any noise intended to advertise the presence of the
vehicle, while it is moving.
      2.   Vending before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after sunset on any day.
   F.   No vehicle shall be backed up to make or attempt to make a sale. (2016
Code)
5-1E-5: DISEASE CARRYING VENDORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or who is the carrier
of any infections or contagious disease to conduct vending. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Nuisances Enumerated
5-2-2: Nuisances Prohibited
5-2-3: Abatement Procedures
5-2-1: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Obstructing Watercourses: It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person,
firm, or corporation to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water
supply in the village. (1976 Code § 8.12.010)
   B.   Stagnant Water: Any stagnant pool of water in the village is declared
to be a nuisance. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit
any such nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his or its control.
(1976 Code § 8.12.020)
   C.   Refuse And Animal Carcass Deposits: It is unlawful for any person,
firm, or corporation to deposit anywhere in the village any uncovered pile of
refuse, garbage, offal, or carcasses of dead animals. Such refuse must be
properly stored in a garbage receptacle and promptly disposed of in a state
approved landfill, recycling center, or waste incinerator. Any uncovered pile
of refuse is declared to be a nuisance. (1976 Code § 8.12.030; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Privies: It is unlawful to maintain or permit the maintenance of any
privy vault on any premises in the village. (1976 Code § 8.12.040)
   E.   Unsafe Buildings: It is unlawful to permit any building, structure, or
place to remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in
any way. Any such structure, building, or place is declared to be a nuisance.
(1976 Code § 8.12.050)
   F.   Acts Endangering Public Health: It is unlawful to commit or do any act
which endangers the public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the
public. (1976 Code § 8.12.060)
   G.   Noisy Animals: It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which
disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. (1976 Code §
8.12.070)
5-2-2: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any
premises controlled or occupied by any person, firm, or corporation in the
village. (1976 Code § 8.12.080)
5-2-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
The village is authorized to abate any nuisance existing in the village,
whether such nuisance is one specifically recognized as such by ordinance or
not, in the following manner:
   A.   Inspection: A member of the police department or the building official
may inspect or cause to be inspected any premises upon which it is believed
that a public nuisance exists, and a written report shall be made of the
inspection.
   B.   Emergency Abatement: If a public nuisance on private property
constitutes immediate danger to public health, safety, peace, morals or
decency, the police chief shall serve a notice on the owner or, if the owner
cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining
the nuisance, and shall post a copy of the notice on the premises. Such notice
shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining
the nuisance to abate or remove the nuisance within twenty four (24) hours. The
notice shall also state that if the nuisance is not abated within twenty four
(24) hours, the village may cause the nuisance to be abated and will charge the
costs of such abatement to the person to whom the notice was sent. The village
may employ such village resources as are necessary to abate or remove the
nuisance.
   C.   Court Ordered Abatement: If a public nuisance on private property does
not constitute an immediate danger to public health, peace, morals or decency,
the police chief may cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in
any administrative adjudication hearing or court of proper jurisdiction in the
name of the village.
   D.   Cost Of Abatement: In addition to any other penalty or fee imposed by
this code for the erection, contrivance, creation, maintenance or continuance
of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the village
shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance.
   E.   Special Lien Authorization: The costs and expenses incurred by the
village to abate any public nuisance may be made a lien on the property on
which any such public nuisance is located pursuant to, and to the fullest
extent provided by, Illinois law. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE A. NUISANCE PROPERTIES AND AGGRAVATED NUISANCE PROPERTIES
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Definitions
5-2A-2: Violations
5-2A-3: Procedures
5-2A-4: Abatement Of Nuisance
5-2A-5: Burden Of Proof; Relief; Fines; Attorney Fees
5-2A-6: Other Remedies
5-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words or terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AGGRAVATED NUISANCE PROPERTY: A lot of record or parcel of real property upon
which two (2) or more of the nuisance activities listed below have occurred
within a six (6) month period:
   A.   Homicide.
   B.   Kidnapping.
   C.   Criminal housing management.
   D.   Possession of explosives or incendiary devices.
   E.   Any offense involving unlawful use of weapons.
   F.   Mob action.
   G.   Child pornography.
   H.   Any controlled substance violation.
   I.   Felony production, sale, distribution or possession of cannabis.
   J.   Gang activity violations as described in the streetgang terrorism
omnibus prevention act.
   K.   Unlawful contact with a gang member.
   L.   Violation of the methamphetamine control and community protection act.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the village of Berkeley or the chief of
police's designee.
CONTROL: The right to permit or deny entry onto property, the right to direct a
person to leave property or the right to govern conduct that occurs on
property.
NUISANCE PROPERTY: A lot of record or parcel of real property upon which three
(3) or more of the nuisance activities listed below occurred within a six (6)
month period:
   A.   Unlawful assembly.
   B.   Assault.
   C.   Battery.
   D.   Unlawful use of weapons or firearms.
   E.   Unlawful discharge of a firearm.
   F.   Prostitution.
   G.   Soliciting or patronizing a prostitute.
   H.   Keeping a house of prostitution.
   I.   Pandering.
   J.   Obscenity.
   K.   Sexual assault and sexual abuse.
   L.   Public indecency.
   M.   Disorderly conduct.
   N.   Unlawful production, sale, distribution, possession, or use of
cannabis.
   O.   Illegal gambling.
   P.   Keeping or maintaining a place of illegal gambling.
   Q.   Unlawful possession of gambling devices.
   R.   Arson.
   S.   Criminal damage to property.
   T.   Illegal consumption, sale or possession of alcohol.
   U.   Theft.
   V.   Interference with a public/peace officer.
   W.   Harassment.
   X.   Indecent exposure.
   Y.   Zoning violations.
   Z.   Loitering.
   AA.   Unlawful possession, sale, distribution, or use of fireworks.
   BB.   Aiding and abetting.
   CC.   Conspiracy.
   DD.   Trespass.
   EE.   Drug paraphernalia.
   FF.   Violation of noise ordinance.
   GG.   Parking on the lawn.
   HH.   Junk vehicles.
   II.   Unlicensed vehicles.
   JJ.   Occupancy violations.
   KK.   Garbage, junk or trash violations.
   LL.   Vandalism, graffiti.
   MM.   Violations of any animal regulations.
   NN.   Any misdemeanor or felony violation of the Illinois criminal code of
2012 1 , as amended.
   OO.   Illegal dumping, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/47-10 and 5/47-15.
PERMIT: To allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, suffer or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of the act.
PERSON: Any entity capable of holding a legal or equitable interest in real
property.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in, or with the right of, actual or constructive
possession of real property with the right to permit or deny entry thereon, the
right to direct a person to leave the property or the right to govern conduct
that occurs in the property. Property may have more than one person in charge
at any given time.
PROPERTY: Real property including, but not limited to, any lot, parcel,
condominium unit or other tract of land.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any person holding a legal or equitable interest in real
property. "Property owner" includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:
      1.   All or part of the legal title of the property; or
      2.   All or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the present
use and enjoyment of the premises; or
   B.   An occupant in control of property. (Ord. 12-12, 5-15-2012; amd. 2016
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
5-2A-2: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any real property to be a nuisance property or
an aggravated nuisance property.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge to permit real property
under his or her control to be a nuisance property or an aggravated nuisance
property. A person in charge does not have to be present at the real property
during the nuisance activities to be in violation of this subsection. (Ord. 12-
12, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 19-25, 6-18-2019)
5-2A-3: PROCEDURES:
When the chief of police receives one or more police reports documenting the
occurrence of nuisance activity on a property as described in section
5-2A-1 of this article, definition of "aggravated nuisance property", or two
(2) or more police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity on
or within a property as described in section
5-2A-1 of this article, definition of "nuisance property", the chief of police
shall examine such reports to determine whether there is a rational basis to
believe that such nuisance activity, if it recurs, may unreasonably interfere
with the use and enjoyment of the property by the residents thereof or the use
and enjoyment of adjoining or nearby properties. Upon such a finding, the chief
shall:
   A.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger
of becoming either a nuisance property or aggravated nuisance property. The
notice shall contain the following information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
      2.   A statement that the chief of police has information that the
property may be an aggravated nuisance property or a nuisance property, with a
concise description of the nuisance activities that may exist or that have
occurred. The chief of police shall offer the person in charge an opportunity
to propose a course of action that the chief of police agrees will abate the
nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
      3.   Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of police
within five (5) business days to discuss the nuisance activities.
   B.   1. After complying with the notification procedures described herein,
if the chief of police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of
additional nuisance activity on or within a property and determines that the
property has become an "aggravated nuisance property" or a "nuisance property",
as defined in section
5-2A-1 of this article, he shall:
         a.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has
become a nuisance property or an aggravated nuisance property. The notice shall
contain the following information:
            (1)   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
            (2)   A statement that the chief of police has determined the
property to be an aggravated nuisance property or a nuisance property with a
concise description of the nuisance activities leading to the finding
supporting the determination.
            (3)   Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of
police within five (5) business days and propose a course of action to abate
the nuisance activities.
         b.   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail
addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property believed to be
an aggravated nuisance property or nuisance property, or such other place which
is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the chief
of police. (Ord. 12-12, 5-15-2012)
         c.   A copy of the notice shall be served on the taxpayer of record at
such address as shown on the tax rolls of Cook County and/or the occupant, at
the address of the property, if these persons are different from the person in
charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage
prepaid. (Ord. 12-12, 5-15-2012; amd. 2016 Code)
         d.   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after
five (5) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the
person in charge and the person in charge has not contacted the chief of
police.
         e.   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may
be an aggravated nuisance property or nuisance property shall not invalidate or
otherwise affect the proceedings under this article.
      2.   If, after notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the village pursuant to this section, a person in charge
stipulates with the chief of police that the person in charge will pursue a
course of action that the parties agree is reasonably calculated to abate the
nuisance activities, the chief of police may agree to defer to other
enforcement measures for a reasonable period of time. If the agreed course of
action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activity or if no
agreement concerning abatement is reached, the chief of police shall order a
local ordinance citation be issued to the person in charge and/or shall request
that the village attorney commence a legal action to abate the nuisance.
      3.   The chief of police shall send copies of the notice and citation
required by this section to the village administrator.
   C.   Statements made by the person in charge to the chief of police
regarding the nuisance activities shall not constitute an admission that
nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring. This subsection does not
require the exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered
for any other purpose. (Ord. 12-12, 5-15-2012)
5-2A-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
The village attorney, at the direction of the village administrator or the
chief of police, at any time may commence any appropriate action at law, in
equity, or in the village’s administrative adjudication system to abate an
aggravated nuisance property or a nuisance property or for violations of this
article. (Ord. 12-12, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 19-25, 6-18-2019)
5-2A-5: BURDEN OF PROOF; RELIEF; FINES; ATTORNEY FEES:
   A.   In any action seeking the abatement of an aggravated nuisance property
or nuisance property, the village shall establish by a preponderance of the
evidence that the property is an aggravated nuisance property or a nuisance
property. As used in this section, “court” shall refer to either a circuit
court judge or an administrative hearing officer, as applicable.
   B.   In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a nuisance
property or an aggravated nuisance property, the court may order such relief as
it deems appropriate. In addition, in the event that it also finds a person in
charge had knowledge of activities or conditions of the property constituting
or violating this article and permitted the activities to occur, the court may
assess a fine. Each incident that the property constitutes a nuisance property
or an aggravated nuisance property shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   In determining what remedies to grant, the court may, in its
discretion, consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the
property including, but not limited to:
      1.   The disturbance of neighbors.
      2.   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises.
      3.   The actions or lack of actions taken by the person in charge to
mitigate or correct the problem at the property.
      4.   Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous.
      5.   The magnitude or gravity of the problem.
      6.   The cost of the village investigating and correcting or attempting
to correct the condition.
   D.   The court may also require the owner to physically secure the property
against use or occupancy. In the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court, the court may authorize the village to physically
secure the property against use or occupancy. In the event that the village is
authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the village
to secure the property shall be made and assessed as a lien against the
property and/or as a judgment against the owner. As used herein, "costs" mean
those costs actually incurred by the village for the physical securing of the
property.
   E.   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure or is fined by the court
shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the village.
   F.   In the event that the village prevails in any action to enforce this
article, it shall be awarded reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 12-12, 5-15-2012;
amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 19-25, 6-18-2019)
5-2A-6: OTHER REMEDIES:
   A.   The procedures, rights and remedies set forth herein are in addition to
any other right, remedy or claim the village may have and are not intended to
waive or limit the availability of any common law or statutory cause of action.
   B.   In addition to any other remedy the village may have, in the event that
it is determined that the property is an unreasonable threat to the public
safety and welfare, the village may apply to the court for such interim relief
as is deemed appropriate. (Ord. 12-12, 5-15-2012)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS, GRASS AND PLANTS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Height Limit
5-3-3: Notice To Remove
5-3-4: Failure To Remove; Abatement By Village; Costs
5-3-5: Lien Provisions
5-3-5-1: Priority Liens On Abandoned Property
5-3-6: Liability Of Owner
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
OWNER, OWNERS, OWNER'S: A sole owner, any part owner, any joint owner, any
tenant in common, any joint tenant, any tenant by entirety, any contract
purchaser or any lessee or tenant or occupant of the whole or of any part of
any land or real estate located within the corporate limits of the village of
Berkeley.
PLANTS: Shall not include trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants.
PROPERTY: The land or real estate owned, leased, occupied or being purchased by
the "owner" (as defined in this section).
RIGHT OF WAY OR BOULEVARD: The space between any sidewalk adjacent to the
owner's property and the adjacent street pavement, and shall include the space
between the owner's property line and the adjacent street pavement if there is
no sidewalk adjacent to the owner's property line.
WEEDS: Shall include, but not be limited to, the following: burdock, ragweed
(giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common
milkweed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lamb's quarter,
wild lettuce, curled dock, smartweeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, wild
hemp and Johnson grass and all other noxious weeds as defined by the statutes
of the state of Illinois; and the word "weeds" shall also include any grass of
any variety exceeding six inches (6") in height. (2016 Code)
5-3-2: HEIGHT LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit any weeds, grass or plants to grow
to a height exceeding six inches (6") upon any property or upon any right of
way or boulevard within the corporate limits of the village. Any such weeds,
grass or plants exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(2016 Code)
5-3-3: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
The police department, building commissioner or any other person so designated
by the village board, may issue a written notice for removal of weeds, grass,
or plants. Such weeds, grass, or plants shall be cut, mowed and trimmed by the
owner to a height not to exceed six inches (6") within five (5) days after such
notice has been duly served. Service of the notice provided for herein may be
effected by handing the same to any owner or to any member of his or her
household of the age of fifteen (15) years or older found on the premises, or
by mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner;
provided, that if the premises is unoccupied and the owner's address cannot be
obtained, then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(2016 Code)
5-3-4: FAILURE TO REMOVE; ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE; COSTS:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five (5) days, the
village may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense
of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged to and paid by the owner.
(2016 Code)
5-3-5: LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Abatement Costs A Lien:
      1.   Charges for weed, grass or plant removal, destruction or abatement
shall be a lien upon the premises. A bill representing the cost and expense
incurred or payable for the service shall be presented to the owner. If this
bill is not paid within sixty (60) days of submission of the bill, a notice of
lien of the cost and expense thereof incurred by the village shall be recorded
in the following manner:
         a.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof.
         b.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service.
         c.   The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the
village.
      2.   The notice of lien shall be filed in the county recorder's office
within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred.
   B.   Notice Of Lien; Payment Of Costs; Release Of Lien: The cost of the
cutting of weeds shall not be lien on the real estate affected unless a notice
is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding
year. The notice shall be delivered or sent after the cutting of weeds on the
property. The notice shall state the substance of this section and shall
identify the property, by common description, and the location of the weeds to
be cut. Upon payment of the cost and expense after the notice of lien has been
filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the
lien has been filed, and the release may be filed of record in the same manner
as filing notice of the lien. All lien and release filing fees shall be paid by
the owner of the property.
   C.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed, grass
or plant cutting charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the
proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting
costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure
shall be in the name of the village after the lien is in effect for sixty (60)
days. (2016 Code)
5-3-5-1: PRIORITY LIENS ON ABANDONED PROPERTY:
   A.   From and after March 1, 2010, any action taken by the village under
this chapter on property that is abandoned shall be subject to the priority
lien provisions set forth in this section.
   B.   The village must file a lien within one year of the date for actions
taken under this chapter for any abandoned property, which lien shall include a
sworn statement that specifically sets forth the following:
      1.   A description of the abandoned property.
      2.   Cost and expense incurred by the village taking action under this
chapter.
      3.   Date or dates of action taken under this chapter.
      4.   Reference that the actions taken under this chapter were done
pursuant to authority granted in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7.
   C.   In furtherance of its authority under this section, the village clerk
will maintain a record for each property for which a lien has been filed under
this section that will include the following:
      1.   Dated statement of a finding that the property was abandoned.
      2.   Date when the property was first observed to be vacant.
      3.   Description of the actions taken by the village to contact the legal
owner of the property and a statement that no contacts were made with the legal
owner.
      4.   Dated certification by a municipal official of the necessity and
specific nature of the work performed.
      5.   Copy of the agreement with the person or company performing the work
including the rates and estimated cost of the work.
      6.   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work.
      7.   A statement as to whether the work was competitively bid and, if so,
a copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders. (2016 Code)
5-3-6: LIABILITY OF OWNER:
The liability of the owner as set forth in this chapter shall be joint and
several, and the village may proceed against any one or all owners, but the
village shall not be required to proceed against more than one owner. (2016
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
5-4-1: Receptacles
5-4-2: Deposit In Streets
5-4-3: Collection Charge
5-4-4: Accumulation Of Garbage And Refuse Prohibited; Removal Required; Lien
Provisions
5-4-1: RECEPTACLES:
   A.   Receptacle Required: It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of
any house, building, flat or apartment located within the village where people
reside, board or lodge, or where animal or vegetable matter is prepared or
served, to maintain in good order and repair, at all times, one or more cans or
containers designed as receptacles for discarded garbage, bottles, cans and
similar refuse. (1976 Code § 8.08.010)
   B.   Specifications: Any can in which garbage is deposited shall be
watertight and shall be fitted with a closefitting cover. All cans for garbage
and refuse shall have a capacity of not more than one hundred five (105)
gallons and shall be provided with suitable handles. (1976 Code § 8.08.020;
amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Placement For Pick Up; Removal: No cans, sealed trash bags or other
trash containers shall be placed in any street right of way prior to six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the day before the scheduled pick up day for that
particular area. All cans shall be removed before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on
the day following the scheduled pick up. (1976 Code § 8.08.040)
5-4-2: DEPOSIT IN STREETS:
No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited in any street right of way
except within cans or containers designed as receptacles therefor and in such a
manner as would reasonably assure that the garbage and refuse would not be
blown about or be scattered by the wind, animals or vandals.
(1976 Code § 8.08.040)
5-4-3: COLLECTION CHARGE:
   A.   Established: There is established a monthly service charge for the
collection and disposal of garbage within the corporate limits of the village.
   B.   Amount Of Charge: The charge for solid waste, recycling and yard waste
collection in the village, per residential household, shall be as established
by the village board of trustees
   C.   Bills For Service: Such service charge shall become due and payable
every month of the year and shall be billed as a separate item on the water
bill received by such owner or occupant.
(1976 Code §§ 8.08.050, 8.08.070; amd. Ord. 06-23, 6-20-2006; 2016 Code; Ord.
20-25, 5-5-2020; Ord. 21-35, 5-18-2021; Ord. 22-31, 6-21-2022; Ord. 24-26, 5-7-
2024)
5-4-4: ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE PROHIBITED; REMOVAL REQUIRED; LIEN
PROVISIONS:
   A.   Accumulation Prohibited: It is illegal for the owners of real estate to
accumulate garbage and debris except in receptacles as provided in this
chapter. (1976 Code § 8.08.080)
   B.   Removal Required: Upon receipt of notice in writing from the building
official, the owner of the premises specified in such notice shall take
immediate measures for the removal of garbage and debris from the premises, and
unless said work is completed in the time specified in the notice, in no event
to be less than fifteen (15) days, or any written extension thereof that may be
granted by the village, the owner, agent, or occupant in charge of said
building, structure or premises is guilty of a violation of this section.
   C.   Removal By Village; Costs A Lien: Whenever the owner of the premises,
after being served with notice as provided in this section, refuses or
neglects, within the time fixed in the notice, to perform all work necessary
for the removal of garbage and debris from the premises as described in said
notice, the building official or person duly authorized thereby may go on the
premises and do such work as is necessary to free said premises from garbage
and debris. The cost and expense incurred for all work and materials may be
collected from the owner of said premises, and the village or persons
performing such work or furnishing such materials therefor shall have a lien on
said premises and may enforce the same as provided by statute. (1976 Code §
8.08.090; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Recording Lien:
      1.   A notice of lien of the cost and expense thereof incurred by the
village or person authorized shall be recorded in the following manner: The
village, or the person performing the service by authority of the village, in
its or his own name, may file notice of lien in the office of the recorder of
deeds in the county. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out: (1976 Code § 8.08.100; amd. 2016 Code)
         a.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
         b.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
         c.   The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the
village.
      2.   The notice shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and
expense is incurred. (1976 Code § 8.08.100)
   E.   Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of
lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in
whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be filed of record in
the same manner as filing notice of said lien. (1976 Code § 8.08.110)
ARTICLE A. GRASS CLIPPINGS AND LEAVES
SECTION:
5-4A-1: Definition
5-4A-2: Containment Method
5-4A-3: Insert Prohibited In Containers
5-4A-4: Prohibited Contents
5-4A-5: Multi-Family, Commercial And Industrial Properties
5-4A-6: Collection Regulations
5-4A-1: DEFINITION:
"Biodegradable paper bag" means a paper bag capable of disintegrating by
naturally occurring biological or physical processes in the environment within
a period of two (2) years after disposal, or into particles of a molecular
weight that is low when compared to the molecular weight of the original
material. (1976 Code § 8.18.020)
5-4A-2: CONTAINMENT METHOD:
Effective May 1, 1990, grass clippings and leaves, for disposal by residents,
must be contained in biodegradable paper bags or sealable containers not
exceeding fifty (50) pounds bearing the notation "Village of Berkeley Leaves
and Grass Clippings Only". (1976 Code § 8.18.010; amd. 2016 Code)
5-4A-3: INSERT PROHIBITED IN CONTAINERS:
Containers may be used for the containment of grass clippings and leaves so
long as no bag or other insert is contained within the container. (1976 Code §
8.18.040; amd. 2016 Code)
5-4A-4: PROHIBITED CONTENTS:
The biodegradable paper bags or other containers may not contain any substance
to be disposed of other than grass clippings and leaves. (1976 Code § 8.18.050;
amd. 2016 Code)
5-4A-5: MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES:
The owners and/or occupiers of multi-family, commercial or industrial
properties located within the industrial properties located within the village,
through their respective disposal contractors, shall comply with sections
5-4A-2 and
5-4A-3 of this article. (1976 Code § 8.18.060)
5-4A-6: COLLECTION REGULATIONS:
   A.   All refuse, garbage, debris, and leaves and grass clippings shall be
picked up and accumulated by the village as otherwise provided by the village
board in the contract with the village's selected scavenger. (1976 Code §
8.18.070; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Residential pick up of grass clippings and leaves by the village or the
agent of the village shall be accomplished on the regular day for collection in
April and ending on the last regular day for collection in November, except if
a collection date coincides with the date of a holiday. (1976 Code § 8.18.080;
amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE B. COMPOST BINS
SECTION:
5-4B-1: Definition
5-4B-2: Size And Location
5-4B-3: Nuisance Conditions Prohibited
5-4B-1: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this article, a "compost bin" means and is defined as an
outdoor area framed in wood, wire, concrete block, or any other material for
the purpose of storing grass, bush, tree or other biological growth material.
(1976 Code § 8.30.010)
5-4B-2: SIZE AND LOCATION:
A compost bin, as allowed by this article, shall not be larger than four feet
by four feet (4' x 4') in dimensions and shall be located in the rear yard area
of a given residence or residential building, but in any event not less than
twenty five feet (25') from the nearest residential building. (1976 Code §
8.30.020)
5-4B-3: NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
Nothing contained in this article shall grant or permit the creation of an
odor, sight or health nuisance by the owner of the compost bin by virtue of the
creation of a compost bin. (1976 Code § 8.30.030; amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE C. COLLECTION FROM MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES
SECTION:
5-4C-1: Definitions
5-4C-2: On Site Multi-Family Structure Recycling Program
5-4C-3: Private Scavengers
5-4C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions pertain to the management of solid waste:
MULTI-FAMILY PROPERTY: A property consisting of one or more multi-family
structures.
MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE: A building with more than two (2) residential living
units which is not included in the village of Berkeley curbside refuse,
recyclables and landscape waste collection and disposal service.
OWNER: Any person, corporation, partnership, or entity such as a condominium or
homeowners' association, jointly or severally having an ownership interest in a
multi-family property or otherwise being responsible for solid waste
collection.
PRIVATE SCAVENGER: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the removal of
solid waste, compostable material and/or recyclable material from any location
within the village of Berkeley not covered by either an exclusive collection
contract between the village of Berkeley and a contracted hauler, or a
franchise agreement between the village of Berkeley and a franchised hauler.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: A material which would otherwise be abandoned or discarded
but which can be utilized in the secondary material market.
RECYCLING: The process by which materials that would otherwise be disposed of
or discarded are collected, separated or processed and returned to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
SOURCE SEPARATION: A process that separates recyclable material from other
refuse prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials. (Ord.
95-01, 2-7-1995)
5-4C-2: ON SITE MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE RECYCLING PROGRAM:
   A.   Program Requirements:
      1.   All multi-family properties, as defined in section
5-4C-1 of this article, shall be required to institute an on site recycling
program, with collection of recyclable materials to be no less than one pick up
per week.
      2.   Said program shall be instituted by a multi-family property at the
earliest of the following two (2) occurrences:
         a.   Upon the expiration date of its current refuse collection
contract; or
         b.   By January 1, 1996.
      3.   Multi-family property owners may contract for recycling and refuse
services with a private scavenger, duly licensed by the village. Multi-family
property owners shall be billed for recycling and refuse services directly by
the private scavenger.
      4.   An acceptable recycling program shall include, but is not limited
to, the following components:
         a.   Siting and design of common area collection areas for recyclable
materials;
         b.   Recyclable materials collection;
         c.   Provision of common area recycling containers;
         d.   Data collection and reporting;
         e.   Educational campaign and materials; and
         f.   Recycling program administration and maintenance.
   B.   Specific Requirements:
      1.   Recycling Areas:
         a.   Recycling collection areas for residents shall be conveniently
located and maintained within common areas in or near the buildings, and
consist of separate containers for the purposes of temporary storage of
recyclables. Whenever possible, recycling containers should be placed adjacent
to common area solid waste collection containers.
         b.   Indoor common area collection/storage areas shall be established
in accordance with appropriate village fire and/or safety codes.
         c.   Exterior recyclables storage areas shall be established in
accordance with village requirements for solid waste enclosures.
         d.   The multi-family property owner shall maintain all recycling
areas, including the containers, in a clean, sanitary, and litter free manner.
      2.   Authorized Materials: On site multi-family structure recycling
programs are required to offer collection of a minimum of five (5) of the
following types of recyclable materials:
         Aluminum, steel, tin and bimetal cans.
         Chipboard.
         Corrugated cardboard.
         Glass bottles (3 colors).
         High grade paper.
         Junk mail.
         Magazines and catalogs.
         Miscellaneous ferrous and nonferrous scrap metals.
         Newspapers.
         PETE (#1) and HDPE (#2) plastic bottles.
         Telephone books.
      3.   Separation From Solid Waste Required: Recyclable materials must be
source separated from other solid waste prior to collection for the purpose of
recycling such materials. Separate collection containers and collection
vehicles shall be employed.
      4.   Minimum Container Capacity:
         a.   The minimum gallon amount of recycling container capacity (total
weekly base recycling container capacity) an owner shall provide weekly for
each structure shall be based on the following formula:
            7 gallons x number of studio and 1 bedroom units +
            8 gallons x number of 2 bedroom units +
            9 gallons x number of 3 bedroom or more units
            = total base weekly recycling container capacity
         b.   The weekly base recycling container capacity may be met by a
combination of container sizes and number of pick ups, such as containers
totaling half the base capacity picked up twice a week. Capacity per structure
may be shifted within the multi- family property if necessary, so long as the
total required capacity is met.
      5.   Scavenger Responsibility: The contracted private scavenger providing
the on site recycling collection service shall be responsible for furnishing,
maintaining and replacing all common area recycling containers and collection
vehicles which are deemed necessary in the recycling program. The private
scavenger shall be responsible for the collection, intermediate storage or
transfer, transportation, and sale of recyclable materials to a processor,
broker, or market desired for reuse of materials.
      6.   Notice To Residents Of Recycling Services: Multi-family property
owners shall notify residents of the availability of recycling services through
a formal and ongoing educational campaign, and shall use their best efforts to
gain and maintain participation in the program.
      7.   Unauthorized Removal Or Damage Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any unauthorized persons to remove or damage any recyclable materials placed in
designated containers, or the containers themselves. Title to recyclable
material shall pass to the private scavenger when the materials are placed into
the collection vehicle.
   C.   Implementation And Continuation Of Program Required: Implementation of
on site multi-family structure recycling programs shall be required as stated
in subsection A2 of this section. Such recycling programs shall be maintained
in effect regardless of any change of building ownership or private scavenger
service. Multi-family property owners shall be required to notify the village
in writing within thirty (30) days after a change in their choice of private
scavenger. (Ord. 95-01, 2-7-1995)
5-4C-3: PRIVATE SCAVENGERS:
   A.   Requirements To Obtain License: All private scavengers desiring to
receive a scavenger license to collect solid waste, compostable material and/or
recyclable material from multi-family properties in the village must comply
with all applicable federal, state, county and local laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations. As a condition of receiving, renewing and maintaining a
scavenger license to collect solid waste, compostable material and/or
recyclable material from multi-family properties within the village, each
licensee or applicant for such license shall:
      1.   Obtain all permits and licenses required by federal, state and
county laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and maintain the same in full
force and effect.
      2.   Submit to the village a list of the multi-family properties it
serves within the jurisdiction of the village.
      3.   Provide collection and recycling services for any multi-family
property owner that requests such services in accordance with the on site
multi-family structure recycling program requirements set forth in this
article.
      4.   Failure to comply with this subsection A shall result in a denial of
receiving, renewing or maintaining a scavenger license until such time as the
applicant complies with all provisions set forth in this subsection A.
   B.   Reporting Requirements:
      1.   Each licensed private scavenger, exclusive contractor or franchised
hauler shall submit a quarterly report to both the multi-family property owner
(s) or their designee and the village and/or its designee that contains the
following information:
         a.   Total weight or volume of refuse collected from multi-family
properties it serves within the village.
         b.   Total weight or volume of yard waste collected from multi- family
properties it serves within the village.
         c.   Total weight or volume of recyclable materials collected from
multi-family properties it serves within the village.
         d.   A summary of recycling services provided to each multi-family
property, to be submitted only on an annual basis with the fourth quarter
report.
      2.   Quarterly reports submitted to the multi-family property by the
licensed private scavenger shall only pertain to that property's activity.
      3.   Quarterly reports submitted to the village shall contain aggregate
totals concerning the information listed in subsections B1 and B2 of this
section for all multi-family properties the licensed private scavenger serves
within the jurisdiction of the village.
      4.   Reports shall be due no later than fifteen (15) days after the close
of each quarter and shall follow the format prescribed by the village. Quarters
are defined as follows:
         First quarter: January 1 through March 31
         Second quarter: April 1 through June 30
         Third quarter: July 1 through September 30
         Fourth quarter: October 1 through December 31
      5.   The information shall be considered exempt from the Illinois freedom
of information act 1  and disclosure by the village or its designee upon
assertion as to its proprietary nature by the licensed private scavenger. The
village or its designee shall only report the information in the form of
statistics and/or volume totals for all multi-family properties in the village.
No specific information on individual licenses shall be divulged.
      6.   The village and/or its designee shall have the right to inspect and
examine the licensed private scavenger's records pertaining to the collection
and disposal or processing of refuse and recyclables upon request and with
reasonable notice. The village or its designee shall further have the right to
require the reporting of other data or information relative to the recycling
program from time to time.
      7.   All such reports, data, and information, once received by the
village or its designee, shall become the property of the village to be used as
it shall determine without obligation to any person, firm or corporation.
      8.   Failure to submit any required report to the village or its designee
shall be grounds for revocation of the business license and/or franchise
agreement until such time as the licensed private scavenger or franchised
hauler complies with the requirements set forth in this subsection B. (Ord. 95-
01, 2-7-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
ARTICLE D. SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
5-4D-1: Business License Requirements
5-4D-2: License To Remove
5-4D-3: Vehicle Requirements
5-4D-4: Disposal And Storage Restrictions
5-4D-1: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required; Fee: It is unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to engage in the business of scavenger, or the disposal of animal,
human, or vegetable refuse, or offal, without having first secured a license
therefor. The annual fee for such license shall be as established in the annual
fee schedule. (1976 Code § 5.87.010; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Application For License: Applications for such licenses shall be made
to the village clerk, and shall be referred by him to the board of trustees. No
such license shall be issued except on order of the board of trustees. (1976
Code § 5.87.020; amd. 2016 Code)
5-4D-2: LICENSE TO REMOVE:
It shall be illegal for any person to remove all or any portion of any garbage,
refuse, recyclables or trash placed in any street or right of way for pick up
by the company or firm licensed by the village for the collection of same
without first having obtained a license for that purpose. (Ord. 95-19, 9-19-
1995; amd. 2016 Code)
5-4D-3: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Any vehicle used by a scavenger in his business shall be watertight and
equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for the
transportation of refuse. (1976 Code § 5.87.030)
5-4D-4: DISPOSAL AND STORAGE RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse in any place
within the village limits or within one mile therefrom, except with the
permission of the board of trustees. (1976 Code § 5.87.030)
CHAPTER 5
LITTER CONTROL
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definition
5-5-2: Public Property
5-5-3: Trucks
5-5-4: Private Property
5-5-5: Littering From Vehicles
5-5-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, "litter" includes, but is not limited to,
putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food; other putrescible waste,
including dead animals, yard clippings, and leaves; nonputrescible solid waste
(except body waste), including rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, abandoned
automobiles, solid market and industrial wastes, paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials; and all
other waste materials which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this
chapter, shall be deemed to create a danger to public health, safety, and
welfare. (1976 Code § 9.24.010)
5-5-2: PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to throw or deposit
litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place within the
village, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles.
(1976 Code § 9.24.020; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   No person, firm, or corporation shall sweep into or deposit in any
gutter, street, alley, or other public place in the village, the accumulation
of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk and
driveway.
   C.   Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk and
parkway in front of their premises free from litter. (1976 Code § 9.24.020)
5-5-3: TRUCKS:
   A.   Loads Secured: No person, firm, or corporation shall drive or cause to
be driven any truck or other vehicle within the village upon any public street
or way unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent
any load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley, or other public place.
   B.   Wheels And Tires Free Of Mud And Debris: No person shall drive or move
any vehicle or truck within the village, the wheels or tires of which carry
onto or deposit in any street, alley, or other public place any mud, dirt,
sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any kind. (1976 Code §
9.24.030)
5-5-4: PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within
the village, whether owned by such person or not; except, that the owner or
person in control of private property may maintain private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter may be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
place or upon any private property.
   B.   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, that this subsection
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection,
which receptacles shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be so constructed as to prevent the litter deposited therein from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public place or upon any private property. (1976 Code § 9.24.040)
5-5-5: LITTERING FROM VEHICLES:
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street, alley, or other public place within the village or upon
private property. (1976 Code § 9.24.020)
CHAPTER 6
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL REMOVAL AND ABATEMENT
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Authority To Remove Or Abate
5-6-3: Supervision Or Verification By Fire Chief
5-6-4: Costs
5-6-5: Nonexclusive Remedies
5-6-6: Burden Of Liability
5-6-7: Exceptions
5-6-8: Penalty
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: A. Hazardous substance or hazardous waste, as defined in
the environmental protection act 1 , as amended; or
   B.   Any substance listed in the list of toxic pollutants found in 40 CFR
401.15, as amended; or
   C.   Any of the following: explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas,
flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid,
oxidizing material, any flammable material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid,
irritating material, material that causes diseases in humans, gas under such
pressure that an explosion hazard exists, radioactive material, corrosive
material, or liquefied petroleum gas, including any substance, material, waste
or mixture designated as a hazardous material, waste or substance according to
49 CFR including:
      1.   Compressed Gas: Any substance regulated as a compressed gas by the
United States department of transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR
173.300;
      2.   Explosive: Any substance regulated as a class A or class B explosive
by the United States department of transportation by regulations found in 49
CFR 173.53 and 173.88;
      3.   Flammable Liquid: Any substance regulated as a flammable liquid by
the United States department of transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR
173.115;
      4.   Flammable Solid: Any substance regulated as a flammable solid by the
United States department of transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR
173.150;
      5.   Oxidizer: Any substance regulated as an oxidizer by the United
States department of transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR 173.151;
      6.   Poison: Any liquid or gas that is life threatening when mixed with
air in small amounts and shall also include all those substances regulated as
poison A by the United States department of transportation by regulations found
in 49 CFR 173.326;
      7.   Radioactive Material: Any substance required by the United States
department of transportation to have type A packaging or other special
protection or closed transport vehicles under regulations found in 49 CFR
173.425;
   D.   Any material which is classified by the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) as either a flammable liquid, a class II combustible liquid
or a class IIIA combustible liquid; or
   E.   Any material which has been determined to be, by the party storing it
or having control of it, through testing or other objective means, likely to
create a significant potential or actual hazard to public health, safety or
welfare or to the environment. This definition shall not establish a
requirement to test for the purposes of this chapter.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT: Any emergency or nonemergency circumstance
involving the sudden release or threatened or potential release of hazardous
material which, in the judgment of the village or a federal or state agency or
other local agency, threatens immediate and irreparable harm to the environment
or the health, safety or welfare of any individual other than individuals
exposed to the risks associated with hazardous material in the normal course of
their employment. "Hazardous material incident" includes those incidents of
releasing or abandoning of a hazardous material, whether or not such releasing
or abandoning is found to threaten immediate and irreparable harm, or the
improper storage or possession of a hazardous material; but such term does not
include any release of a hazardous material authorized pursuant to any federal,
state or local law or regulation.
RELEASE: Any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or
disposing into the environment but excludes:
   A.   Any release which results in exposure to persons solely within a
workplace with respect to a claim which such persons may assert against the
employer of such persons;
   B.   Unlawful emissions from the engine exhaust of a motor vehicle, rolling
stock, aircraft, vessel or pipeline pumping station engine;
   C.   Release of a source, byproduct or special nuclear material from a
nuclear incident, as those terms are defined in atomic energy act of 1954, if
such release is subject to requirements with respect to financial protection
established by the nuclear regulatory commission under section 1870 of such
act; and
   D.   The normal application of fertilizer.
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The cleanup or removal of released hazardous material or
improperly stored hazardous material from the environment; such actions as may
be necessary to be taken in the event of the threat of release of hazardous
material into the environment; such actions as may be necessary to monitor,
assess and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous material, the
disposal of removed material or the taking of such other actions as may be
necessary to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or
welfare or the environment which may otherwise result from a release or threat
of release. The term includes, in addition, without being limited to, security
fencing or other measure to limit access, provision or alternative water
suppliers, temporary evacuation and housing of threatened individuals and any
emergency assistance which may be provided under the Illinois emergency
management agency act 2 , as amended. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
2 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
5-6-2: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE OR ABATE:
The village is authorized to remove or abate the effect of any hazardous
material involving the actual or threatened release, discharge or deposit upon
or onto property or facilities within the village. The following described
persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the village for the payment of
all costs incurred by the village as a result of such removal or abatement
activity:
   A.   Any person or persons whose negligent or wilful act or omission
proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit;
   B.   The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the
hazardous material at the time of such threatened or actual release, discharge
or deposit without regard to fault or proximate cause;
   C.   The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the
container or vehicle which held such hazardous material or substance at the
time of or immediately prior to such actual or threatened release, discharge or
deposit without regard to fault or proximate cause; and
   D.   Any person owning or in control of any real property from which a
hazardous material is or may be released. (2016 Code)
5-6-3: SUPERVISION OR VERIFICATION BY FIRE CHIEF:
In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon the order
of the fire chief or other village official, to remove or abate the effects of
any actual or threatened release, discharge, or deposit of hazardous material
upon or onto any property or facility within the village, the fire chief may
take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the
removal or abatement. The persons described in section
5-6-2 of this chapter shall be liable to the village for all costs incurred as
a result of such supervision or verification. (2016 Code)
5-6-4: COSTS:
Costs incurred by the village shall include, but shall not necessarily be
limited to, the following: actual labor costs of village personnel, including
benefits and administrative overhead; cost of equipment operation; cost of
materials obtained directly by the village; costs of consultants whose
expertise is required to remove or abate the incident or to assess the nature
and extent of damage done; cost of equipment operation; replacement cost of
vehicles or equipment which, in the determination of the fire chief, is
contaminated beyond reuse or repair; laboratory costs; cost of materials or
equipment obtained directly by the village; cost of any contract or mutual aid
labor and materials; and attorney fees incurred in collecting monies owed to
the village by liable parties. (2016 Code)
5-6-5: NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES:
The remedies provided by this chapter shall be in addition to any other
remedies or penalties provided by law. (2016 Code)
5-6-6: BURDEN OF LIABILITY:
This chapter shall be liberally construed to give effect to its purpose which
is to shift the burden of liability for the aforesaid removal or abatement
costs from the citizens of the village to those responsible for the incident.
(2016 Code)
5-6-7: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   There shall be no liability under this chapter for a person otherwise
liable who can establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the release
or substantial threat of release of a hazardous substance and the damages
resulting therefrom were caused solely by:
      1.   An act of God or nature;
      2.   An act of war;
      3.   An act of omission of a third party other than an employee or agent
of the defendant or other than one whose act or omission occurs in connection
with a contractual relationship, existing directly or indirectly, with the
defendant (except where the sole contractual arrangement arises from a
published tariff and acceptance for carriage by a common carrier by rail) if
the defendant establishes, by a preponderance of the evidence, that:
         a.   He exercised due care with respect to the hazardous substance
concerned taking into consideration the characteristics of such hazardous
substance in light of all relevant facts and circumstances; and
         b.   He took precautions against foreseeable acts or omissions of any
such third party and the consequences that could foreseeably result from such
acts or omissions; or
      4.   Any combination of the foregoing paragraphs.
   B.   There shall be no liability under this chapter for any release
permitted by state or federal law.
   C.   There shall be no liability under this chapter for damages as a result
of actions taken or omitted in the course of rendering care, assistance or
advice in accordance with this chapter or the national contingency plan
pursuant to the comprehensive environmental response, compensation and
liability act of 1980 (Public Law 96-510, as amended) or at the direction of
any on scene coordinator appointed under such plan with respect to an incident
creating a danger to public health or welfare or the environment as a result of
any release of a hazardous substance or a substantial threat thereof. This
subsection shall not preclude liability for damages as the result of gross
negligence or intentional misconduct on the part of such person. For the
purposes of the preceding sentence, reckless, wilful or wanton misconduct shall
constitute gross negligence.
   D.   No person may recover under the authority of this chapter for any
response costs or damages resulting from the application of a pesticide product
registered under the federal insecticide, fungicide and rodenticide act.
   E.   Nothing in this chapter shall affect or modify in any way the
obligations or liability of any person under any other provision of this
chapter or state or federal law, including common law, for damages, injury or
loss resulting from a release or substantial threat of a release of any
hazardous substance or for removal or remedial action or the costs of removal
or remedial action of such hazardous substance. (2016 Code)
5-6-8: PENALTY:
If any person who is liable for a release or substantial threat of release of a
hazardous substance fails without sufficient cause to provide removal or
remedial action upon or in accordance with a notice and request by the village
or upon or in accordance with any order of the Illinois pollution control board
or any court, such person may be liable to the village for punitive damages in
an amount at least equal to and not more than three (3) times the amount of any
costs incurred by the village as a result of such failure to take such removal
or remedial action. The punitive damages imposed shall be in addition to any
costs recovered from such person pursuant to this chapter and in addition to
any other penalty or relief provided by the act or any other law. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 7
BURNING RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Fires And Outdoor Burning Generally
5-7-2: Indoor Burning
5-7-3: Permit Required
5-7-4: Prohibited Acts
5-7-5: Authority To Restrict Bonfires
5-7-6: Exemptions From Provisions
5-7-1: FIRES AND OUTDOOR BURNING GENERALLY:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    CLEAN LUMBER: Lumber that has not been painted, varnished, or coated with
similar material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives, and does
not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.
   DRY SEASONED FIREWOOD: Wood cut that has dried for more than six (6) months
with darkened ends and cracks or visible splits that has a moisture content of
less than twenty five percent (25%).
   MANUFACTURED FIRE LOG: Those manufactured wood products that are designed
for burning in fireplaces.
   OUTDOOR FIREPLACE: An outdoor structure made of stone, brick, or metal,
commercially designed for outdoor burning, used principally for aesthetic or
recreational enjoyment and/or heating including a patio wood burning unit.
   PATIO WOOD BURNING UNIT: A chimenea, patio warmer, or other portable wood
burning device.
   B.   Burning Prohibited: Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful to
burn anywhere in the village any garbage, refuse, or landscape waste or lumber
that is not clean.
   C.   Fires And Burning Permitted:
      1.   Burning is permitted in an outdoor fireplace or cooking unit
(barbecue grill) only if:
         a.   The fuel used is charcoal, natural or propane gas, dry seasoned
firewood, clean lumber, or a manufactured fire log.
         b.   The fireplace or cooking unit is under the supervision of an
adult at all times during use.
         c.   The fire shall be entirely extinguished prior to leaving the
fireplace or cooking unit unattended.
         d.   The manufacturer's installation, operating, and safety
instructions shall be followed.
         e.   The fireplace shall be located at least ten feet (10') from the
nearest structure which is not on the same property as the fireplace.
         f.   The fire shall be maintained in such a manner as to minimize the
generation of smoke, fumes, fly ash, or soot which shall not cause a nuisance
to neighbors.
         g.   All fires in a fireplace are prohibited during the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
         h.   Fire, police, and code enforcement officials are authorized to
order the extinguishment or extinguish burning in violation of this section.
      2.   Open burning is allowed for fire suppression training by the village
fire department.
      3.   Open burning is allowed for prescribed burns to meet land or habitat
management objectives by a permit issued by the village administrator;
provided, that it shall not be detrimental to the public's health and safety in
the village.
      4.   Open burning is allowed for special requests by school,
governmental, and other institutions by permit issued by the village
administrator; provided, that it shall not be detrimental to the public's
health and safety in the village. (2016 Code)
5-7-2: INDOOR BURNING:
No person, firm, corporation, or entity shall burn any trash, paper, rubbish or
garbage anywhere indoors in the village except in an incinerator complying with
all applicable laws and ordinances. (2016 Code)
5-7-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire that contains wood or
rubbish or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any public or
private real property without first obtaining a permit from the village fire
chief or his/her designee.
   B.   There shall be no charge for the permit.
   C.   During construction or demolition of buildings or structures, no waste
materials or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the premises or in the
immediate vicinity without having obtained a permit from the village fire chief
or his/her designee. (2016 Code)
5-7-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Open Burning Of Leaves: The open burning of leaves within the village
limits is prohibited.
   B.   Fires Near Buildings, On Public Ways: It shall be unlawful to build or
light any bonfire so close to any structure as to endanger such building or
structure or on any public street or sidewalk pavement. Determination of a
danger shall be made by the village fire chief or his/her designee. (2016 Code)
5-7-5: AUTHORITY TO RESTRICT BONFIRES:
The chief of the fire department or his/her designee may prohibit any and all
bonfires when conditions or circumstances make such fires hazardous in his/her
sole determination. (2016 Code)
5-7-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the use of wood in stoves
used for cooking, the use of wood in fireplaces or decorative fires or the use
of wood in fireplaces or stoves designed for heating. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 8
PEST CONTROL
SECTION:
5-8-1: Extermination By Owner Required
5-8-2: Extermination By Village; Costs A Lien
5-8-3: Priority Liens On Abandoned Property
5-8-1: EXTERMINATION BY OWNER REQUIRED:
Upon receipt of notice in writing from the county health official or building
official, the owner, agent, or occupant in charge of any building, structure or
premises specified in such notice shall take immediate measures for the pest
extermination of such building or structure and for freeing the premises of all
pests, and unless said work is completed in the time specified in the notice,
in no event to be less than fifteen (15) days, or any written extension thereof
that may be granted by the county health official or building official, then
the owner, agent, or occupant in charge of said building, structure or premises
is guilty of a violation of this chapter. (1976 Code § 8.20.010; amd. 2016
Code)
5-8-2: EXTERMINATION BY VILLAGE; COSTS A LIEN:
Whenever the owner, agent or occupant in charge of any building, structure or
premises, after being served with notice as provided in section
5-8-1 of this chapter, has failed, within the time fixed in the notice, to
perform all work necessary to prevent the ingress of pests to said building or
structure or to exterminate pests from the premises described in said notice,
the county health official or building official or person duly authorized by
them may go on the premises and do such work as is necessary to free said
premises from pests and to maintain said premises in a pest exterminated
condition. The cost and expense incurred for all work and materials shall be
charged to and collected from the owners and persons interested in said
premises, and the village or persons performing such work or furnishing such
materials therefor shall have a lien on said premises and may enforce the same
as provided by statute. (1976 Code § 8.20.010; amd. 2016 Code)
5-8-3: PRIORITY LIENS ON ABANDONED PROPERTY:
   A.   From and after March 1, 2010, any action taken by the village under
this chapter on property that is abandoned shall be subject to the priority
lien provisions set forth in this section.
   B.   The village must file a lien within one year of the date for actions
taken under this chapter for any abandoned property, which lien shall include a
sworn statement that specifically sets forth the following:
      1.   A description of the abandoned property.
      2.   Cost and expense incurred by the village taking action under this
chapter.
      3.   Date or dates of action taken under this chapter.
      4.   Reference that the actions taken under this chapter were done
pursuant to authority granted in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-8.
   C.   In furtherance of its authority under this section, the village clerk
will maintain a record for each property for which a lien has been filed under
this section that will include the following:
      1.   Dated statement of a finding that the property was abandoned.
      2.   Date when the property was first observed to be vacant.
      3.   Description of the actions taken by the village to contact the legal
owner of the property and a statement that no contacts were made with the legal
owner.
      4.   Dated certification by a municipal official of the necessity and
specific nature of the work performed.
      5.   Copy of the agreement with the person or company performing the work
including the rates and estimated cost of the work.
      6.   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work.
      7.   A statement as to whether the work was competitively bid and, if so,
a copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 9
TOPOGRAPHY ALTERATION
SECTION:
5-9-1: Permit Required; Fee
5-9-2: Rendering Or Sketch Required
5-9-3: Cash Bond Required
5-9-4: Violation
5-9-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
A person desiring to place landfill on a parcel of real estate within the
village which may potentially change the topography of said parcel shall first
secure a permit from the village allowing for the deposit of landfill of any
nature. There shall be a nonrefundable fee for the permit as established by the
annual fee schedule, payable at the time of application. (1976 Code §
12.36.010; amd. 2016 Code)
5-9-2: RENDERING OR SKETCH REQUIRED:
   A.   The person must present to the village a topography rendering or sketch
depicting the existing contours of the entire site to be affected and all
adjoining parcels within one hundred feet (100') thereof and the proposed
contours resulting from the addition of any landfill.
   B.   The rendering or sketch shall be done at a scale which is easily
legible and shall include property lines, structures, driveways, sidewalks,
easements and similar items, including dimensions of each. The proposed
rendering or sketch view must indicate the point at which stormwater runoff
will exist on the site and evidencing that there will be no effect on adjacent
properties.
   C.   The rendering or sketch shall include the name and address of the
property owner, the address of the property being altered by the addition of
landfill and the addresses of adjacent properties one hundred feet (100') in
each direction thereof. (1976 Code § 12.36.020)
5-9-3: CASH BOND REQUIRED:
The person shall post with the office of the village clerk a cash bond in an
amount established by the village engineer to guarantee and assure compliance
with the terms and conditions stated herein. Upon completion of the landfill
deposits and alterations, presuming that the person has otherwise complied with
all terms and conditions hereof and has not caused an adverse effect to
adjacent properties, said bond shall be refunded by the village clerk to the
person. (1976 Code § 12.36.030; amd. 2016 Code)
5-9-4: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to add or deposit landfill on any real
estate parcel within the village which would result in the alteration of the
topography of the site to a degree where adjacent properties will be adversely
affected or potentially adversely affected from water runoff, drainage matters
or otherwise. (1976 Code § 12.36.040; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 10
SMOKE FREE AIR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-10-1: Title And Purpose
5-10-2: Definitions
5-10-3: Prohibitions
5-10-4: Designation Of Other Nonsmoking Areas
5-10-5: No Retaliation
5-10-6: Notices And Signs
5-10-7: Removal Of Smoking Paraphernalia Required
5-10-8: Exemptions
5-10-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter may be cited as the BERKELEY SMOKE FREE AIR ACT, the purpose of
which is to protect public places and places of employment and within fifteen
feet (15') of all certain public entrances to such places, to protect open air
public dining areas and, within fifteen feet (15') of such areas, to protect
certain unenclosed public places including school grounds, parks and recreation
areas, and outdoor areas to ensure that nonsmokers may breathe air free from
the hazardous effects of secondhand smoke. (2016 Code)
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS: A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or any other means including, but not by way of limitation, what is
commonly referred to as e-cigarettes. "Alternative nicotine product" excludes
cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products and any product
approved by the United States food and drug administration as a nontobacco
product for sale as a tobacco cessation, as a tobacco dependence product, or
for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.
BAR/TAVERN: An establishment that has a Berkeley liquor license for the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, and that derives no more than
ten percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the
premises. Each bar/tavern shall provide such documentation as may be requested
by the village clerk to enable it to determine whether the establishment meets
the percentage requirement of this definition.
BUSINESS: Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
association, or other business entity within the village, whether formed for
profit or nonprofit purposes, and religious corporations.
CLUB: A private not for profit association, corporation, or other entity within
the village that consists of bona fide paying members and that owns, leases, or
uses a building or portion thereof, the use of which is restricted primarily to
those members and their guests.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed in the village by an employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who
volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity and the owner or operator
of a sole proprietorship or other similar business entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
OPEN AIR DINING AREA: A seating area within the village open to the air that is
accessory to a restaurant, hotel, cafeteria, club, or other public place
engaged in purveying commercial food or beverage service where members of the
public, members, or guests are invited to sit and receive food and beverage
service for a consideration, including beer gardens.
OUTDOOR EVENT: A scheduled outdoor musical, dance, theatrical, dramatic,
entertainment, or similar performance or event or a scheduled outdoor community
fair, event, or market within the village that is organized, licensed, or
permitted by the owner to which the public is invited.
OUTDOOR VENUE: An outdoor theater, amphitheater, plaza, street, or other
improved area that is used as a public venue or forum to which the general
public is invited to listen, view, or otherwise participate in an outdoor event
that is organized, licensed, or permitted by the owner within the village.
PARK: A public park or recreation area within the village that is open to and
used by the general public.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer
that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of
employment, including minimum distance, as set forth herein, of fifteen feet
(15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that
serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas;
restrooms; conference rooms and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and
other common areas. A private residence or home based business, unless used to
provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social
service care on the premises, is not a "place of employment", nor are enclosed
laboratories, not open to the public, in an accredited university or government
facility where the activity of smoking is exclusively conducted for the purpose
of medical or scientific health related research.
PRIVATE CLUB: A. A not for profit association that:
      1.   Has been in active and continuous existence for at least three (3)
years prior to February 7, 2008, whether incorporated or not;
      2.   Is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof
used exclusively for club purposes at all times;
      3.   Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic,
political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; and
      4.   Only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation.
   B.   For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization
that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a
constitution, or both, to govern its activities, and has been granted an
exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation, a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE: A. The doorway or other entrance to a public place within the
village that is open to and intended for use by the general public for ingress
and egress to the public place.
   B.   The term also means a doorway or other entrance for pedestrian ingress
and egress to a place of business or employment:
      1.   That is open to and intended for use by the general public or
business invitees as ingress and egress to the place of employment; or
      2.   Where employees are required or permitted to enter or exit the place
of employment.
PUBLIC PLACE: A. That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to
the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other
public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission,
including a minimum distance, as set forth herein, of fifteen feet (15') from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
   B.   The term does not include a private residence unless the private
residence is used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar
social service care on the premises.
   C.   The term includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants,
retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters,
libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities,
nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas,
meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling
places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and
facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the
state or state subcontractor, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed
shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions,
educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public
restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating
rinks, reception areas, and no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the
sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast,
or other similar public accommodation that is rented to guests, but excludes
private residences.
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias,
that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and a
kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for
serving elsewhere. The term includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty
percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental. The term includes an enclosed workplace that
manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco products, when, as a
necessary and integral part of the process of making, manufacturing, importing,
or distributing a tobacco product for the eventual retail sale of that tobacco
or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco
product is tested; provided, that the involved business entity: a) maintains a
specially designated area or areas within the workplace for the purpose of the
heating, burning, smoking, or lighting activities, and does not create a
facility that permits smoking throughout; b) satisfies the eighty percent (80%)
requirement related to gross sales; and c) delivers tobacco products to
consumers, retail establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of
its business. The term does not include a tobacco department or section of a
larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor,
food, or restaurant license.
SCHOOL GROUNDS: All public or private outdoor school grounds within the
village.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any
kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment. The term does not include smoking that is associated
with a native recognized religious ceremony, ritual, or activity by American
Indians that is in accordance with the federal American Indian religious
freedom act, 42 USC 1996 and 1996a.
UNENCLOSED AREA: All space in any structure or building within the village that
is open to the outdoors on at least one side including the ceiling side. (2016
Code)
5-10-3: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Enclosed Public Places:
      1.   It is unlawful to smoke in any enclosed area of any public place
located in the village.
      2.   It is unlawful for the owner or other person in control of a public
place located in the village to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area
of that public place.
   B.   Unenclosed Public Places And Outdoor Venues: It is unlawful to smoke in
the following unenclosed areas of public places:
      1.   The seating areas of all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and
amphitheaters.
      2.   Public parks and recreation areas within fifteen feet (15') of any
play area, any playground, or any scheduled activity group of any kind
including, but not limited to, a game, show, party, event, or similar activity.
      3.   School grounds, which means all public or private outdoor school
grounds within the village.
      4.   Public sidewalks within fifteen feet (15') of a public entrance, but
excluding any person who is temporarily in such area for the purpose of walking
or traversing through such area.
      5.   Public sidewalks within fifteen feet (15') of an open air dining
area, but excluding any person who is temporarily in such area for the purpose
of walking or traversing through such area.
   C.   Places Of Employment:
      1.   It is unlawful to smoke in any enclosed area of any place of
employment located in the village.
      2.   No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the
state, a political subdivision of the state, or the village.
      3.   It is unlawful for any employer or other person in control of a
place of employment located in the village to knowingly permit smoking in any
enclosed area of that place of employment.
   D.   Open Air Dining Areas:
      1.   It is unlawful to smoke in any open air dining area.
      2.   It is unlawful for the owner or other person in control of an open
air dining area to knowingly permit smoking in that open air dining area.
      3.   It is unlawful to smoke within fifteen feet (15') of an open air
dining area.
   E.   Near Entrances, Exits, Windows And Ventilation Intakes: It is unlawful
to smoke within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits,
windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where
smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure that tobacco smoke
does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other means.
   F.   Village Buildings: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or
possess a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product in the village hall
complex, the public works building and all other buildings owned by the
village. (2016 Code)
5-10-4: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the owner or other person in
control of a public place or a place of employment from further prohibiting
smoking by designating outdoor areas not subject to the restrictions in this
chapter as a place where smoking is prohibited; provided, that the owner or
such other person shall cause signs to be posted at appropriate locations
advising persons that smoking is prohibited within the designated outdoor area.
(2016 Code)
5-10-5: NO RETALIATION:
No person, business, or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any
manner retaliate against an employee or customer because that employee or
customer reports a violation of this chapter or exercises or asserts any rights
afford by this chapter. (2016 Code)
5-10-6: NOTICES AND SIGNS:
   A.   Required:
      1.   Each owner or other person in control of a public place or place of
employment shall post conspicuous "No Smoking" notices in the enclosed area and
at every entrance where smoking is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove, deface, or obscure any notice posted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Each owner or other person in control of a public park, a public
recreation area, or a school ground shall cause signs or notices to be posted
at appropriate locations advising persons where smoking is prohibited within
the park, recreation area, or school ground.
      3.   Each owner or other person in control of an outdoor venue shall
cause signs or notices to be posted at appropriate locations advising persons
where smoking is prohibited within the outdoor venue during outdoor events.
      4.   Signs prohibiting smoking shall be displayed at the entrances to all
village buildings.
   B.   Specifications: "No Smoking" signs shall have a white field with the
words "No Smoking" printed in red letters four inches (4") high with a one-half
inch (1/2") face or shall bear the international "No Smoking" symbol which
consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a circle with
a bar across it. Further, either the "No Smoking" sign or an additional sign in
red letters four inches (4") high shall state: "E-cigarette use is
prohibited.". (2016 Code)
5-10-7: REMOVAL OF SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA REQUIRED:
The owner or other person having control of an area where smoking is prohibited
shall remove all ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia intended for use
where smoking is prohibited. (2016 Code)
5-10-8: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the
following areas:
   A.   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a childcare,
adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based business open to
the public.
   B.   Retail tobacco stores in operation prior to February 7, 2008. The
retail tobacco store shall annually file with the state department of public
health by January 31 an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income
during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco,
plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for
smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that
begins operation after February 7, 2008, may only qualify for an exemption if
located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke
from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited.
   C.   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided, that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms.
   D.   Enclosed laboratories that are excluded from the definition of "place
of employment" in section
5-10-2 of this chapter.
   E.   Common smoking rooms in long term care facilities operated under the
authority of the Illinois department of veterans' affairs or licensed under the
nursing home care act that are accessible only to residents who are smokers and
have requested in writing to have access to the common smoking room where
smoking is permitted, and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the
long term care facility. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 11
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
5-11-1: Purpose And Scope
5-11-2: Definitions
5-11-3: General Prohibition
5-11-4: Specific Prohibitions
5-11-5: Exemptions
5-11-6: Enforcement
5-11-7: Penalties
5-11-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: This chapter is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the
health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the citizens of the village
through the reduction, control, and prevention of unreasonably loud and raucous
noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivity.
   B.   Scope: This chapter applies to the control of all sound originating
within the jurisdictional limits of the village. (2016 Code)
5-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent
physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating
physical trauma or property damage, whether actually caused or threatened by an
emergency, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility
service.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, or
corporation.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley,
or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled
by a government entity.
PUBLIC SPACE: Any real property or structures on real property owned by a
government entity and normally accessible to the public, including, but not
limited to, parks and other recreational areas.
RESIDENTIAL AREA: Any real property which contains a structure or building in
which one or more persons reside; provided, that the structure or building is
properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for residential use in accordance
with the terms and maps of the village zoning code. (2016 Code)
5-11-3: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
   A.   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, the
following:
      1.   Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise; or
      2.   Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the village; or
      3.   Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in
time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any persons within the
neighborhood from which said noise emanates, or as to unreasonably interfere
with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators or
customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect
such residences or places of business.
   B.   Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud and
raucous include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   The volume of the sound;
      2.   The intensity of the sound;
      3.   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
      4.   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial;
      5.   The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound
emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;
      6.   The time of day or night the sound occurs;
      7.   The duration of the sound; and
      8.   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. (2016
Code)
5-11-4: SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
The following acts are declared to be per se violations of this chapter. This
list does not constitute an exclusive list.
   A.   Radios, Televisions, Stereos, Musical Instruments And Similar Devices:
The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, television receiving set, phonograph, or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a
manner between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the
building or structure in which it is located.
   B.   Loudspeakers; Amplifiers For Advertising: The using, operating, or
permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, mobile sound vehicle, or similar
device for amplifying or reproducing of sound on the public right of way or
public space for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any building or structure.
   C.   Vehicular Noise From Audio Systems: No person shall play, use, or
operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated, any radio, tape recorder,
cassette player, or other device for receiving broadcast or reproducing
recorded sound, or any other sound amplification system if the device is
located in any motor vehicle, and if the sound generated by the device is
audible to a person, including, but not limited to, a peace officer at a
distance of seventy five feet (75') or greater.
   D.   Building Operations: The erection (including excavation), demolition,
alteration, or repair of any building or structure is prohibited other than
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.,
Monday through Saturday, except in cases of an emergency in the interest of
public health and/or safety, and then only with a permit from the village
administrator or his or her designee, which permit may be granted for a period
not to exceed three (3) days while the necessity continues, and which permit
may be renewed for periods of three (3) days while the necessity continues. The
application for said permit may be made at the time the permit for work is
awarded or during the progress of work.
   E.   Landscaping Equipment: No person shall use or operate any landscaping
power equipment including any mechanically powered saw, leaf blower, lawn
mower, hedge trimmer, grass trimmer, edger, or any other similar tool or
device, but not including snowblowers, on any residential dwelling unit in the
village or within fifty feet (50') of a residential dwelling unit property line
in the village prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and after eight o'clock (8:
00) P.M. on Mondays through Fridays, prior to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on Saturdays, and prior to nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on Sundays.
   F.   Garbage Trucks; Scavenger Services: All garbage and dumpster pick up
other than between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) P.M.
   G.   Emergency Signaling Devices: The intentional sounding or permitting the
sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device including fire and burglar
alarms, sirens, whistles, or similar emergency signaling devices, except in an
emergency or except as follows. Local, state, and federal governments are
exempt from this prohibition.
      1.   Testing of an emergency signaling device shall occur between seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Any testing shall use only
the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed five (5)
minutes or more than once in a calendar month.
      2.   Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire
alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm shall terminate within fifteen (15)
minutes of activation unless an emergency exists. If a false or accidental
activation of an alarm occurs more than twice in a calendar month, the owner or
person responsible for the alarm shall be in violation of this chapter.
   H.   Yelling, Shouting And Similar Activities: Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing in residential areas or in public places between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (2016 Code)
5-11-5: EXEMPTIONS:
Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the prohibitions set out in
section
5-11-4 of this chapter:
   A.   Sounds generated from the provision of authorized services of the
United States, the state of Illinois, the village of Berkeley, or a unit of
local government.
   B.   Repairs of utility structures which are damaged, in disrepair, or out
of service and such conditions pose a clear and immediate danger to life,
health, or significant loss of property.
   C.   Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles or other
alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity,
or imminent danger.
   D.   Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf
of the village of Berkeley, the state of Illinois, or the federal government.
   E.   Reasonable activities conducted on public or private playgrounds and
school grounds which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such
spaces are generally used including, but not limited to, school athletic and
school entertainment events.
   F.   Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, parades, festivals, and other
similar outdoor events; provided, that a permit has been obtained from the
village.
   G.   Any event that is sponsored by or sanctioned by the village or its
designee.
   H.   Sounds generated by bells, chimes, or carillons or like devices, while
being used for religious purposes or in conjunction with religious services, or
for national celebrations, seasonal contribution solicitors, or public
holidays.
   I.   Any other lawful activity which constitutes protected expression
pursuant to the first amendment of the United States constitution, but not
amplified expression. (2016 Code)
5-11-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   No person shall be charged with a violation of the provisions of this
chapter unless the complainant requests a citation be issued, except, if a
violation of prohibited noise is committed in the presence of a village police
officer or code enforcement officer, he or she shall have the authority to
issue any appropriate citation or initiate any proceedings necessary to protect
the safety or health of the public.
   B.   Should the person making or causing to be made the unlawful noise
emission be unavailable or unwilling to comply with a request to abate the
noise levels, or should the noise level, once abated, return to an excessive
level, there shall be a citation of the responsible person or persons, and the
violation shall be prosecuted as any other ordinance violation. Enforcement
personnel shall have the authority to direct the immediate termination of any
noise source determined to be excessive. (2016 Code)
5-11-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   General Penalty:
      1.   The first violation of the provisions of this chapter in a twelve
(12) month period enforced by a notice to appear or complaint shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A subsequent second violation by
the same person which occurs within twelve (12) months of a previous conviction
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) or a third or subsequent violation within twelve (12) months shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      2.   However, this section shall not be construed as requiring the
village police department to cite a person for violation of this chapter if, in
its discretion, the department determines that it is in the best interest of
the community to utilize other lawful means to gain compliance.
   B.   Alternative Penalty:
      1.   Any person, pursuant to the issuance of a ticket accused of a
violation of this chapter, may settle and compromise that ticket by paying to
the village the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) within ten (10) days from
the time such alleged violation was committed. Subsequent to said ten (10) day
period and prior to the village filing a notice to appear or complaint for said
violation, the ticket may be settled and compromised by the payment of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
      2.   The ticket issued under this subsection B shall be as a courtesy in
lieu of arrest. If the person accused of the violation does not settle the
claim, a notice to appear or complaint will be issued for that violation, and
the person shall be subject to the penalty set forth in subsection A of this
section. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 12
VACANT PROPERTIES
SECTION:
5-12-1: Registration And Maintenance Requirements
5-12-2: Securing, Boarding Up Structures
5-12-1: REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
    VACANT: A building which is lacking habitual presence of human beings who
have a legal right to be on the premises, or at which substantially all lawful
business operations or residential occupancy has ceased, or which is
substantially devoid of content. In determining whether a building is vacant,
it is relevant to consider, among other factors, the percentage of the overall
square footage of the building and the presence of rental or for sale signs on
the property; provided, that a residential property shall not be deemed vacant
if it has been used as a residence by a person entitled to possession for a
period of at least three (3) months within the previous nine (9) months, and a
person entitled to possession intends to resume residing at the property; and
further provided, that multi-family residential property containing five (5) or
more dwelling units shall be considered vacant when substantially all of the
dwelling units are unoccupied. (Ord. 09-03, 1-20-2009)
   B.   Registration Requirements:
      1.   The owner of any building that has become vacant shall, within
thirty (30) days after the building becomes vacant, file a registration
statement for each such building with the building department on forms provided
by the building department for such purposes. The registration shall remain
valid for one year from the date of registration. The owner shall be required
to annually renew the registration as long as the building remains vacant and
shall pay an annual registration fee as set by the village annual fee ordinance
for each registered building; provided, however, that religious, educational,
benevolent, or charitable associations and all governmental agencies shall be
exempt from the payment of the annual registration fee. The owner shall notify
the building department, within twenty (20) days, of any change in the
registration information by filing an amended registration statement on a form
provided by the building department for such purposes. The registration
statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein contained
in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court proceeding instituted by
the village against the owner or owners of the building.
      2.   In addition to other information required by the building
commissioner, the registration statement shall include the name, street address
and telephone number of a natural person twenty one (21) years of age or older
designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for receiving notices
of code violations and for receiving process in any court proceeding or
administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owner or owners in
connection with the enforcement of this code. By designating an authorized
agent under the provisions of this subsection, the owner is consenting to
receive any and all notices of code violations concerning the registered
building and all process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement
proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the registered
building by service of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner
who fails to register a vacant building under the provisions of this subsection
shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at the building, any
and all notices of code violations and all process in an administrative
proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the building. (Ord.
09-03, 1-20-2009; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Responsibilities Of Owner Or Manager: The owner of any building that
has become vacant, and any person maintaining, operating or collecting rent for
any building that has become vacant, shall, within thirty (30) days, do the
following:
      1.   Enclose and secure the building;
      2.   Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and the owner's authorized agent for the purpose
of service of process. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a
location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk,
whichever is nearer; and
      3.   Maintain the building in a secure and closed condition and maintain
the sign until the building is again occupied or until repair or completion of
the building has been undertaken. (Ord. 09-03, 1-20-2009)
   D.   Liability Insurance: The owner of any building that has become vacant
shall, within thirty (30) days, acquire or otherwise maintain liability
insurance in an amount of not less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for buildings designed primarily for use as residential units and
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any other building,
including, but not limited to, buildings designed for manufacturing,
industrial, storage, or commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or
any property caused by any physical condition of or in the building. Any
insurance policy acquired after the building is vacant shall provide written
notice to the building commissioner within thirty (30) days of any lapse,
cancellation or change in coverage. The owner or the owner's authorized agent
for service of process shall provide notice to the building commissioner within
thirty (30) days of any lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The owner
and the owner's authorized agent for service of process shall provide evidence
of the insurance, upon request, to the building commissioner or his or her
designee. (Ord. 09-03, 1-20-2009; amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   Rules And Regulations: The building commissioner may issue rules and
regulations for the administration of this section. These rules may designate
board up materials and methods which must be used when securing a building so
that the boarding is reasonably incapable of being removed by trespassers or
others acting without the building owner's consent.
   F.   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section or of
the rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 09-03, 1-20-2009)
5-12-2: SECURING, BOARDING UP STRUCTURES:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   Every owner or occupant of a building shall maintain all doors and
windows therein with glass or such other glazing materials as are permitted by
the village building code.
      2.   No owner or occupant of a building shall enclose nor permit the
enclosure of any door or window by enclosing or covering any door or window
with plywood, masonite, particleboard or other similar lumber product
(hereinafter "boarding up").
      3.   In lieu of boarding up, effective securing of premises shall be in
the form of a wire mesh, securely attached to the framework of either the doors
or windows so as to restrict or prohibit access to the premises. This method
shall be done in a way to create an appearance of occupancy to the premises and
reduce neighborhood blight. Wire mesh shall not be less than 23-gauge with one-
fourth inch (1/4") holes and shall be installed as one continuous piece.
   B.   Exemptions: Nothing in this section shall prohibit:
      1.   The boarding up of a building damaged by fire, tornado or other
similar catastrophe causing the building to be uninhabitable for a period not
to exceed eight (8) weeks; provided, however, the period of such permitted
boarding up may be extended by the building official. The boarding up of
windows and doors that have broken glass in an occupied building may be done
for not more than four (4) weeks.
      2.   The boarding up of the doors and windows of a building under
construction, renovation, or remodeling, by the builder thereof, until such
time as construction is complete and the building is ready for occupancy.
      3.   The chief of police, fire chief, building commissioner, building
official and/or code enforcement officials from causing a building to be
boarded up when it is otherwise authorized by law or ordinance for such
official to do so, or when the public health, safety and welfare are endangered
by the condition of any such building. (Ord. 12-20, 6-19-2012; amd. 2016 Code)
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
6-4A-1: Registration And Licensing Of Dogs
6-4A-2: Registration And Licensing Of Cats
6-4A-3: License Fees
6-4A-4: Rabies Inoculation Requirements
6-4A-5: Number Of Dogs And/Or Cats
6-4A-6: Dangerous Dogs
6-4A-7: Vicious Dogs
6-4A-8: Redemption And Disposition Of Impounded Dogs And Cats
6-4A-9: Dog Kennels
6-4A-1: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF DOGS:
   A.   Dogs, Except Dangerous Or Vicious Dogs:
      1.   Registration And License Required: Every dog, except a dangerous dog
or a vicious dog, must be registered with and licensed by the village pursuant
to this article. Any dog purchased or otherwise acquired after the effective
date hereof must be registered with and licensed by the village pursuant to
this article not later than thirty (30) days after the dog is acquired. It
shall be unlawful for any owner or person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or
have the care or custody of any dog in the village without having registered
and licensed such dog pursuant to this article.
      2.   Application For Registration And License: The application for
registration and license for all dogs shall be made to the village clerk, which
application shall include, without limitation, the following information:
         a.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and of
the owner, if different from the applicant, and the address where the dog is to
be kept.
         b.   The breed, color, sex, name, and date of rabies inoculation of
the dog to be registered.
      3.   Issuance Of Certificate And Tag; Records Kept: The village clerk
shall register the dog in the dog register book and issue a license certificate
and metal license tag to the applicant or the owner, if different from the
applicant, upon the occurrence of all of the following:
         a.   Payment of the license fee required by this article;
         b.   Presentation of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that the
dog to be registered and licensed has been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this article;
         c.   Submission of a complete application pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
      4.   Tag Description; Lost Tags: The shape and color of the tag shall be
determined by the village clerk, and each tag shall have stamped thereon the
year in which it will expire and a number corresponding with the number of the
license certificate. The replacement fee for lost or destroyed license tags
shall be as established in the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015;
amd. 2016 Code)
      5.   Term Of License: The license year shall begin on April 1 of each
year and expire on March 31 of the following year.
      6.   Nontransferability Of License: Licenses issued pursuant to this
article shall not be transferable.
      7.   Restrictions On Issuance Of License: No license shall be issued
pursuant to this article to any applicant or owner who has been declared to be
a problem pet owner pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Dangerous And Vicious Dogs:
      1.   Registration And License Required: Every dog which has previously
been designated as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog must be registered with and
licensed by the village pursuant to this article. Any dangerous dog or vicious
dog designated as such or purchased or otherwise acquired after the effective
date hereof must be registered with and licensed by the village pursuant to
this article not later than thirty (30) days after the dog is so designated or
acquired. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of any dangerous dog or vicious
dog in the village without having registered and licensed such a dangerous dog
or vicious dog pursuant to this article.
      2.   Application For Registration And License:
         a.   The application for registration and license for all dangerous
dogs and vicious dogs shall be made to the village clerk, which application
shall include, without limitation, the following information:
            (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and
of the owner, if different from the applicant, and the address where the dog is
to be kept;
            (2)   The breed, color, sex, name, and date of rabies inoculation
of the dog to be registered;
            (3)   Written evidence establishing that the dog has been altered;
            (4)   Written evidence establishing that the dog has been implanted
with a microchip with current information concerning the accurate name, address
and telephone number of the owner;
            (5)   A copy of the insurance policy or surety bond to establish
that the owner possesses and will continue to maintain the insurance coverage
required for dangerous dogs and vicious dogs pursuant to this article;
            (6)   A certificate from the owner to be filed with the village
clerk affirming that the dangerous or vicious dog is or will be confined in
compliance with this chapter as applicable, and is in compliance with any and
all other conditions that may have been imposed with respect to the dangerous
dog or vicious dog by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction;
            (7)   A written affidavit by the applicant and by the owner, if
different from the applicant, stating that the applicant and the owner: a) have
read the educational materials provided by the village concerning dog
ownership, including, without limitation, a summary of the provisions of this
chapter; and b) will comply with all provisions of this chapter.
         b.   It shall be the obligation of the applicant or the owner, if
different from the applicant, to notify the village clerk of any change to the
information required pursuant to this article at least forty eight (48) hours
before the change occurs.
      3.   Review Of Application; Grant Or Denial Of License: The village clerk
shall promptly review the application for registration and license upon receipt
of a completed application and upon payment of the license fee by the
applicant. The village clerk shall grant or deny the license application within
thirty (30) days from the date the completed application and license fee were
filed with the village clerk.
      4.   Issuance Of Certificate And Tag; Records Kept: The village clerk
shall register the dog in the dog register book and issue a license certificate
and metal license tag to the applicant or the owner, if different from the
applicant, upon the occurrence of all of the following:
         a.   Payment of the license fee required by this article;
         b.   Presentation of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that the
dog to be registered and licensed has been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this article;
         c.   Submission of a complete application pursuant to subsection B2a
of this section.
      5.   Restrictions On Issuance: No license shall be issued pursuant to
this article to any applicant or owner who has been declared to be a problem
pet owner pursuant to this chapter.
      6.   Appeals On Denial Of License:
         a.   Any applicant who is denied a license for a dangerous dog or
vicious dog may file a written appeal to the village administrator within
thirty (30) days after receipt of the written copy of the denial by certified
mail.
         b.   If the village clerk fails to grant or deny the license
application within thirty (30) days from the date of the completed application
and license fee were filed, an applicant may file a written appeal to the
village administrator within forty (40) days from the date the completed
license application and license fee were filed with the village clerk.
         c.   The village administrator, or the village administrator's
designee, shall grant or deny the appeal within twenty (20) days from the date
the appeal was received by the village administrator. The village
administrator's decision to grant or deny an appeal shall be made in accordance
with the criteria set forth in section
6-4A-6 or
6-4A-7 of this article. If the village administrator, or the village
administrator's designee, fails to grant or deny an appeal within twenty (20)
days from the date the appeal was received, the appeal shall be deemed denied.
(Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
      7.   Tag Description; Lost Tags: The shape and color of the tag shall be
determined by the village clerk, and each tag shall have stamped thereon the
year in which it will expire and a number corresponding with the number of the
license certificate. The village shall issue tags of a different shape and
color for licenses for dangerous dogs and vicious dogs. The replacement fee for
lost or destroyed license tags shall be as established in the annual fee
schedule. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
      8.   Term Of License; Required Information At End Of Term: The license
year shall begin on April 1 of each year and expire on March 31 of the
following year. The owner shall file with the village clerk within thirty (30)
days prior to the issuance of the license a certificate of a licensed
veterinarian that the dog continues to have been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this article and a copy of the insurance
policy or surety bond to establish that the owner continues to possess and will
continue to maintain the insurance coverage required for dangerous dogs and
vicious dogs pursuant to this article, as applicable.
      9.   Nontransferability Of License: Licenses issued pursuant to this
article shall not be transferable.
      10.   Revocation Of License: Any license issued under this article may be
revoked by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction after notice
and hearing for fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a license, for violation of the provisions of this chapter, or
for violation of any other applicable requirements of law. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-
2015)
6-4A-2: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF CATS:
   A.   Registration And License Required: Every cat, except a feral cat, that
is more than four (4) months of age must be registered with and licensed by the
village pursuant to this article. Any cat purchased or otherwise acquired after
the effective date hereof must be registered with and licensed by the village
pursuant to this article not later than thirty (30) days after the cat is
acquired. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of any cat, except a feral cat,
in the village without having registered and licensed such cat pursuant to this
article.
   B.   Application For Registration And License: The application for
registration and license shall be made to the village clerk, which application
shall include, without limitation, the following information:
      1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and of the
owner, if different from the applicant, and the address where the cat is to be
kept;
      2.   The breed, color, sex, name, and date of rabies inoculation of the
cat to be registered.
   C.   Issuance Of Certificate And Tag; Records Kept: The village clerk shall
register the cat in the cat register book and issue a license certificate and
metal license tag to the applicant or the owner, if different from the
applicant, upon the occurrence of all of the following:
      1.   Payment of the license fee required by this article;
      2.   Presentation of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that the
cat to be registered and licensed has been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this article;
      3.   Submission of a complete application pursuant to this article. (Ord.
15-08, 1-20-2015)
   D.   Tag Description; Lost Tags: The shape and color of the tag shall be
determined by the village clerk, and each tag shall have stamped thereon the
year in which it will expire and a number corresponding with the number of the
license certificate. The replacement fee for lost or destroyed license tags
shall be as established in the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015;
amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   Term Of License: The license year shall begin on April 1 of each year
and expire on March 31 of the following year.
   F.   Nontransferability Of License: Licenses issued pursuant to this article
shall not be transferable.
   G.   Restrictions On Issuance Of License: No license shall be issued
pursuant to this article to any applicant or owner who has been declared to be
a problem pet owner pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4A-3: LICENSE FEES:
Fees for licenses required hereunder shall be as follows:
   A.   An annual fee shall be due and payable between March 1 and April 1 of
each year, or within thirty (30) days of acquiring a new animal. A fee as
established in the annual fee schedule shall be paid for issuance of each dog
or cat license. (Proof of altering the animal is required within 30 days or the
fees shall increase as indicated in the annual fee schedule.) The village clerk
will only issue a license upon presentation of evidence satisfactory that such
animal has been spayed or neutered. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   No fee shall be required for dogs and/or cats owned, kept, impounded,
or maintained by shelters, pounds, kennels, pet shops, petting zoos, veterinary
hospitals, or local governmental units, or for guide dogs; provided, that such
animals shall, in all other respects, comply with this chapter.
   C.   No refunds shall be made on any license fee because of death of the
animal or the owner leaving the village before expiration of the license
period. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4A-4: RABIES INOCULATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   Every dog that is more than six (6) months of age or cat that is
more than four (4) months of age must be currently inoculated against rabies by
a licensed veterinarian. The type and brand of the antirabic vaccine used and
the method of inoculation must be recognized and approved by the department of
agriculture of the state of Illinois and the United States department of
agriculture. The vaccine may be administered annually, or if the dog or cat is
over twelve (12) months of age at the time of inoculation, the interval between
inoculations may be extended for three (3) years. The exception to this
subsection will be determined by a licensed veterinarian for animals whose
lives would be endangered by the vaccination "due to disease, age or other
considerations that a veterinarian can verify and document", as determined by a
licensed veterinarian on an annual basis.
      2.   Any dog or cat that is found not to be currently inoculated against
rabies after the dog or cat has been found in violation of subsection A1 of
this section by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction is
declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded by
any police officer or the animal control officer.
   B.   Collar And Tag:
      1.   The owner of each dog of more than six (6) months of age and each
cat of more than four (4) months of age that is housed within the corporate
limits of the village must provide such dog or cat with a sturdy collar to
which the rabies inoculation tag issued by the county and village license tag
shall be securely fastened. It shall be the owner's duty to make certain that
the collar and tags are worn by the dog or cat at all times when off of the
owner's premises.
      2.   The owner of each dangerous dog or vicious dog that is housed within
the corporate limits of the village must provide such dog with a sturdy collar
to which the rabies inoculation tag issued by the county and to which the
license tag issued by the village shall be securely fastened. It shall be the
owner's duty to make certain that the collar and tags are worn by the dangerous
dog or vicious dog at all times.
   C.   Unauthorized Removal Of Tags: It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than a police officer or the animal control officer, to remove a rabies
inoculation tag or license tag from any dog or cat without the permission of
the owner of the dog or the owner's agent. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4A-5: NUMBER OF DOGS AND/OR CATS:
No person shall permit more than four (4) dogs and/or four (4) cats to be kept
in or about any single-family residence within the village. This section shall
apply only to dogs over three (3) months of age and cats over four (4) months
of age. When circumstances dictate removal of any dogs or cats to assure
compliance with this section, the animal control officer or other village
personnel shall apply to the hearing officer or to the circuit court having
jurisdiction seeking an order of removal. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4A-6: DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Designation Of Dangerous Dog: A dog shall be designated as a dangerous
dog when the hearing officer or a court having jurisdiction, at the request of
the police department, has conducted an evidentiary hearing, heard and
considered evidence pertaining to the temperament of the dog, and has entered
an order determining that the dog has behaved in the manner described in
subsection 6-4-3D of this chapter and designating the dog as a dangerous dog.
The hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction, upon designating a dog as
a dangerous dog, shall enter a written order requiring that, in addition to the
payment of the penalties provided in this chapter, the owner shall comply with
the registration and license requirements in section 6-4A-1B of this article
and shall comply with each and all of the restrictions set forth in subsection
B of this section.
   B.   Restrictions On Dangerous Dogs: It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a dangerous dog within the
village except upon compliance with each and all of the following restrictions
at the expense of the owner:
      1.   Confinement: The dangerous dog must be confined as follows:
         a.   A dangerous dog on private premises must be kept indoors or
outdoors either:
            (1)   Within an enclosure;
            (2)   Within a fully fenced yard enclosed on all sides by secure
fencing;
            (3)   Within a fully fenced yard enclosed on all sides by fencing
that is at least four feet (4') in height and locks securely, and the dangerous
dog is securely muzzled with a muzzle in a manner that will prevent it from
biting any person or animal, but that will not injure the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration;
            (4)   The dangerous dog is tethered in compliance with the
requirements set forth in section
6-4-7 of this chapter, the dangerous dog is supervised by an adult at least
eighteen (18) years of age, and the dog is securely muzzled with a muzzle in a
manner that will prevent it from biting any person or animal but that will not
injure the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration; or
            (5)   The dangerous dog is on a leash while supervised by an adult
at least eighteen (18) years of age and the dog is securely muzzled with a
muzzle in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person or animal but
that will not injure the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
         b.   A dangerous dog on public premises must be directly controlled
and supervised by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age. Such control
and supervision shall require, at a minimum, that the dog be:
            (1)   Restrained on a nonretractable leash no longer than six feet
(6'); and
            (2)   Securely muzzled with a muzzle in a manner that will prevent
it from biting any person or animal, but that will not injure the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.
      2.   Evaluation And Training: The owner of a dangerous dog must cause to
be completed, no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the designation
of the dog as a dangerous dog, both: a) an evaluation of the dangerous dog by a
certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or
another recognized expert in the field of dog behavior; and b) obedience
training or other training or treatment of the dangerous dog as deemed
appropriate by the behaviorist or expert.
      3.   Altering And Microchipping: A dangerous dog must be altered and
microchipped at the owner's expense, if not already altered and microchipped,
within fourteen (14) days after the designation of the dog as a dangerous dog.
      4.   Insurance Coverage: Within fourteen (14) days after the designation
of a dog as a dangerous dog, the owner of the dangerous dog must obtain and
maintain and provide the village with satisfactory evidence of liability
insurance coverage in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), which coverage includes, without limitation, coverage for animal
bites. In lieu of liability insurance, the owner of a dangerous dog may obtain
a surety bond in the value of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
      5.   Notice Of Designation: No owner shall sell, transfer, or otherwise
place a dangerous dog in the permanent possession of any other person,
including, without limitation, any animal shelter, without first notifying that
person that the dog has been designated a dangerous dog pursuant to this
section and notifying the jurisdiction to which the dog will be transferred of
the dog's designation as a dangerous dog pursuant to this section.
   C.   Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a dangerous dog within the
corporate limits of the village unless the dog is kept and maintained in
compliance with this chapter and with the order entered by the hearing officer
or the court having jurisdiction. Upon finding that a dangerous dog has not
been so kept or maintained, the hearing officer or court having jurisdiction
may, in addition to requiring the payment of the penalties provided in this
chapter, order that the license issued for the dangerous dog pursuant to
subsection 6-4A-1B of this article be revoked, that the dangerous dog be
altered and microchipped at the owner's expense, if not already altered and
microchipped, and be permanently removed from the corporate limits of the
village within fourteen (14) days, with the owner of the dangerous dog being
responsible for all fees and costs incurred or charged by the village or the
animal control facility utilized by the village in caring for the dangerous dog
and the altering and microchipping prior to its removal from the corporate
limits.
   D.   Unlawful Return Of Dangerous Dog To Village: It shall be unlawful for
any person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a
dangerous dog within the corporate limits of the village after such a dangerous
dog has been ordered permanently removed from the corporate limits of the
village. Upon finding that a dangerous dog has been kept, maintained or
returned to the corporate limits of the village after having been ordered
permanently removed from the corporate limits of the village, the hearing
officer or court having jurisdiction may, in addition to requiring the payment
of penalties provided in this chapter, order that the dangerous dog be humanely
destroyed.
   E.   Public Nuisance: Any dangerous dog that is not kept and maintained in
accordance with the order entered by the hearing officer or the court having
jurisdiction is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended
and impounded upon the order of the animal control officer or chief of police.
The impoundment may, at the discretion of the chief of police, continue through
any subsequent investigation of the police department and any subsequent
determination of the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction.
   F.   Dangerous Dogs From Other Jurisdictions: Any person desiring to bring a
dog to live in the village that has been previously declared within another
jurisdiction to have behaved in a dangerous manner or a similar manner, or has
been designated within another jurisdiction as a dangerous dog or any similar
designation, must notify the police department of such declaration or
designation prior to moving the dog into the village. Upon moving the dog into
the village, the dog will be considered a dangerous dog pursuant to this
article, and the owner shall comply with the registration and license
requirements in subsection 6-4A-1B of this article and shall comply at all
times with each and every other requirement and restriction established in this
chapter pertaining to dangerous dogs, including, without limitation, the
restrictions set forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4A-7: VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   Designation Of Vicious Dog: A dog shall be designated as a vicious dog
when the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction, at the request of
the police department, has conducted an evidentiary hearing, heard and
considered evidence pertaining to the temperament of the dog, and entered an
order determining that the dog has behaved in the manner described in
subsection 6-4-3E of this chapter and designating the dog as a vicious dog. A
dog previously designated as a dangerous dog pursuant to subsection 6-4A-6A of
this article that is found by the hearing officer or the court having
jurisdiction to have behaved in a dangerous manner for a second time may be
designated as a vicious dog by the hearing officer or the court having
jurisdiction without evidence that the dog has behaved in a vicious manner. The
hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction, upon designating a dog as a
vicious dog, shall enter into a written order requiring that, in addition to
the payment of the penalties provided under this chapter, the owner shall
comply with the registration and license requirements in subsection 6-4A-1B of
this article and with each and all of the restrictions set forth in subsection
B of this section.
   B.   Restrictions On Vicious Dogs: It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep a
vicious dog within the village except upon compliance with each and all of the
following restrictions at the expense of the owner:
      1.   Confinement: The vicious dog must be confined as follows:
         a.   A vicious dog on private premises must be kept indoors or within
an enclosure at all times.
         b.   A vicious dog shall only be allowed outdoors and outside of an
enclosure if:
            (1)   The dog is securely muzzled with a muzzle in a manner that
will prevent it from biting any person or animal, but that will not injure the
dog or interfere with its vision or respiration and is restrained on a
nonretractable leash no longer than six feet (6'), or in the alternative, the
vicious dog is transported in a secure temporary enclosure;
            (2)   Is under the direct control and supervision of the owner or
other adult at least eighteen (18) years of age at all times; and
            (3)   The release is:
               (A)   Necessary for veterinary care for the dog;
               (B)   Pursuant to a sale or other change of ownership that
results in the removal of the vicious dog from the corporate limits of the
village;
               (C)   Pursuant to the immediate transfer of the vicious dog to
another enclosure; or
               (D)   Necessary for compliance with an order of the hearing
officer or the court having jurisdiction.
      2.   Required Signage: The owner of any dog found to be a vicious dog
must display in a prominent place on the premises where the vicious dog is
confined, and at each entrance to any outdoor enclosure where the dog is kept,
clearly visible signage stating that a vicious dog is kept on the premises.
Each such sign shall be a noncombustible material, weather resistant and one
foot by one foot (1' x 1') in size with text not less than one inch (1") in
height. The text of such sign shall read:
WARNING: VICIOUS DOG KEPT ON THE PREMISES
      3.   Evaluation And Training: The owner of a vicious dog must cause to be
completed, no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the designation of
the dog as a vicious dog, both: a) an evaluation of the vicious dog by a
certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or
another recognized expert in the field; and b) obedience training or other
training or treatment of the vicious dog as deemed appropriate by the
behaviorist or expert.
      4.   Altering And Microchipping: A vicious dog must be altered and
microchipped at the owner's expense, if not already altered and microchipped,
within fourteen (14) days after the designation of the dog as a vicious dog.
      5.   Insurance Coverage: Within fourteen (14) days after the designation
of a dog as a vicious dog, the owner of the vicious dog must obtain and
maintain, and provide the village with satisfactory evidence of liability
insurance coverage in the amount of at least five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00), which coverage includes, without limitation, coverage for animal
bites. In lieu of liability insurance, the owner of a vicious dog may obtain a
surety bond in the value of at least five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).
      6.   Notice Of Designation: No owner shall sell, transfer, or otherwise
place a vicious dog in the permanent possession of any other person, including,
without limitation, any animal shelter, without first notifying that person
that the dog has been designated a vicious dog pursuant to this section and
notifying the jurisdiction to which the dog will be transferred of the dog's
designation as a vicious dog pursuant to this section.
   C.   Failure To Comply:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess,
maintain or have the care or custody of a vicious dog within the corporate
limits of the village unless the dog is kept and maintained in compliance with
this article and with the order entered by the hearing officer or the court
having jurisdiction. Upon finding that a vicious dog has not been so kept or
maintained, the hearing officer or court having jurisdiction may, in addition
to requiring the payment of the penalties provided in this chapter, order that
the license issued for the vicious dog pursuant to subsection 6-4A-1B of this
article be revoked and order:
         a.   That the vicious dog be altered and microchipped at the owner's
expense, if not already altered and microchipped, and be permanently removed
from the corporate limits of the village within fourteen (14) days, with the
owner of the vicious dog being responsible for all fees and costs incurred or
charged by the village or the animal control facility utilized by the village
in caring for the vicious dog and the altering and microchipping prior to its
removal from the corporate limits; or
         b.   That the vicious dog be humanely destroyed; except, that the
hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction shall not order the humane
destruction of the vicious dog if the owner of the vicious dog provides the
hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction with written proof that:
            (1)   The vicious dog will be placed in an animal shelter outside
of the village that has been notified of the dog's designation as a vicious dog
under this section and has consented to the shelter and care of the vicious
dog;
            (2)   The animal shelter will accept the vicious dog and the owner
is willing to pay all expenses for transporting the vicious dog to the animal
shelter; and
            (3)   The owner has informed the animal control authority in the
jurisdiction to which the animal is being relocated of the dog's designation as
a vicious dog under this section and the animal control authority, if required
by law, has consented to the relocation.
      2.   If the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction orders the
permanent removal of the vicious dog pursuant to subsection C1a of this
section, the owner must, within fourteen (14) days of the order to remove the
dog from the corporate limits of the village, provide written evidence to the
village that the owner has informed the person(s) to whom the dog has been
relocated of the dog's designation as a vicious dog under this section and that
person(s) has consented to the shelter and care of the dog, and has informed
the animal control authority in the jurisdiction to which the animal is being
relocated of the dog's designation as a vicious dog under this section and the
animal control authority has consented to the relocation.
   D.   Unlawful Return Of Vicious Dog To Village: It shall be unlawful for any
person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a
vicious dog within the corporate limits of the village after such a vicious dog
has been ordered permanently removed from the corporate limits of the village.
Upon finding that a vicious dog has been kept, maintained or returned to the
corporate limits of the village after having been ordered permanently removed
from the corporate limits of the village, the hearing officer or court having
jurisdiction may, in addition to requiring the payment of penalties provided in
this chapter, order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed.
   E.   Public Nuisance: Any vicious dog that is not confined in accordance
with this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
impounded by any law enforcement authority having jurisdiction and permanently
removed from the corporate limits of the village.
   F.   Vicious Dogs From Other Jurisdictions: Any person desiring to bring a
dog to live in the village that has been previously declared within another
jurisdiction to have behaved in a vicious manner or a similar manner, or has
been designated within another jurisdiction as a vicious dog or any similar
designation, must notify the police department, prior to moving the dog into
the village, of such declaration or designation. Upon moving the dog into the
village, the dog will be considered as a vicious dog pursuant to this article,
and the owner shall comply with the registration and license requirements in
subsection 6-4A-1B of this article and shall comply at all times with each and
every requirement and restriction established in this chapter pertaining to
vicious dogs, including, without limitation, the restrictions set forth in
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4A-8: REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS:
   A.   Notice To Owners Of Impoundment: When dogs or cats are apprehended and
impounded, they shall be scanned for the presence of a microchip by the animal
control facility used by the village. The police department and/or the animal
control facility utilized by the village shall make every reasonable attempt to
contact the owner as soon as possible. The animal control facility shall give
notice of not less than seven (7) business days to the owner prior to disposal
of the animal. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the
owner. Testimony of the personnel of the animal control facility who mails such
notice, or the animal control officer, shall be evidence of the receipt of such
notice by the owner of the animal.
   B.   Redemption Procedure: Except as provided in section
6-4-3 of this chapter and sections
6-4A-6 and
6-4A-7 of this article, in case the owner of any impounded dog or cat desires
to make redemption thereof, he or she may do so by doing the following:
      1.   Presenting proof of current rabies inoculation and license
registration, if applicable.
      2.   Paying for the rabies inoculation of the dog or cat and license
registration, if applicable.
      3.   Paying the animal control facility for the board of the dog or cat
for the period it was impounded.
      4.   Paying for microchipping if not already done.
      5.   Paying for altering if required by this chapter.
   C.   Disposition Of Unclaimed Dogs Or Cats: When not redeemed by the owner,
agent or caretaker, a dog or cat must be scanned for a microchip. If a
microchip is present, the registered owner must be notified. After contact has
been made or attempted and the dog or cat has not been redeemed, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter with respect to dangerous dogs or vicious
dogs, dogs or cats deemed adoptable by the animal control facility utilized by
the village shall be offered for adoption by the animal control facility
utilized by the village, or made available to a licensed humane society or
rescue group. If no placement is available, it shall be humanely destroyed. The
animal control facility utilized by the village shall not adopt or release any
dog or cat to anyone other than the owner unless the animal has been altered
and microchipped. The animal control facility utilized by the village shall not
release dogs or cats to an individual representing a rescue group, unless the
group has been licensed or has a foster care permit issued by the Illinois
department of agriculture or is a representative of a not for profit out of
state organization. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4A-9: DOG KENNELS:
   A.   Definition: The owner of six (6) or more dogs at least two (2) months
old, whether for pleasure, profit, breeding, or exhibiting, shall be deemed the
operator of a dog kennel.
   B.   Application For License: The application for a kennel license shall
state the name and address of the owner of the kennel, the location of the
kennel, and the number of dogs proposed to be kept. No kennel shall be
established within fifty feet (50') of any dwelling house unless both the owner
and lessee of such dwelling house consent in advance in writing to the same.
(Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
   C.   Kennel Owner's Licensing Options: The owner of a dog kennel may, at
his/her option, in lieu of an individual license for each dog, procure a kennel
license to expire on March 31 next from the village clerk on application and
payment of a fee as established in the annual fee schedule. Such kennel license
shall obviate the necessity of procuring individual licenses for said dogs;
provided, that any such dogs permitted off the owner's premises must be
licensed individually; and provided further, that the vaccination provisions of
this article shall also apply to kennel dogs. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. 2016
Code)
   D.   License Tags: With each kennel license, the village clerk shall issue
an equal number of tags or checks to the number of dogs authorized to be kept
in the kennel, such tags bearing the number of the kennel license. Each dog
shall wear said tag in lieu of an individual license tag.
   E.   Posting License: Each license shall be posted conspicuously on the
premises where the kennel is located. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
   F.   Transfer Of License: The kennel license is not transferable except on
application by both the old and the new owners and payment to the village clerk
of a transfer fee as established in the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-
2015; amd. 2016 Code)
   G.   Sanitary Conditions; Restraint Of Noisy Dogs: Dog kennels shall be kept
at all times in a clean and sanitary condition, and dogs shall be reasonably
restrained from annoying the neighborhood or the general public by loud,
frequent, or habitual barking, yelping, or howling. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Department Created; Composition
6-1-2: Chief Of Police
6-1-3: Deputy Chief Of Police
6-1-4: Rank Of Officers
6-1-5: Appointment Of Police Officers; Oath Of Office
6-1-6: Commissions, Promotions And Discharges
6-1-7: General Duties Of Members
6-1-8: Conduct Of Members
6-1-9: Serving Process
6-1-10: Serve As Witnesses; Fees
6-1-11: Salaries And Pensions
6-1-12: Rules And Regulations
6-1-13: Part Time Police
6-1-14: Auxiliary Citizen Police
6-1-15: Obedience To Police Required
6-1-16: Criminal History Records
6-1-17: Bail Bond Administration Fee
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION:
   A.   There is hereby created a police department, referred to in this
chapter as the "department". The department shall consist of a chief of police,
a deputy chief and such number of commanders, sergeants, patrol officers,
dispatchers, records clerks and any other special officers as may from time to
time be provided by the village president, with the advice and consent of the
village board of trustees, and as budgeted for by the board of trustees.
   B.   The deputy chief and commanders may be appointed from any rank of
sworn, full time officers of the department, but must have at least five (5)
years of full time service as a police officer in the department. A deputy
chief and commanders shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and,
if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank previously held, without
regard as to whether a vacancy exists in that rank. A deputy chief or commander
having been appointed from any rank of sworn full time officers shall be
permitted, regardless of rank, to take promotional exams and be promoted to a
higher classified rank than he currently holds without having to resign as a
deputy chief or commander. (2016 Code)
6-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
chief of police. The village president, with the consent of the board of
trustees, shall appoint the chief of police for the village.
   B.   General Duties: The chief shall be in charge of all activities of the
police department, subject to all then existing ordinances of the village,
state and federal law and actions taken by the board of trustees. The chief
shall cause the public peace to be preserved and shall see that all laws and
ordinances are enforced. The chief shall superintend and direct the officers of
the police department generally and from time to time give such directions and
prescribe such rules and regulations and policies and procedures for the
conduct and guidance of the members of the police department as the chief may
deem proper and necessary for the preservation of the peace and good order and
enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the village. The chief shall instruct
all police officers concerning their duties and see that a record is kept of
all complaints made and arrest tickets issued, and shall make a report once a
month at the regular meeting of the board of trustees concerning the affairs of
the police department. (2016 Code)
6-1-3: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of deputy chief of
police. The deputy chief of police shall be a rank immediately below that of
chief of police.
   B.   Appointment: The chief of police shall have the power of appointment of
the deputy chief of police, without the advice or consent of the board of fire
and police commissioners, in accordance with the following guidelines:
      1.   During such time as the village contains fewer than one hundred
thirty thousand (130,000) inhabitants and employs fewer than twenty five (25)
full time police officers, the chief of police may appoint one deputy chief of
police.
      2.   The deputy chief shall be appointed from any rank of sworn, full
time officers of the village police department; provided, that said appointee
has at least five (5) years of full time service with the village police
department prior to appointment.
   C.   Term Of Service; Removal And Promotions: The deputy chief of police
shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be removed from
the position of deputy chief of police at any time by the chief. During service
as deputy chief, the officer shall be permitted to take promotional exams and
be promoted to a higher classified rank than the officer currently holds,
without having to resign as deputy chief. If removed from the position of
deputy chief, the officer in question shall revert to the rank currently held
by the officer, without regard as to whether a vacancy exists in that rank.
   D.   General Duties: The deputy chief shall assist the chief of police in
the performance of his duties, shall perform the duties assigned to him by the
chief of police, and shall perform the general duties of members of the village
police department. The deputy chief shall have the authority to direct and
issue orders to all employees of the department holding the rank of captain or
any lower rank. (2016 Code)
6-1-4: RANK OF OFFICERS:
The chief of police shall be the head of the department and shall have command
and supervision over all officers and members thereof. Following him in rank
shall be the deputy chief, commanders, sergeants, and patrol officers,
respectively, in order of seniority in each group. (2016 Code)
6-1-5: APPOINTMENT OF POLICE OFFICERS; OATH OF OFFICE:
All appointments for the position of police officer shall be made by the board
of fire and police commissioners from those applicants who have passed the
examination(s) as provided for by the board of fire and police commissioners
and/or state law. Each appointee, before entering upon the duties of his
office, shall take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed by law. Such
oath shall be administered as required by law. The oath shall be filed in the
office of the village clerk. (2016 Code)
6-1-6: COMMISSIONS, PROMOTIONS AND DISCHARGES:
   A.   Commissions of members to and promotions within the department, other
than the chief, deputy chief, and commanders, shall be made by the board of
fire and police commissioners, as provided by statute.
   B.   No member, except the chief, deputy chief and commanders, of the
classified service shall be discharged from the department except after a
hearing on the charges before the board of fire and police commissioners, as
provided by statute; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed as
affecting the power of the village president to appoint and remove the chief of
police, with the advice and consent of the village board of trustees. (2016
Code)
6-1-7: GENERAL DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the
enforcement of all of the ordinances of the village and all statutes applicable
thereto; and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof. Members of the police department shall have all the powers
and duties granted to them pursuant to state law and this code, as now or
hereafter amended. (2016 Code)
6-1-8: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct
himself in a proper and law abiding manner at all times and to avoid the use of
unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the orders and
directions of his superior. (2016 Code)
6-1-9: SERVING PROCESS:
No member of the police department, except the chief, shall serve any process
except on command or direction of the chief of the department. (2016 Code)
6-1-10: SERVE AS WITNESSES; FEES:
Any member of the police department shall appear as witness whenever this is
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state or
federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee in any action or suit
to which the village is a party or to which the member of the police department
has been duly summoned in his capacity as a member of the police department or
employee of the village. Any and all fees paid to a police department member
shall be turned over to the village finance director. (2016 Code)
6-1-11: SALARIES AND PENSIONS:
   A.   Salaries: The salaries of the appointees shall be such as may be fixed
by appropriate action of the village board of trustees.
   B.   Pension Fund:
      1.   There is hereby established a police pension fund, in accordance
with the provisions of 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., to
administer the retirement and pension funds of the police officers and other
qualified personnel of the village.
      2.   Said fund will be conducted and operated in accordance with 40
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., entitled "pensions", as it now
exists or hereafter may be amended. (2016 Code)
6-1-12: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations and
policies and procedures for the conduct and guidance of the members of the
police department as he shall deem advisable, and such rules shall be binding
on members of the department. The respective rank and grade of the members of
the police department may be prescribed by regulation of the chief of police.
(2016 Code)
6-1-13: PART TIME POLICE:
   A.   Appointment: The village may employ part time police officers from time
to time. The chief of police, with the approval of the village administrator,
may appoint such number of part time police officers as may be necessary.
   B.   Qualifications: Any person employed as a part time police officer must
meet the following minimum standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      4.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      5.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      6.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
      7.   Only persons who are certified as police officers by the Illinois
law enforcement training and standards board shall be hired as part time police
officers by the village.
      8.   Must pass a physical, psychological, and polygraph examination, and
a background check.
   C.   Duties: A part time police officer shall have all of the
responsibilities of a full time police officer and such specific duties as
delineated in the rules and regulations and policies and procedures of the
village police department. Part time police officers shall not be assigned to
supervise or direct full time police officers.
   D.   Hours Restricted: The number of hours a part time officer may work
within a calendar year is restricted. (2016 Code)
6-1-14: AUXILIARY CITIZEN POLICE:
   A.   Position Created; Appointment And Discharge: There is hereby created
the position of (voluntary) auxiliary citizen police officer. Auxiliary citizen
police officers shall be appointed and discharged by the chief of police from
time to time as deemed necessary.
   B.   Qualifications And Training:
      1.   Auxiliary citizen police officers must be residents of the village
and shall be fingerprinted prior to appointment and shall not have been
convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude.
      2.   Prior to entering upon any duties, said persons shall receive a
course of training on police procedures as shall be appropriate in the exercise
of the powers conferred upon an auxiliary police officer, which training shall
be determined and provided by the chief of police, as set forth in the
"Berkeley Police Department Policies And Procedures Manual".
   C.   Duties And Authority: Auxiliary citizen police officers shall not be
members of the regular police department and shall not supplement members of
the regular police department in the performance of their assigned and normal
duties, except as otherwise provided herein. Such auxiliary police officers
shall only be assigned to perform the following duties in the village:
      1.   To aid or direct traffic within the village.
      2.   To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters.
      3.   To assist with crowd control and presence at community events.
      4.   To aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the police chief;
provided, that in cases which render it impractical for members of the regular
police department to perform the normal and regular police duties, the chief of
police is hereby authorized to assign auxiliary citizen police officers to
perform normal and regular police duties.
   D.   Identification: Identification symbols, including any badge or uniform,
worn by such auxiliary citizen police officers shall be different and distinct
from those used by members of the regular police department. Such auxiliary
citizen police officers shall at all times, during the performance of their
duties, be subject to the direction and control of the chief of police or of
the superior officer in charge during such period of duty.
   E.   Firearms: Auxiliary citizen police officers will not carry firearms.
   F.   Compensation: The position of auxiliary citizen police officer is a
voluntary one and is, therefore, not entitled to compensation from the village.
(2016 Code)
6-1-15: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order, signal or direction of a police officer. (2016 Code)
6-1-16: CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS:
Every person arrested for any criminal offense by a police officer of the
village, and only such person as may have been arrested, may secure a copy of
his or her criminal history record by paying the actual expense incurred by the
village for reproducing copies of the same. Only such person as may have been
arrested may secure such copy of criminal history record after first showing
identification to the chief of police in such form as the chief requires to
reasonably assure the chief of the identity of the person seeking the criminal
history record. No criminal history record shall be released to any other party
or parties other than law enforcement officers and agencies, prosecutors or the
individual about whom the criminal history record is made. (2016 Code)
6-1-17: BAIL BOND ADMINISTRATION FEE:
The police department shall charge a mandatory administrative processing fee in
the amount as established in the annual fee schedule to any person(s) posting
bail or bond in any legal process, civil or criminal, or on any bookable
arrest, including a warrant, to be levied and paid at the time of the posting
of said bail or bond. (Ord. 07-04, 2-20-2007; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Department Created; Composition
6-2-2: Fire Chief
6-2-3: Recruitment, Selection, Appointment And Promotion
6-2-4: Oath Of Office
6-2-5: Obedience To Orders
6-2-6: Duties Of Department Members
6-2-7: Emergency Ambulance Service Provided
6-2-8: Regulations And Authority At Fires And Other Emergencies
6-2-9: Fire Department Property, Apparatus And Equipment
6-2-10: Impersonating A Firefighter Prohibited
6-2-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created and established a fire department, which shall be under
the jurisdiction and control of the village administrator, which shall consist
of a fire chief and such other members of the fire department as may be from
time to time provided by the president and board of trustees. (2016 Code)
6-2-2: FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Authority And Appointment: The head of the fire department shall be the
fire chief, who shall have the control and supervision over all employees of
the department, subject to the order and direction of the village
administrator. The village president shall appoint, with the consent of the
board of trustees, the fire chief.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   The chief of the fire department shall have control and be
responsible for the fire department and the performance of the duties of the
members of the department. The fire chief shall have control of all fires,
emergency medical service, hazardous materials, and all fire apparatus and
shall maintain such apparatus in good operating condition. He shall keep such
records and make such reports regarding the activities of the fire department
as may be required by the village administrator, and he shall make an annual
report to the president and board of trustees.
      2.   The fire chief shall be responsible for the training and conduct of
members of the department and may make or prescribe such rules and regulations
for the conduct and guidance of the members of the department as he shall deem
advisable. Such rules, when approved by the village administrator, shall be
binding on such members.
      3.   The fire chief shall investigate the cause of all fires occurring in
the village as soon after their occurrence as practical, and shall keep a
record of such investigation and the evidence of any criminal act or violation
of any village ordinance in connection therewith. (2016 Code)
6-2-3: RECRUITMENT, SELECTION, APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION:
Procedures for the recruitment, selection, appointment, and promotion of fire
department personnel shall be governed by the village personnel rules and
regulations. (2016 Code)
6-2-4: OATH OF OFFICE:
The fire chief and all members of the fire department, before entering upon the
duties of their office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by the
village. (2016 Code)
6-2-5: OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS:
The chief and, in his absence, such officer of higher rank as may be designated
by him, shall have charge of the activities of the department. All members of
the department shall obey the orders and directions of the fire chief and other
superiors in the department. (2016 Code)
6-2-6: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
It shall be the function of the fire department and the duty of the members
thereof to prevent and extinguish accidental or destructive fires, provide
emergency medical services, and respond to hazardous materials incidents
occurring in the village; to enforce all ordinances relating to fire hazards;
and to perform such other duties as directed by the village administrator.
(2016 Code)
6-2-7: EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDED:
The fire department shall provide emergency ambulance service in cases of
actual and extreme emergency for the transportation of critically ill or
injured persons whose lives are threatened unless medical treatment is
immediately rendered. (2016 Code)
6-2-8: REGULATIONS AND AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND OTHER EMERGENCIES:
   A.   Generally: The fire chief or duly authorized representative, as may be
in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of
life and/or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be
necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks,
or other hazardous conditions or situations to take any other action necessary
in the reasonable performance of his duty. The fire department official may
prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may
remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object
which may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire department. The
fire department official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle
or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area
shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do
so by the fire department official.
   B.   Interference With Department Operations Prohibited: It shall be
unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere
with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel of any
fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to
interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire
department operation.
   C.   Noncompliance With Orders: A person shall not wilfully fail or refuse
to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire department official or
interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. (2016 Code)
6-2-9: FIRE DEPARTMENT PROPERTY, APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Tampering With Equipment Or Property:
      1.   A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire chief
or official in charge of the fire department emergency equipment, cling to,
attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department
emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the
siren, horn, bell or other sound producing device thereon, or manipulate or
tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with, any levers, valves,
switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective
clothing on or a part of any fire department emergency vehicle.
      2.   A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise
disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or
maintained under the provisions of the village fire code except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making
necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire chief.
   B.   Maintenance Of Equipment Required: Whenever a fire appliance is removed
as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose
for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire
appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire
chief.
   C.   Entering Department Premises: Only persons having business pertaining
to the fire department or with authorization from personnel of the fire
department shall enter fire department premises or any place where the
equipment and apparatus of the fire department are stored.
   D.   Hydrant Use Approval Required: A person shall not use or operate any
fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression
purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the fire
chief and the superintendent of public works. This subsection shall not apply
to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by and authorized to make such
use by the department of public works. (2016 Code)
6-2-10: IMPERSONATING A FIREFIGHTER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, not a member of the fire department, to
impersonate a firefighter. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE A. COST RECOVERY FOR SERVICES
SECTION:
6-2A-1: Ambulance And Emergency Services
6-2A-2: Fire And Rescue Services
6-2A-3: Fees For Programs And Classes
6-2A-1: AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES:
Each person receiving ambulance or life support services, or both, from the
village shall pay the village fees therefor in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    ALS: Advanced life support.
   ALS ASSESSMENT: An assessment performed by an ALS crew as part of an
emergency response that was necessary because the patient's reported condition
at the time of dispatch was such that only an ALS crew was qualified to perform
the assessment. An ALS assessment does not necessarily result in a
determination that the patient requires ALS level of service.
   ALS INTERVENTION: A procedure that is in accordance with state and local
laws, required to be done by an emergency medical technician-intermediate (EMT-
B and/or paramedic).
   ALS, LEVEL 1 (ALS 1): The provision of medically necessary supplies and
services including the provision of an ALS assessment or at least one ALS
intervention.
   ALS, LEVEL 2 (ALS 2): The provision of medically necessary supplies and
services including:
      1.   At least three (3) separate administrations of one or more
medications by intravenous push/bolus or by continuous infusion (excluding
crystalloid fluids); or
      2.   Gound ambulance transport, medically necessary supplies and
services, and the provision of at least one of the following ALS 2 procedures:
         a.   Manual defibrillation/cardioversion;
         b.   Endotracheal intubation;
         c.   Central venous line insertion;
         d.   Cardiac pacing;
         e.   Chest decompression;
         f.   Surgical airway; or
         g.   Intraosseous line insertion.
   ALS REFUSAL: A person who has received or accepted advanced life support
(ALS) services from ambulance personnel (EMT-Bs and/or paramedics), but has
refused transportation by ambulance to a hospital.
   BLS: Basic life support. The provision of medically necessary supplies and
services, including BLS ambulance services as defined by the state of Illinois.
   BLS REFUSAL: A person who has called for the services of an ambulance and/or
received or accepted basic life support (BLS) services from ambulance personnel
(EMT-Bs and/or paramedics), but has refused transportation by ambulance to the
hospital.
   NONRESIDENT: A person who is not domiciled within the village of Berkeley.
   NONRESIDENT ALS REFUSAL: All persons who are nonresidents of the village of
Berkeley who have received or accepted advanced life support services from
ambulance personnel (EMT-Bs and/or paramedics), but have refused transportation
by ambulance to a hospital.
   NONRESIDENTS TRANSPORTED TO HOSPITAL: All persons who are nonresidents of
the village of Berkeley who are transported by a fire department operated
ambulance from within the limits of the village of Berkeley to a hospital or
other authorized medical facility for medical care or attention.
   PAYMENT: Payment of the ambulance service fee shall be due upon the
rendering of an invoice or statement by the village of its authorized billing
and collection service corporation or agent and any policies pertaining
thereto.
   RESIDENT: A person who is domiciled within the village of Berkeley.
   RESIDENT ALS REFUSAL: All persons who are residents of the village of
Berkeley who have received or accepted advanced life support services from
ambulance personnel (EMT-Bs and/or paramedics), but have refused transportation
by ambulance to a hospital.
   RESIDENTS TRANSPORTED TO HOSPITAL: All persons who are residents of the
village of Berkeley who are transported by a fire department operated ambulance
from within the limits of the village of Berkeley to a hospital or other
authorized medical facility for medical care or attention.
   VEHICLE EXTRACTION: When members of the fire department are required to use
hydraulic, gas powered, electric powered, air powered or other specialized
rescue equipment to remove a person from a vehicle or other structure.
   VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley, unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 12-27, 8-
21-2012)
   B.   Ambulance Service Fees Established:
      1.   Fees for ambulance services and prehospital care provided by the
village fire department shall be charged to the person receiving said services,
or the person's estate, in accordance with the annual fee schedule.
      2.   In addition to the fees required pursuant to subsection B1 of this
section, any nonresident person, firm, or corporation receiving emergency fire
service of an engine and crew from the village shall be charged a fee as
established in the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 13-8, 2-19-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Payment Of Fees:
      1.   General Requirements:
         a.   Payment of ambulance and/or emergency fire service fees shall be
due upon the rendering of an invoice or statement by the village or its
authorized billing and collection service corporation or agent and any policies
pertaining thereto.
         b.   Each and every time that ambulance and/or emergency fire services
are provided, such recipient shall be treated as a separate obligation of that
recipient. All recipients of such service shall be billed for service after
completion of said service, and no person shall be denied service for reasons
of failure to pay prior amounts or for reasons of residency status.
      2.   Medicare Coverage: All fees shall be determined pursuant to the
schedules set forth in subsections B and C1a of this section, with the
exception of ambulance services provided to patients covered under the federal
medicare system who shall be billed under the appropriate billing code as
provided under the uniform medicare fee schedule for ambulance services, and
based on the services provided and applicable mileage.
      3.   Third Party Insurer:
         a.   All persons who receive ambulance services from the village and
who have insurance coverage which provides for the payment, in whole or in
part, of the ambulance service fee, are covered by a governmental entity
program such as medicare that provides for the payment, in whole or in part, of
the ambulance service fee, or who have the ability to obtain reimbursement, in
whole or in part, of the ambulance service fee from a noninsurance/
nongovernmental entity third party shall, upon request of the village, provide
the names and addresses of said third party to the village. (The term "third
party" shall mean any such insurance company, governmental entity, or other
third party as referenced in the foregoing sentence.) The village shall prepare
and issue to the third party an invoice for such ambulance service fee in
accordance with the ambulance service fee schedule set forth in subsection B of
this section.
         b.   In the event any person who received ambulance services from the
village receives compensation from a third party which is allocable to the
ambulance service fee, such compensation shall be promptly forwarded by said
person to the village. Under no circumstances shall any term or provision of
this section adversely affect the rights of the village as set forth in the
Illinois health care services lien act 1 , as amended, or any other similar
statute. (Ord. 12-27, 8-21-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 770 ILCS 23/1 et seq.
6-2A-2: FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    CARELESS: Not taking ordinary or reasonable care, including the disregard
of the safety of others.
   CONTRACT: An oral or written agreement to have work performed by a
contractor.
   CONTRACTOR: A person or entity who has a contract to perform a task or
service.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE: Any call requiring the fire department to respond.
   INCENDIARY ACT: A fire purposely set by a person or persons.
   INCIDENT: Any request by any person for the services of the Berkeley fire
department.
   MALICIOUS ACT: A wrongful act intentionally done without legal justification
or excuse; an unlawful act done wilfully and purposely.
   NEGLIGENCE: Failure to exercise the standard of care that a reasonably
prudent person would use under similar circumstances, including the doing of
something which a reasonable and prudent person would not do.
   B.   Acts Requiring Cost Reimbursement: The following acts are subject to
the fee provisions in subsection C of this section:
      1.   Negligent, Careless Acts: Any contractor whose negligence or
careless actions or conduct causes an incident resulting in an emergency
response shall be required to make restitution to the village for the costs of
that emergency response.
      2.   Malicious Or Incendiary Acts: Any person whose malicious or
incendiary act causes an incident resulting in an emergency response shall be
required to make restitution to the village for the costs of that emergency
response.
      3.   Driving Under The Influence: Every person found guilty, including an
order of supervision or probation, of section 11-501 entitled "driving while
under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or
compounds, or any combination thereof" of the Illinois vehicle code who
proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response
shall make restitution to the village for the village's costs of that emergency
response.
      4.   Salvage Operations: A fee as established in the annual fee schedule
shall be charged for fire department salvage operations including, but not
limited to, tarping personal property and smoke or water removal.
      5.   Fire Company Standby: When a fire company (engine, truck, or
ambulance) is requested or required to stand by for a nonvillage sponsored
event, the person responsible shall be required to make restitution, pursuant
to subsection C of this section, to the village for the costs of such fire
company standby. No person shall contract for fire company standby services
within the village other than with the village fire department unless the
village is unable to provide such services.
   C.   Fees Established:
      1.   The fees for all acts enumerated in subsection B of this section
shall be as established in the annual fee schedule.
      2.   The fee for use of any equipment not stated in the annual fee
schedule shall be the higher of the current federal emergency management agency
schedule of equipment rates or the schedule of average annual equipment
ownership expense prepared by the Illinois department of transportation.
      3.   A minimum of one hour shall be charged. Subsequent hours will be
billed at fifteen (15) minute increments.
      4.   The following additional fees shall apply and shall be as indicated
in the annual fee schedule:
         a.   Extrication of persons from vehicles involved in traffic
accidents.
         b.   Extinguishing of a motor vehicle fire.
         c.   Salvage operations including, but not limited to, tarping of
personal property, ventilation of smoke or other hazardous products and/or
water removal.
         d.   For all noncourt ordered nonvillage residents who request a child
car seat installation and for all court ordered installations of a child's car
seat regardless of residency.
   D.   Waiver Of Fees: The fire chief or his designee may waive or reduce
fees, upon his discretion, based on mitigating circumstances. (2016 Code)
6-2A-3: FEES FOR PROGRAMS AND CLASSES:
The following fire department programs and classes require a fee as established
in the annual fee schedule: CPR and first aid class (resident), CPR and first
aid class (nonresident) and healthcare provider CPR class. However, no fee
shall be charged for village employees or public safety volunteers. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
6-3A-1: Agency Created; Purpose; Organization
6-3A-2: Coordinator
6-3A-3: Oath Of Office
6-3A-4: Functions
6-3A-5: National Incident Management System Utilized
6-3A-6: Service As Mobile Support Team
6-3A-7: Mutual Aid Agreements
6-3A-8: Emergency Action
6-3A-9: Compensation
6-3A-10: Reimbursement By State
6-3A-11: Purchases And Expenditures
6-3A-12: Succession To Office During Emergency
6-3A-13: Emergency Locations For Village Government; Governmental Powers
6-3A-1: AGENCY CREATED; PURPOSE; ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Created; Purpose: Pursuant to the Illinois emergency management agency
act 1  (the "IEMA act"), there is hereby created the Berkeley emergency
management agency (the "BEMA") to coordinate the emergency management program
within the village and with private organizations, other political
subdivisions, and the state and federal governments. The village president
shall be the executive in charge of the BEMA.
   B.   Organization:
      1.   Chair: The village president shall be the chairperson of the BEMA.
      2.   Meetings: The BEMA shall meet at the call of the village president
who shall be advised on all matters pertaining to emergency services.
   C.   Recommendations To Village Board: The BEMA shall, from time to time,
recommend to the village board action or procedures necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village as it may deem
necessary or advisable in order to carry out the purposes of this article and
of the IEMA act, including, but not limited to:
      1.   The formulation of a plan of action, to be coordinated with the
Illinois emergency preparedness plan and program, and to serve particularly the
residents of the village and of any surrounding area.
      2.   Any regulations of the BEMA shall not become effective until
approved by the village board. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
6-3A-2: COORDINATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The village president shall appoint, subject to the advice
and consent of the village board, a coordinator, who shall be the assistant to
the village president with the duty of coordinating the emergency management
program for the village consistent with the applicable provisions of the IEMA
act.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The coordinator shall have direct responsibility and
oversight for the organization, administration, training and operation of the
BEMA, subject to the direction and control of the village administrator as
provided by statute.
   C.   Vacancy: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve as the coordinator, the village administrator, or any person
designated thereby, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is
made as provided in this article. (2016 Code)
6-3A-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the BEMA organization shall,
before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the oath as stated in section 20
of the IEMA act and filed with the coordinator. (2016 Code)
6-3A-4: FUNCTIONS:
The BEMA shall perform such functions within the village as shall be prescribed
in and by the state IEMA plan, programs, orders, rules and regulations as may
be promulgated by the IEMA and by village ordinance; and, in addition, shall
perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to
any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or
quasi-municipality entered into as provided in the IEMA act. The specific
functions that the BEMA shall perform include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   A.   Developing emergency management plans and standard operating procedures
which outline emergency management responsibilities of village government, as
well as activities which ensure coordination among and between local, county,
state, and federal governments.
   B.   Developing and conducting emergency management training and education
programs for village employees as well as the general public.
   C.   Coordinating with private relief agencies, such as the American Red
Cross and Salvation Army, in the development of capabilities to ensure the
provision of relief supplies and assistance to disaster victims as well as
emergency management responders and their families.
   D.   Developing, conducting, and evaluating emergency management exercises
designed to test the ability of the village to respond to emergencies, public
health emergencies and disasters.
   E.   Receiving and analyzing information regarding potential hazards,
regardless of their nature, and disseminating appropriate warning information
to village officials and, as appropriate, the general public.
   F.   Supporting the development and issuance of media releases in
preparation for or during periods of impending or actual disaster or other
emergency or public health emergency situation.
   G.   Providing emergency lighting and electrical generation capability at
the site of an emergency, or following the loss of power at a governmental or
other critical facility as capabilities allow.
   H.   Assisting law enforcement agencies in traffic and perimeter control
functions.
   I.   Assisting fire/rescue agencies at an emergency, public health emergency
or disaster scene in search and rescue and victim movement activities.
   J.   Enhancing the capability of the village to respond to an emergency,
public health emergency or disaster situations by stockpiling and the delivery
of critical supplies and/or resources, i.e., sandbags, pumps, etc.
   K.   Establishing and maintaining a communications system within the
village's emergency operating center, and supporting the mobile operating
center, capable of communicating with key village departments, as well as
appropriate county, state, and federal agencies; utilizing these systems and
others as appropriate to manage communications resources during an emergency,
public health emergency or disaster.
   L.   Assisting in disaster recovery efforts through active participation in
the management of debris removal.
   M.   Assisting any village department, as requested, with services within
the scope of the BEMA.
   N.   Managing and assisting in the training of the village community
emergency response team (CERT) members, or any citizen corps programs that may
be developed in the future. (2016 Code)
6-3A-5: NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM UTILIZED:
The village will utilize the national incident management system (NIMS) in all
areas where appropriate in the preparation for and throughout the response and
recovery phases of an emergency, disaster, public health emergency, or incident
of national significance, through the activation of the village emergency
operating center, utilization of the incident command system and emergency
management plan, and deployment of appropriate resources. (2016 Code)
6-3A-6: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
   A.   Members of the BEMA may be designated by the governor or the director
of the Illinois emergency management agency (the "IEMA") as members of a mobile
support team to aid and to reinforce the IEMA and emergency services and
disaster agencies in areas stricken by disaster.
   B.   Any member of a mobile support team who is a municipal employee or
officer, while on duty pursuant to a call to duty or while engaged in a
regularly scheduled training exercise, shall receive the compensation and have
the powers, duties, and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any
such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the village, while so
serving, may receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(2016 Code)
6-3A-7: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The coordinator may negotiate mutual assistance agreements with other
municipalities or political subdivisions of the state, but, notwithstanding any
provisions thereof to the contrary, no such agreements nor amendments thereto,
nor any expansion thereof by the addition of any other such municipalities or
subdivisions, shall be binding against the village until approved by the
president and board of trustees, and, if required, by the IEMA. (2016 Code)
6-3A-8: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor declares that an emergency exists in the event of a disaster,
as defined in the IEMA act, then it shall be the duty of the BEMA to cooperate
fully with the IEMA in the provision of emergency services as provided in the
IEMA act. (2016 Code)
6-3A-9: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Neither the village president, the coordinator, nor members of the BEMA
shall receive compensation from the village for their services in the BEMA, but
this provision shall not affect their compensation authorized by the village
for other services to the village or their compensation for activities related
to the BEMA as otherwise provided by law.
   B.   Members of the BEMA who are paid employees or officers of the village,
if called for training by the state director of IEMA, shall receive for the
time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the president and
board of trustees.
   C.   Members of the BEMA who are neither employees nor officers of the
village shall receive for such training time only such compensation as may be
provided by law.
   D.   Members of the BEMA who are also members of a village mobile support
team and who, while engaged in a disaster or disaster training exercise, suffer
disease, injury or death, shall be deemed to be employees of the state for the
purposes of benefits under the workers' compensation act or workers'
occupational diseases act only, if:
      1.   The claimant is a duly qualified and enrolled (sworn in) volunteer
of the BEMA; and
      2.   The claimant was participating in an actual disaster as defined in
the IEMA act or engaged in a regularly scheduled training or exercise pursuant
to a call for duty by the IEMA. (2016 Code)
6-3A-10: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The village finance director may request from the state and receive and
allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state to the village
for expenses incident to training members of the BEMA as prescribed by the
director of the IEMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a
mobile support team while serving outside the village in response to a call by
the governor or the director of the IEMA and any other reimbursement made by
the state incident to the BEMA's activities, all as provided by law. (2016
Code)
6-3A-11: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
   A.   The village board may, on recommendation of the coordinator, authorize
any purchase or contract necessary to place the village in a position to
mitigate any disaster in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the village and its residents including providing emergency assistance to
victims.
   B.   In the event of any disaster, the village administrator is authorized,
on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or
material as may be necessary for emergency purposes, in light of the exigencies
of the disaster and, excepting mandatory constitutional requirements, without
regard to the procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining
to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of
obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the
purchase of supplies and materials, and the appropriation, expenditure, and
disposition of public funds and property as authorized by the IEMA act, until
the village board is able to act effectively, whereupon, the village
administrator shall then act in accordance with the direction of the village
president, pursuant to law. (2016 Code)
6-3A-12: SUCCESSION TO OFFICE DURING EMERGENCY:
   A.   In the event that at the time or as a consequence of any disaster or
occurrence described in section
6-3A-1 of this article, the incumbent of any municipal office, position or
place of employment shall be killed or rendered incapable of performing the
duties of such office or position and it is necessary to fill such office or
position, such office or position shall be filled, until such time as a
successor can be selected as prescribed by law, in the following manner: Any
such vacancy shall, for the emergency period, be filled by appointment of the
village administrator for those positions normally filled by appointment of the
village administrator, otherwise by the following order of preference: the
village president, the remaining members of the board of trustees based on
seniority, the village administrator, the chief of police, the chief of the
fire department.
   B.   The person appointed in the manner prescribed herein to fill any such
office or position shall exercise all the duties and powers of that position
during the emergency and until such time as a successor can be appointed or
selected in the manner provided by law. (2016 Code)
6-3A-13: EMERGENCY LOCATIONS FOR VILLAGE GOVERNMENT; GOVERNMENTAL POWERS:
   A.   Whenever, due to an emergency resulting from the effects of enemy
attack or natural or manmade disaster, it becomes imprudent, inexpedient or
impossible to conduct the affairs of local government at the regular or usual
place or places thereof, the corporate authorities may meet at any place within
or without the village limits on the call of the village president or any three
(3) members of the board of trustees, and shall proceed to establish and
designate, by ordinance, resolution or other manner, alternate or substitute
sites or places as the emergency temporary location or locations of government
where all or any part of the public business may be transacted and conducted
during the emergency situation. Such sites or places may be within or without
the territorial limits of the village.
   B.   During the period when the public business is being conducted at the
emergency temporary location or locations, the governing body and other
officers of the village shall have and possess and shall exercise at such
location or locations all of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers
and functions conferred upon such body and officers by or under the laws of
this state. Such powers and functions may be exercised in light of the
exigencies of the emergency situation without regard to or compliance with time
consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law and pertaining thereto,
and all acts of such body and officers shall be valid and binding as if
performed within the territorial limits of the village. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE B. CIVIL EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
6-3B-1: Definitions
6-3B-2: Declaration Of Emergency
6-3B-3: Curfew
6-3B-4: Emergency Orders
6-3B-5: Duration Of Proclamation
6-3B-6: Notice Requirements
6-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY: A. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force, if accompanied by
immediate power to execute, by three (3) or more persons acting together
without authority of law; or
   B.   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion, within the corporate
limits of the village, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property, or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated
to duty with reference to said civil emergency. (1976 Code § 2.52.010)
6-3B-2: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
Whenever an emergency, as defined in section
6-3B-1 of this article, exists, the president shall declare the existence by
means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency. (1976 Code § 2.52.020)
6-3B-3: CURFEW:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the president, he may order a
general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village, or to the
village as a whole, as he deems advisable and applicable during such hours of
the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare. (1976 Code § 2.52.030)
6-3B-4: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the village president may also, in
the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders:
   A.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof, wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted.
   B.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer.
   C.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
   D.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving
away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
   E.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property. (1976 Code § 2.52.040)
6-3B-5: DURATION OF PROCLAMATION:
The proclamation authorized by this article shall be effective for a period of
forty eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the
village president indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The
village president shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil
emergency at the end of each forty eight (48) hour period during the time the
civil emergency exists. (1976 Code § 2.52.050)
6-3B-6: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Upon issuing the proclamation authorized by this article, the chief of police
shall notify the news media situated within the township, or general area of
the village, and shall cause three (3) copies of the proclamation, declaring
the existence of the emergency, to be posted at the following places within the
village: the village hall, the police station, and the post office. (1976 Code
§ 2.52.060)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Care And Treatment Of Animals
6-4-3: Prohibited Conduct
6-4-4: Animals Prohibited In Certain Places
6-4-5: Animal Bites; Rabies Control
6-4-6: Confinement Of Female Dogs In Heat
6-4-7: Tethering Animals
6-4-8: Keeping Animals
6-4-9: Problem Pet Owners
6-4-10: Enforcement Of Provisions
6-4-11: Violations; Penalties
6-4-12: Provisions Nonexclusive
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or phrases are used, they shall, for purposes of
this chapter have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when
the context otherwise indicates:
ABANDON: To leave an animal without demonstrated or apparent intent to recover
or resume custody of the animal, to leave an animal for more than twelve (12)
hours without providing adequate food, water, and shelter for the duration of
the absence, or to turn out or release an animal for the purpose of causing it
to be impounded; provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to
feral cats.
ALTERED: An animal that has been permanently spayed or neutered.
ANIMAL: Any nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian.
ANIMAL ADMINISTRATOR/CONTROL OFFICER: The chief of police or such other persons
as may be designated by the chief of police or the village administrator that
is charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any public or private organization, including the
organization's officers, agents and representatives when acting in the name or
on behalf of the organization, that controls, rescues, shelters, or cares for
animals as all or part of the purpose of the organization.
BITE: Any cutting, wounding, or tearing with the teeth, including any abrasion
of the skin.
CAT: Any animal that is classified as Felis catus.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the
owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its
owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal or a dog that, without
justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury.
DOG: Any animal that is classified as Canis lupus familiaris.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: A dog, cat, or other animal, the keeping of which is not
otherwise prohibited under the terms of this chapter that has been raised or
maintained in confinement or otherwise domesticated so as to live in a tame
condition.
ENCLOSURE: A structure erected in conformance with the building code that:
   A.   Is designed to confine and prevent the escape of a dangerous dog or
vicious dog and prevent the entry of children or other animals;
   B.   Locks securely, and includes a secure top, sides, and bottom;
   C.   Has sides that embed into the ground at a depth of at least one foot
(1') and attach to the bottom of the enclosure so that the animal confined
within cannot escape by digging under the sides of the enclosure;
   D.   Is adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition; and
   E.   Is labeled with a predominantly displayed warning sign at each entrance
that indicates that a dangerous or vicious animal is confined within.
FERAL CAT: A cat that:
   A.   Is born in the wild or is the offspring of a domestic animal or a feral
cat and is not socialized;
   B.   Is a domestic animal that has been abandoned and is no longer
socialized; or
   C.   Lives on a farm.
FERAL CAT CARETAKER: A person participating in a program to trap, spay/neuter,
return or release feral cats in order to help control cat overpopulation.
HEARING OFFICER: The individual(s) appointed as hearing officer in the
village's administrative hearing system pursuant to this code.
HUMANELY DESTROYED: The humane destruction of an animal pursuant to the humane
euthanasia and animal shelters act 1 , as amended.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody by the animal control officer, police officers
and such other persons as may be designated by the chief of police or the
village administrator as being authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain that is securely fastened to the collar or
harness of a dog and is sufficient to physically restrain and control the dog.
MICROCHIP: An identifying device consisting of a microchip or similar device
that is humanely and permanently installed in or injected under the skin of an
animal by a licensed veterinarian and is designed so that it provides, when
scanned by an electronic reader, readable information as determined by the
chief of police to allow, at a minimum, for the identification of the animal
and the name, address and telephone number of the owner.
MUZZLE: A leather, wire or nylon restraint that fits over a dog's nose and jaws
and prevents it from biting and which also includes straps extending and
connecting over and around the dog's head and its neck to prevent the dog from
dislodging the muzzle with its paws or otherwise.
NONRETRACTABLE LEASH: A leash that cannot be increased in length via any
mechanical device or any other means.
OWNER: Any person having the right of property in an animal, who keeps or
harbors an animal, who has it in his care, who acts as its custodian or who
knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him
within the village of Berkeley. Native wildlife remaining on or about any
premises shall not be included in this definition.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, trustee, association, or corporation.
POLICE DOG: Any dog owned and used by the Berkeley police department or by the
police department of a governmental entity in the course of its work.
RUN LINE: A securely anchored system of tying and keeping an animal in place
with either a rope or chain sufficient to physically restrain and control the
animal.
RUNNING AT LARGE: An animal is off the premises of its owner and not under the
control of the owner (or a person acting for the owner) by means of a leash
that is capable of physically restraining the movement of such animal.
SECURE FENCING: Fencing that is at least six feet (6') in height, locked
securely, has secure sides that prevent a dog from extending any portion of its
body through any part of the fence and is anchored to the ground so that a dog
cannot escape by digging under the fence.
SECURE TEMPORARY ENCLOSURE: A secure enclosure used for the purposes of
transporting a dangerous dog or vicious dog and which includes a top and bottom
permanently attached to the sides except for a "door" for removal of the dog.
Such enclosure must be of such material, and such door closed and secured in
such a manner, that the dangerous dog or vicious dog cannot exit the enclosure
on its own.
SERVICE DOG: Any guide dog, signal dog, or other dog trained to do work or
perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including,
without limitation, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting
individuals with impaired hearing to sounds, and pulling a wheelchair or
fetching dropped items for individuals with mobility impairments.
SEVERE PHYSICAL INJURY: Any physical injury that results in any of the
following injuries: a) broken bones; b) muscle, ligament, or tendon tears; c)
skin lacerations, puncture wounds, or other injuries that require sutures or
surgery; or d) the transmission of an infectious or contagious disease.
SHADE: Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June
through September.
SHELTER: A moistureproof structure of suitable size to accommodate the dog and
allow retention of body heat, made of durable material with a solid floor
raised at least two inches (2") from the ground and with the entrance covered
by a flexible, windproof material. Such structure shall be provided with a
sufficient quantity of suitable bedding.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes
serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to
be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 72/1 et seq.
6-4-2: CARE AND TREATMENT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Cruelty, Unlawful Treatment: It shall be unlawful for any person to
commit any act of cruelty to any animal, or to knowingly cause or allow to be
caused any act of cruelty to any animal, including, without limitation:
      1.   To wilfully or maliciously inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty,
torture, or abuse upon or cruelly shoot, poison, kill, injure, abuse, overwork,
torment, beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by an act, omission or neglect,
cause or inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or
death to any animal, whether such animal belongs to such person or to another;
except, that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals. Any unwanted animals should be delivered to a licensed
veterinarian or animal shelter/rescue;
      2.   To fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal in his or her
charge or custody as owner or otherwise with food, potable water, shade or
shelter; to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such animal in hot, stormy,
cold or inclement weather; or to carry any such animal in or upon any vehicle
in a cruel or inhumane manner;
      3.   To abandon any animal within the village limits;
      4.   To confine an animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places
it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period
of extreme heat or cold;
      5.   To transport any living animal in the trunk of a vehicle;
      6.   To transport any living animal in the open bed of a truck unless the
animal is restrained in a kennel or on a leash that will prevent the animal
from jumping or falling off the vehicle;
      7.   To cause, instigate, stage, or train any animal to fight or permit
any fight between any animal and another animal or human;
      8.   To crop animal ears or dock animal tails, unless performed by a
licensed veterinarian;
      9.   To give away any live domestic animal as a prize for or as an
inducement to enter a place of amusement, or as an inducement to purchase any
product or enter into any business relationship or agreement; or
      10.   To tether an animal, except in compliance with section
6-4-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Duty Of Driver Of Vehicle Striking Animal: Any person who kills or
injures a domestic animal while driving a vehicle shall stop at the scene of
the accident and render such assistance as practicable and immediately report
the incident to the police department.
   C.   Authority To Take Custody Of Animal; Treatment, Boarding, Disposition:
      1.   Any animal control officer, police officer, or licensed veterinarian
may take into custody any animal, upon either private or public property, that
such officer reasonably determines has been the victim of cruelty; provided,
that entry upon private property shall only be accomplished with the assistance
of a police officer and pursuant to a warrant. The officer or veterinarian may
inspect, care for, or treat such animal or place the animal in the care of a
licensed humane society or licensed veterinarian for treatment, boarding or
other care or, if a licensed veterinarian determines that the animal appears to
be diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose, for humane
destruction.
      2.   The owner of an animal destroyed pursuant to this section will not
be entitled to recover damages for the destruction of the animal unless the
owner proves that the destruction was unreasonable and unwarranted.
      3.   Expenses incurred for the care, treatment or boarding of any animal
taken into custody pursuant to this section pending prosecution of the owner of
the animal shall be assessed to the owner as a cost of the case if the owner is
adjudicated liable.
      4.   If a person is adjudicated liable for a violation of this section
and the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction determines that such
animal would be subject to any cruelty in the future, such animal will not be
returned to or remain in the custody of such person, and the hearing officer or
the court having jurisdiction shall order the animal turned over to an animal
shelter or licensed veterinarian for adoption. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4-3: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   Running At Large:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in control of any
dog or cat to permit, or cause to be permitted, his or her dog or cat to run at
large in the village at any time, or to fail to use reasonable care in
restraining any dog or cat that he or she keeps, harbors or otherwise
maintains, or that is under his or her control, from running at large.
      2.   Any dog or cat found running at large is declared hereby to be a
public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded by any police officer or
the animal control officer.
      3.   A dog found by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction
to be in violation of subsection A1 of this section must be microchipped at the
owner's expense, if not already microchipped, within thirty (30) days after
being reclaimed.
      4.   A dog found by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction
to be in violation of subsection A1 of this section a second time must be
altered at the owner's expense, if not already altered, within thirty (30) days
after being reclaimed.
   B.   Biting And Attacking:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for an owner or any other person in control of
any domestic animal to allow the domestic animal to bite or attack any other
domestic animal or person in the village. If a person is bitten by a domestic
animal, the incident shall be reported to the police department immediately.
All reports of bites or attacks shall be investigated by the police department
in accordance with this chapter.
      2.   Any domestic animal that bites or attacks any other domestic animal
or person in the village after the domestic animal has been found in violation
of subsection B1 of this section by the hearing officer or the court having
jurisdiction is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended
and impounded at any time by a police officer or the animal control officer.
The impoundment may, at the discretion of the chief of police, continue through
any subsequent investigation by the police department and until any subsequent
determination of the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction.
      3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B1 of this section,
service dogs and police dogs shall not be declared public nuisances pursuant to
subsection B2 of this section if the behavior that would provide the basis for
a declaration of public nuisance occurred while the dog was performing its
duties as expected.
   C.   Disturbing Peace Or Quiet:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or harbor
any animal that, by habitual and continuous barking, howling, yelping, bawling,
or other loud noise, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
health, peace, repose and/or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities within the corporate limits of the village.
      2.   Any dog that subsequently disturbs the peace or quiet after the dog
has been found in violation of subsection C1 of this section by the hearing
officer or the court having jurisdiction is declared hereby to be a public
nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded at any time by a police officer
or the animal control officer.
      3.   Upon finding a violation of subsection C1 of this section, the
hearing officer or court having jurisdiction may, in addition to the payment of
the penalties provided under this chapter, order the person to take sufficient
action to immediately abate the nuisance.
   D.   Dangerous Behavior:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow a dog to behave in a
dangerous manner. For purposes of this chapter, a dog behaves in a dangerous
manner when the dog:
         a.   Unprovoked, bites or injures a person or a domestic animal on
public or private property;
         b.   Unprovoked, chases or approaches a person or a domestic animal
upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property in a menacing
fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
         c.   Otherwise behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious, unjustified, and imminent threat of physical injury or
death to a person or a domestic animal.
      2.   However, a dog shall not be considered to behave in a dangerous
manner when the behavior occurred because:
         a.   The threatened or injured person was committing or attempting to
commit a violent crime against the owner or custodian of the dog or member of
its household;
         b.   The threatened or injured person was committing or attempting to
commit a crime against the property of the owner or custodian of the dog,
including, without limitation, burglary, arson or criminal trespass;
         c.   The threatened or injured person was tormenting, abusing,
assaulting or physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
         d.   The threatened or injured domestic animal was attacking or
threatening to attack the dog or its offspring;
         e.   The dog was responding to inflicted pain or injury;
         f.   The dog was protecting itself or its offspring;
         g.   The dog is a service dog or a police dog and was performing its
duties as expected; or
         h.   The threatened or injured domestic animal was running at large.
   E.   Vicious Behavior: It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow a dog to
behave in a vicious manner. For purposes of this chapter, a dog behaves in a
vicious manner when it, without provocation, attacks a person or domestic
animal and causes severe physical injury or death. However, a dog shall not be
considered to behave in a vicious manner if the behavior occurred because:
      1.   The attacked or injured person was committing or attempting to
commit a violent crime against the owner or custodian of the dog or member of
its household;
      2.   The attacked or injured person was committing or attempting to
commit a crime against the property of the owner or custodian of the dog,
including, without limitation, burglary, arson or criminal trespass;
      3.   The attacked or injured person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting,
or physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
      4.   The attacked or injured domestic animal was attacking or threatening
to attack the dog or its offspring;
      5.   The dog was responding to inflicted pain or injury;
      6.   The dog was protecting itself or its offspring;
      7.   The dog is a service dog or a police dog and was performing its
duties as expected; or
      8.   The attacked or injured domestic animal was running at large.
   F.   Animal Fights: No person shall own, keep, harbor, possess, maintain or
have the care or custody of any dog or other animal or be in any way connected
with the management or ownership of any place kept or used for the purpose of
causing, instigating, or staging the fighting or baiting of any dogs or other
animals, or for the purpose of training dogs or other animals for such fighting
or baiting, or to permit such a place to be kept or used on premises owned or
controlled by such person.
   G.   Damage To Property: No person shall, without the consent of the owner
of the property concerned, permit or allow any dog or cat in his custody or
control to enter upon the premises of another within the village, or permit or
allow any dog or cat in his custody to injure or carry away any vegetable,
plant, fruit, refuse, shrub, tree, flower, or any other thing which may be on
said premises or which may be planted there. The person having custody of such
dog or cat shall be liable for damage incurred.
   H.   Failure To Remove Excrement:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to have in his immediate
possession some means for the removal of animal excrement when causing a dog or
other animal to be on the public right of way, on any property under the
ownership or control of the village, or on any private property without the
express consent of the owner or lawful occupant of the property.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any reason to fail to remove any excrement
of a dog or other animal under that person's control from the public right of
way, from any property under the ownership or control of the village, or from
any private property without the express consent of the owner or lawful
occupant of the property. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4-4: ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
Animals shall not be permitted or allowed to enter upon any school premises,
public playground, public swimming pool, public hall or building, food service
establishment, or any sidewalk or path extending through any of the above
described areas. The provisions of this section shall not apply to police dogs
or service dogs. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4-5: ANIMAL BITES; RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Quarantine Of Biting Animals:
      1.   In the event the owner of any animal has notice that his or her
animal has bitten any person, it shall be unlawful for the owner to kill such
animal, sell or give the animal away, or permit or allow the animal to be taken
beyond the corporate limits of the village except to a licensed veterinary
hospital. It shall be the duty of the owner to immediately report the incident
to the police department and to immediately place the animal in a licensed
veterinary hospital where the animal shall be quarantined for a period of at
least ten (10) days or, upon the request of any police officer or the animal
control officer, to deliver the animal to him or her for such placement. The
owner shall immediately furnish to the police department the name and location
of the hospital and a certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating whether or
not the animal shows signs of rabies. At the expiration of the quarantine
period and prior to the release of the animal, the owner shall furnish the
police department with a certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating that
the animal does not have rabies. All costs of maintaining any such animal in a
veterinary hospital shall be the obligation and responsibility of its owner and
shall be paid by said owner.
      2.   In the event any animal that has bitten any person is slain or dies
within ten (10) days from the time of the bite, it shall be the duty of the
person slaying the animal, or having knowledge of its death, and of the owner
of the animal to notify the police department and immediately deliver or cause
the delivery of the intact animal to the police department.
      3.   a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A1 and A2 of this
section, the owner of any animal that has bitten any person may, in lieu of the
delivery and the quarantine of the animal as provided in subsection A1 of this
section:
            (1)   Present evidence to the animal control officer or the chief
of police that the animal has been inoculated against rabies more than thirty
(30) days but less than one year prior to the biting, if a one year immunity
vaccine has been used, or more than thirty (30) days but less than three (3)
years prior to the biting if a three (3) year vaccine has been used; and
            (2)   Have the animal examined by a rabies inspector or a licensed
veterinarian who shall make an examination of the animal to determine if the
animal exhibits any sign of rabies, and who shall thereafter:
               (A)   Take the animal into custody for a period of ten (10) days
if such examination discloses any sign or symptoms of rabies and notify the
police department thereof;
               (B)   In the event such examination discloses that no sign or
symptoms of rabies are present, order the animal confined in the home of the
owner or upon the owner's premises for a period of ten (10) days in an
enclosure adequate to ensure, in the opinion of the animal control officer,
that the animal will not be in contact with other animals or persons; or
               (C)   Have such animal examined for rabies by a licensed
veterinarian on the first, fifth and tenth days of such confinement, which
veterinarian shall, within twenty four (24) hours of each such examination,
report in writing the results of the examination to the animal control officer
or the chief of police. It shall be the duty of the owner to ensure that the
reports required by this subsection are made.
         b.   No animal displaying any signs or symptoms of rabies, as
determined by the rabies inspector or licensed veterinarian who examines the
animal pursuant to subsection A3a(2) of this section, shall be released from
any confinement without the prior approval of the animal control officer or the
chief of police.
         c.   In the event an examination of any animal discloses signs or
symptoms of rabies, the animal shall be delivered to a licensed veterinarian
for continued observation and/or testing.
      4.   It is the responsibility of the owner to provide, upon request by
the examining veterinarian, animal control officer, or a police officer, a
dated certificate or certificates of vaccination, signed by a licensed
veterinarian. The certificates shall include a description of the animal
sufficient for purposes of identification.
   B.   Rabid Animals:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog suffering from rabies
to place it immediately in a veterinary hospital or, upon demand, to surrender
the dog to a police officer or the animal control officer. Any dog suffering
from rabies is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and, if the dog cannot
be safely apprehended and impounded, the dog may be slain by a police officer
or the animal control officer.
      2.   It shall be the duty of any person who discovers that any dog is
suffering from rabies, or that any dog or other animal has been bitten by a dog
or other animal suffering with rabies, to report such fact immediately to the
animal control officer or the chief of police. The report shall include the
name, if known, and the place of residence of the owner of the dog or other
animal, the place where the animal can be found, and the license number of any
such dog, if known. Any such dog or other animal shall be immediately confined
in a veterinary hospital or impounded and securely kept until it can be
determined whether the dog or other animal is suffering from rabies.
      3.   Whenever the village president, by proclamation, shall declare that
danger from rabies is great, it shall be unlawful to permit or allow any dog
upon the public streets, alleys, or other public places unless the dog is
securely muzzled with a muzzle. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4-6: CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
Any female dog in heat must be confined either: a) if outdoors, in an enclosure
or on a leash no more than six feet (6') in length that is under the direct
control and supervision of the owner; or b) if indoors, in a kennel, veterinary
hospital, or an enclosed building on the owner's property. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-
2015)
6-4-7: TETHERING ANIMALS:
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, it shall be
unlawful for any person to tether any animal to a fixed object, except upon the
satisfaction of each of the following conditions:
   A.   The chain, rope, leash, run line, or other device used to tether the
animal shall be placed or attached so as to prevent the animal from becoming
entangled with a structure, tree, plant, shrubbery, another animal or any other
object;
   B.   The chain, rope, leash, run line, or other device used to tether the
animal shall be of sufficient length, in proportion to the size of the animal,
to allow the animal to obtain proper exercise, convenient access to food and
water and protection from direct sunlight or extreme weather conditions;
   C.   The chain, rope, leash, run line, or other device used to tether the
animal does not weigh more than one-eighth (1/8) the amount of the animal's
weight and is not made from a logging chain or a tow chain;
   D.   The animal is not attached to the chain, rope, leash, run line, or
other device by any collar or means of restraint that may injure the animal or
interfere with its vision or respiration, including, without limitation, any
type of "choke" collar that constricts around the animal's neck when pulled;
   E.   The chain, rope, leash, run line, or other device, and the collar
attached thereto, used to tether the animal shall be of such material and shall
be attached and affixed in such a manner sufficient to physically restrain and
control the animal to be tethered;
   F.   The animal to be tethered has not been designated as a vicious dog;
   G.   If the animal to be tethered has been designated as a dangerous dog,
the dog also must be supervised by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age
and securely muzzled with a muzzle at all times that it is tethered in a manner
that will prevent it from biting any person or animal, but that will not injure
the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration;
   H.   The animal is not tethered in a manner that either:
      1.   Permits the animal to trespass upon public property, or upon private
property without the consent of the property owner; or
      2.   Threatens the health, safety or welfare of any person or animal;
   I.   The animal is not tethered and unsupervised for more than one hour
during any twenty four (24) hour period;
   J.   The animal is not tethered and unsupervised between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
   K.   The animal is not tethered and unsupervised within five hundred feet
(500') of any school at any time;
   L.   The animal is not tethered on public property at any time;
   M.   The animal is not tethered on private property without the prior
consent of the property owner; and
   N.   The animal is not tethered and unsupervised during extreme
temperatures, including, without limitation, during heat advisories or when the
temperature is below thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F). (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-
2015)
6-4-8: KEEPING ANIMALS:
   A.   Animal Houses:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep or maintain any pen,
stable, or place in which animals are housed or kept in a condition that is
unreasonably offensive to persons residing in the vicinity of the same, due to
associated debris or odors, or to persons passing along any street or alley
near the same, or that constitutes a hazard to the health of persons residing
nearby.
      2.   Any pen, stable, or place in which animals are housed or kept that
the owner has been found in violation of subsection A1 of this section by the
hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction is declared hereby to be a
public nuisance.
   B.   Wild Animals; Dangerous Animals Generally:
      1.   It is unlawful to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care
or custody in the village any animal which is ferae naturae in the eyes of the
law.
      2.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter with
respect to dangerous dogs and vicious dogs, it is unlawful to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of any animal in the village
which would be dangerous to the public as a result of its propensity to injure
persons.
      3.   Any animal prohibited to be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained
in the village pursuant to this subsection B is declared hereby to be a public
nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded at any time by a police officer
or the animal control officer. The impoundment may, at the discretion of the
chief of police, continue through any subsequent investigation by the police
department and until any subsequent determination of the hearing officer or the
court having jurisdiction.
      4.   In addition to the other penalties and remedies provided in this
chapter, any such animal shall be ordered permanently removed from the village
or humanely destroyed.
      5.   The members of the police department, or any other person in the
village, are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it
becomes necessary for the protection of any person or property.
   C.   Additional Wild Animal Provisions:
      1.   It is unlawful to keep, harbor, possess, maintain, or have the care
or custody in the village of: a) any snake, reptile or lizard that is
physically capable of injuring any person, regardless of age, by bite, poison,
constriction or other means; b) any lion, tiger, cougar, jaguar, panther,
bobcat, mountain lion, lynx, ocelot, leopard, any hybrid thereof or any other
similar feline animal; c) any wolf, coyote, jackal, fox, wild dog or hybrid
thereof; d) any bear or bison; e) any rodent weighing more than one pound, with
the exception of guinea pigs; f) any noncanine animal not native to the North
American continent which, when full grown, normally attains the weight in
excess of two hundred (200) pounds; and g) any monkey, gorilla, chimpanzee or
other similar apelike primate.
      2.   Any animal, snake, reptile, rodent or other creature prohibited to
be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained in the village pursuant to this
subsection C is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended
and impounded at any time by a police officer or the animal control officer. If
such animal cannot be relocated safely to an entity licensed to handle the
dangerous animal in the sole discretion of the chief of police, the chief of
police may order the humane destruction of such animal.
      3.   This subsection C shall not apply to properly zoned and constructed
zoos, federally licensed exhibits, circuses, animal refuges, or licensed
scientific or research laboratories.
   D.   Farm Animals Generally: It is unlawful to raise, keep, harbor, possess,
maintain or have the care or custody of in the village any animal commonly
considered a farm animal including, but not limited to, cows, horses, pigs or
chickens except as provided in subsection E of this section.
   E.   Chickens:
      1.   Definitions: Whenever the following words or phrases are used, they
shall, for the purposes of this subsection E, have the following meanings
ascribed to them, except when the context otherwise indicates:
         COOP: A structure housing hens consisting of a covered insulated
inside enclosure.
         HEN: The female of the species Gallus gallus domesticus, commonly
known as chickens.
         PEN: An enclosure connected to a coop for the purposes of allowing
chickens to leave the coop while remaining in an enclosed, predator safe
environment.
      2.   Permitted And Prohibited Chickens; Number: No person shall keep more
than four (4) hens. Roosters shall be prohibited.
      3.   Confinement: All hens kept in the village shall be entirely confined
in a pen, coop, building, or other enclosure at all times. During daylight
hours, hens may also be temporarily kept in a mobile screened enclosure
commonly known as a chicken tractor. Such chicken tractors shall be located
only in a rear yard in accordance with the accessory structure location
restrictions provided in the village building and zoning regulations.
      4.   Structures:
         a.   Location Restrictions: Structures housing hens including any
pens, coops, buildings or enclosures shall be permitted only in conjunction
with a single-family detached dwelling located in residential zoning districts.
Structures housing hens including any pens, coops, buildings or enclosures
shall be located only in a rear yard, erected or maintained at least twenty
five feet (25') from any occupied residential structure other than that of the
owner, set back at least six feet (6') from all property lines of an adjacent
property and shall not be visible from a street.
         b.   Requirements: Structures housing hens shall consist of a covered
insulated inside enclosure known as a coop and an adjacent covered outside
fenced area known as a pen. Coops shall provide sufficient area for the chicken
(s) to stand up, sit/lay down and move around and able to be protected from
natural forces such as wind, rain and snow. Coops shall be constructed to
specifications as approved by the building commissioner.
      5.   Sanitary Conditions: All pens, coops, buildings, yards or enclosures
for hens shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from all refuse and waste. Such
areas shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once every twenty four (24) hours,
and all refuse and chicken waste shall be disposed of in a clean and sanitary
fashion.
      6.   Miscellaneous Regulations:
         a.   All feed for hens shall be kept in rodentproof containers until
put out for consumption by the permitted hens being kept.
         b.   Fresh and adequate food and water shall be provided each day.
         c.   Slaughtering of chickens is prohibited on the property.
         d.   Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related
substances shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries of the property
where the chickens are kept, and it is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be
unlawful for any person to allow such nuisance to exist.
         e.   No person shall allow chickens to make noise loud enough to annoy
or disturb the comfort, health, peace or repose of reasonable persons of
ordinary sensibilities, and it is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be
unlawful for any person to allow such nuisance to exist. Any complaints that
are filed shall be confirmed by the building commissioner or police officer.
         f.   No person shall compost chicken waste or bedding upon any lot
within the village. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4-9: PROBLEM PET OWNERS:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this chapter, a "problem pet owner" is a
person who has been determined by the hearing officer or the court having
jurisdiction to have committed: 1) three (3) or more separate and unrelated
violations of section
6-4-2, "Care And Treatment Of Animals"; subsection 6-4-3F, "Animal Fights";
section
6-4-7, "Tethering Animals"; subsection 6-4A-6B, "Restrictions On Dangerous
Dogs"; or 6-4A-7B, "Restrictions On Vicious Dogs", of this chapter in one 36-
month period; or 2) two (2) or more separate and unrelated violations of
section
6-4-2, subsection 6-4-3F, section
6-4-7, subsection 6-4A-6B or 6-4A-7B of this chapter at any time after having a
dog owned by him or her designated as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog.
   B.   Designation Of Problem Pet Owner: A person shall be designated as a
problem pet owner when the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction, at
the request of the police department, has conducted an evidentiary hearing,
heard and considered evidence pertaining to past violations of this chapter by
the person, and entered an order determining that the person has committed the
violations described in subsection A of this section and designating the person
as a problem pet owner.
   C.   Notice Of Hearing: A person who the police department requests be
designated as a problem pet owner shall be provided with written notice of a
hearing before the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction, served by
certified and regular mail to the person's last known address, containing the
following information:
      1.   The name and address of the person who is the subject of the
hearing;
      2.   The names, descriptions, and license numbers of any animals owned by
or licensed to the person;
      3.   Brief descriptions of the violations that form the basis of the
request;
      4.   Notification of the date, time, and location of the hearing before
the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction; and
      5.   A summary of the impact of designation as a problem pet owner, as
set forth in this section.
   D.   Prehearing Confinement Of Animals: Upon service of notice pursuant to
subsection C of this section, all of the animals owned by a person who the
police department seeks to be declared to be a problem pet owner may be
impounded if the chief of police or his designee determines that impoundment is
in the interests of public safety or the health and welfare of the animals.
Upon such a determination by the chief of police or his designee, an animal
control officer or police officer may require that all of the animals be held
in an animal shelter or a secure veterinary hospital until a hearing is held.
If all of the animals are not impounded prior to the hearing, the owner shall
comply with any and all requirements imposed by the chief of police, the animal
control officer, or their designee for the confinement and care of the animals
pending the hearing. Any failure to comply with such requirement is a violation
of this subsection, and each day of noncompliance will constitute a separate
violation.
   E.   Bar On Licensing Or Owning Animals: If, after conducting a hearing, the
hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction determines that a person
should be declared a problem pet owner, all animal licenses held by that person
will be immediately revoked, and it shall be unlawful for that person to
license or own any animal in the village for a period of twenty four (24)
months from the date of the entry of that determination. Further, upon the
determination by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction that a
person is a problem pet owner, the problem pet owner must immediately surrender
all animals in his or her possession to the chief of police, the animal control
officer, or their designee. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4-10: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Enforcement Officials: The chief of police, police officers, the animal
control officer and such other persons as may be designated by the chief of
police or the village administrator are authorized and directed hereby to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Hindering Enforcement, Violations Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to
hinder or molest any police officer, the animal control officer or any other
designated enforcement official engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.
Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to provide any false or misleading
information with respect to the registration and licensing of dangerous dogs or
vicious dogs. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense. Any person convicted of an offense for violating section
6-4-2, “Care And Treatment Of Animals”; subsection
6-4-3B, “Biting And Attacking”; E, “Vicious Behavior"; F, “Animal Fights”;
section
6-4-9, “Problem Pet Owners”; subsection
6-4A-1B, “Dangerous And Vicious Dogs”; section
6-4A-6, “Dangerous Dogs”; or
6-4A-7, “Vicious Dogs”, of this chapter, in addition to other legal and
equitable remedies available to the village, shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Any person convicted of an offense for violations of other
sections of this chapter not listed above shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   B.   Any person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation or provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and such person shall be
punished accordingly.
   C.   Violation notices for violations of this chapter shall be issued,
served, and resolved in accordance with the administrative adjudication of code
violations system established pursuant to this code, or if brought before a
court having jurisdiction pursuant to the Illinois code of civil procedure,
Illinois supreme court having jurisdiction rules, and such other rules that
might apply to such court having jurisdiction. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd.
2016 Code; Ord. 21-36, 5-18-2021)
6-4-12: PROVISIONS NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the village from concurrently
or separately using other methods or proceedings to: a) enforce and adjudicate
this chapter or other ordinances of the village; or b) enforce and adjudicate
any county, state or federal laws or regulations pertaining to the regulation
of animals and their owners, including, without limitation, the institution of
an action in the circuit court having jurisdiction of Cook County, the United
States district court having jurisdiction, or an administrative proceeding
before any other administrative body. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
6-4A-1: Registration And Licensing Of Vicious And Dangerous Dogs
6-4A-2: Reserved
6-4A-3: License Fees
6-4A-4: Rabies Inoculation Requirements
6-4A-5: Number Of Dogs And/Or Cats
6-4A-6: Dangerous Dogs
6-4A-7: Vicious Dogs
6-4A-8: Redemption And Disposition Of Impounded Dogs And Cats
6-4A-9: Dog Kennels
6-4A-1: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Registration And License Required: Every dog which has previously been
designated as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog must be registered with and
licensed by the village pursuant to this article. Any dangerous dog or vicious
dog designated as such or purchased or otherwise acquired after the effective
date hereof must be registered with and licensed by the village pursuant to
this article not later than thirty (30) days after the dog is so designated or
acquired. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of any dangerous dog or vicious
dog in the village without having registered and licensed such a dangerous dog
or vicious dog pursuant to this article.
   B.   Application For Registration And License:
      1.   The application for registration and license for all dangerous dogs
and vicious dogs shall be made to the village clerk, which application shall
include, without limitation, the following information:
         a.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and of
the owner, if different from the applicant, and the address where the dog is to
be kept;
         b.   The breed, color, sex, name, and date of rabies inoculation of
the dog to be registered;
         c.   Written evidence establishing that the dog has been altered;
         d.   Written evidence establishing that the dog has been implanted
with a microchip with current information concerning the accurate name, address
and telephone number of the owner;
         e.   A copy of the insurance policy or surety bond to establish that
the owner possesses and will continue to maintain the insurance coverage
required for dangerous dogs and vicious dogs pursuant to this article;
         f.   A certificate from the owner to be filed with the village clerk
affirming that the dangerous or vicious dog is or will be confined in
compliance with this chapter as applicable, and is in compliance with any and
all other conditions that may have been imposed with respect to the dangerous
dog or vicious dog by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction;
         g.   A written affidavit by the applicant and by the owner, if
different from the applicant, stating that the applicant and the owner: a) have
read the educational materials provided by the village concerning dog
ownership, including, without limitation, a summary of the provisions of this
chapter; and b) will comply with all provisions of this chapter.
      2.   It shall be the obligation of the applicant or the owner, if
different from the applicant, to notify the village clerk of any change to the
information required pursuant to this article at least forty eight (48) hours
before the change occurs.
   C.   Review Of Application; Grant Or Denial Of License: The village clerk
shall promptly review the application for registration and license upon receipt
of a completed application and upon payment of the license fee by the
applicant. The village clerk shall grant or deny the license application within
thirty (30) days from the date the completed application and license fee were
filed with the village clerk.
   D.   Issuance Of Certificate And Tag; Records Kept: The village clerk shall
register the dog in the dog register book and issue a license certificate and
metal license tag to the applicant or the owner, if different from the
applicant, upon the occurrence of all of the following:
      1.   Payment of the license fee required by this article;
      2.   Presentation of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that the
dog to be registered and licensed has been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this article;
      3.   Submission of a complete application pursuant to subsection B2a of
this section.
   E.   Restrictions On Issuance: No license shall be issued pursuant to this
article to any applicant or owner who has been declared to be a problem pet
owner pursuant to this chapter.
   F.   Appeals On Denial Of License:
      1.   Any applicant who is denied a license for a dangerous dog or vicious
dog may file a written appeal to the village administrator within thirty (30)
days after receipt of the written copy of the denial by certified mail.
      2.   If the village clerk fails to grant or deny the license application
within thirty (30) days from the date of the completed application and license
fee were filed, an applicant may file a written appeal to the village
administrator within forty (40) days from the date the completed license
application and license fee were filed with the village clerk.
      3.   The village administrator, or the village administrator's designee,
shall grant or deny the appeal within twenty (20) days from the date the appeal
was received by the village administrator. The village administrator's decision
to grant or deny an appeal shall be made in accordance with the criteria set
forth in section
6-4A-6 or
6-4A-7 of this article. If the village administrator, or the village
administrator's designee, fails to grant or deny an appeal within twenty (20)
days from the date the appeal was received, the appeal shall be deemed denied.
   G.   Tag Description; Lost Tags: The shape and color of the tag shall be
determined by the village clerk, and each tag shall have stamped thereon the
year in which it will expire and a number corresponding with the number of the
license certificate. The village shall issue tags of a different shape and
color for licenses for dangerous dogs and vicious dogs. The replacement fee for
lost or destroyed license tags shall be as established in the annual fee
schedule.
   H.   Term Of License; Required Information At End Of Term: The license year
shall begin on April 1 of each year and expire on March 31 of the following
year. The owner shall file with the village clerk within thirty (30) days prior
to the issuance of the license a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that
the dog continues to have been inoculated against rabies in accordance with the
provisions of this article and a copy of the insurance policy or surety bond to
establish that the owner continues to possess and will continue to maintain the
insurance coverage required for dangerous dogs and vicious dogs pursuant to
this article, as applicable.
   I.   Nontransferability Of License: Licenses issued pursuant to this article
shall not be transferable.
   J.   Revocation Of License: Any license issued under this article may be
revoked by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction after notice
and hearing for fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a license, for violation of the provisions of this chapter, or
for violation of any other applicable requirements of law. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-
2015; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 21-36, 5-18-2021)
6-4A-2: RESERVED:
(Reserved by Ord. 21-36, 5-18-2021)
6-4A-3: LICENSE FEES:
Fees for licenses required hereunder shall be as follows:
   A.   An annual fee shall be due and payable between March 1 and April 1 of
each year, or within thirty (30) days of a dog being declared dangerous or
vicious. A fee as established in the annual fee schedule shall be paid for
issuance of each license. Proof of altering the animal is required within 30
days or the fees shall increase as indicated in the annual fee schedule. The
village clerk will only issue a license upon presentation of evidence
satisfactory that such animal has been spayed or neutered.
   B.   No refunds shall be made on any license fee because of death of the
animal or the owner leaving the village before expiration of the license
period. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 21-36, 5-18-2021)
6-4A-4: RABIES INOCULATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   Every dog that is more than six (6) months of age or cat that is
more than four (4) months of age must be currently inoculated against rabies by
a licensed veterinarian. The type and brand of the antirabic vaccine used and
the method of inoculation must be recognized and approved by the department of
agriculture of the state of Illinois and the United States department of
agriculture. The vaccine may be administered annually, or if the dog or cat is
over twelve (12) months of age at the time of inoculation, the interval between
inoculations may be extended for three (3) years. The exception to this
subsection will be determined by a licensed veterinarian for animals whose
lives would be endangered by the vaccination "due to disease, age or other
considerations that a veterinarian can verify and document", as determined by a
licensed veterinarian on an annual basis.
      2.   Any dog or cat that is found not to be currently inoculated against
rabies after the dog or cat has been found in violation of subsection A1 of
this section by the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction is
declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded by
any police officer or the animal control officer.
   B.   Collar And Tag:
      1.   The owner of each dog of more than six (6) months of age and each
cat of more than four (4) months of age that is housed within the corporate
limits of the village must provide such dog or cat with a sturdy collar to
which the rabies inoculation tag issued by the county shall be securely
fastened. It shall be the owner's duty to make certain that the collar and tag
is worn by the dog or cat at all times when off of the owner's premises.
      2.   The owner of each dangerous dog or vicious dog that is housed within
the corporate limits of the village must provide such dog with a sturdy collar
to which the rabies inoculation tag issued by the county and to which the
license tag issued by the village shall be securely fastened. It shall be the
owner's duty to make certain that the collar and tags are worn by the dangerous
dog or vicious dog at all times.
   C.   Unauthorized Removal Of Tags: It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than a police officer or the animal control officer, to remove a rabies
inoculation tag or license tag from any dog or cat without the permission of
the owner of the dog or the owner's agent. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. Ord.
21-36, 5-18-2021)
6-4A-5: NUMBER OF DOGS AND/OR CATS:
No person shall permit more than four (4) dogs and/or four (4) cats to be kept
in or about any single-family residence within the village. This section shall
apply only to dogs over three (3) months of age and cats over four (4) months
of age. When circumstances dictate removal of any dogs or cats to assure
compliance with this section, the animal control officer or other village
personnel shall apply to the hearing officer or to the circuit court having
jurisdiction seeking an order of removal. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
6-4A-6: DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Designation Of Dangerous Dog: A dog shall be designated as a dangerous
dog when the hearing officer or a court having jurisdiction, at the request of
the police department, has conducted an evidentiary hearing, heard and
considered evidence pertaining to the temperament of the dog, and has entered
an order determining that the dog has behaved in the manner described in
subsection
6-4-3D of this chapter and designating the dog as a dangerous dog. The hearing
officer or the dog, shall enter a written order requiring that, in addition to
the payment of the penalties provided in this chapter, the owner shall comply
with the registration and license requriements in section
6-4A-1B of this article and shall comply with each and all of the restrictions
set forth in subsection B. of this section.
   B.   Restrictions On Dangerous Dogs: It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a dangerous dog within the
village except upon compliance with each and all of the following restrictions
at the expense of the owner:
      1.   Confinement: The dangerous dog must be confined as follows:
         a.   A dangerous dog on private premises must be kept indoors or
outdoors either:
            (1)   Within an enclosure;
            (2)   Within a fully fenced yard enclosed on all sides by secure
fencing;
            (3)   Within a fully fenced yard enclosed on all sides by fencing
that is at least four feet (4') in height and locks securely, and the dangerous
dog is securely muzzled with a muzzle in a manner that will prevent it from
biting any person or animal, but that will not injure the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration;
            (4)   The dangerous dog is tethered in compliance with the
requirements set forth in section
6-4-7 of this chapter, the dangerous dog is supervised by an adult at least
eighteen (18) years of age, and the dog is securely muzzled with a muzzle in a
manner that will prevent it from biting any person or animal but that will not
injure the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration; or
            (5)   The dangerous dog is on a leash while supervised by an adult
at least eighteen (18) years of age and the dog is securely muzzled with a
muzzle in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person or animal but
that will not injure the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
         b.   A dangerous dog on public premises must be directly controlled
and supervised by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age. Such control
and supervision shall require, at a minimum, that the dog be:
            (1)   Restrained on a nonretractable leash no longer than six feet
(6'); and
            (2)   Securely muzzled with a muzzle in a manner that will prevent
it from biting any person or animal, but that will not injure the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.
      2.   Evaluation And Training: The owner of a dangerous dog must cause to
be completed, no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the designation
of the dog as a dangerous dog, both: a) an evaluation of the dangerous dog by a
certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or
another recognized expert in the field of dog behavior; and b) obedience
training or other training or treatment of the dangerous dog as deemed
appropriate by the behaviorist or expert.
      3.   Altering And Microchipping: A dangerous dog must be altered and
microchipped at the owner's expense, if not already altered and microchipped,
within fourteen (14) days after the designation of the dog as a dangerous dog.
      4.   Insurance Coverage: Within fourteen (14) days after the designation
of a dog as a dangerous dog, the owner of the dangerous dog must obtain and
maintain and provide the village with satisfactory evidence of liability
insurance coverage in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), which coverage includes, without limitation, coverage for animal
bites. In lieu of liability insurance, the owner of a dangerous dog may obtain
a surety bond in the value of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
      5.   Notice Of Designation: No owner shall sell, transfer, or otherwise
place a dangerous dog in the permanent possession of any other person,
including, without limitation, any animal shelter, without first notifying that
person that the dog has been designated a dangerous dog pursuant to this
section and notifying the jurisdiction to which the dog will be transferred of
the dog's designation as a dangerous dog pursuant to this section.
   C.   Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a dangerous dog within the
corporate limits of the village unless the dog is kept and maintained in
compliance with this chapter and with the order entered by the hearing officer
or the court having jurisdiction. Upon finding that a dangerous dog has not
been so kept or maintained, the hearing officer or court having jurisdiction
may, in addition to requiring the payment of the penalties provided in this
chapter, order that the license issued for the dangerous dog pursuant to
subsection
6-4A-1 of this article be revoked, that the dangerous dog be altered and
microchipped at the owner’s expense, if not already altered and microchipped,
and be permanently removed from the corporate limits of the village within
fourteen (14) days, with the owner of the dangerous dog being responsible for
all fees and costs incurred or charged by the village or the animal control
facility utilized by the village in caring for the dangerous dog and the
altering and microchipping prior to its removal from the corporate limits.
   D.   Unlawful Return Of Dangerous Dog To Village: It shall be unlawful for
any person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a
dangerous dog within the corporate limits of the village after such a dangerous
dog has been ordered permanently removed from the corporate limits of the
village. Upon finding that a dangerous dog has been kept, maintained or
returned to the corporate limits of the village after having been ordered
permanently removed from the corporate limits of the village, the hearing
officer or court having jurisdiction may, in addition to requiring the payment
of penalties provided in this chapter, order that the dangerous dog be humanely
destroyed.
   E.   Public Nuisance: Any dangerous dog that is not kept and maintained in
accordance with the order entered by the hearing officer or the court having
jurisdiction is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended
and impounded upon the order of the animal control officer or chief of police.
The impoundment may, at the discretion of the chief of police, continue through
any subsequent investigation of the police department and any subsequent
determination of the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction.
   F.   Dangerous Dogs From Other Jurisdictions: Any person desiring to bring a
dog to live in the village that has been previously declared within another
jurisdiction to have behaved in a dangerous manner or a similar manner, or has
been designated within another jurisdiction as a dangerous dog or any similar
designation, must notify the police department of such declaration or
designation prior to moving the dog into the village. Upon moving the dog into
the village, the dog will be considered a dangerous dog pursuant to this
article, and the owner shall comply with the registration and license
requirements in subsection
6-4A-1 of this article and shall comply at all times with each and every other
requirement and restriction established in this chapter pertaining to dangerous
dogs, including, without limitation, the restrictions set forth in subsection
B. of this section. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. Ord. 21-36, 5-18-2021)
6-4A-7: VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   Designation Of Vicious Dog: A dog shall be designated as a vicious dog
when the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction, at the request of
the police department, has conducted an evidentiary hearing, heard and
considered evidence pertaining to the temperament of the dog, and entered an
order determining that the dog has behaved in the manner described in
subsection
6-4-3E of this chapter and designating the dog as a vicious dog. A dog
previously designated as a dangerous dog pursuant to subsection
6-4A-6A of this article that is found by the hearing officer or the court
having jurisdiction to have behaved in a dangerous manner for a second time may
be designated as a vicious dog by the hearing officer or the court having
jurisdiction without evidence that the dog has behaved in a vicious manner. The
hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction, upon designating a dog as a
vicious dog, shall enter into a written order requiring that, in addition to
the payment of the penalties provided under this chapter, the owner shall
comply with the registration and license requirements in subsection
6-4A-1B of this article and with each and all of the restrictions set forth in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Restrictions On Vicious Dogs: It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep a
vicious dog within the village except upon compliance with each and all of the
following restrictions at the expense of the owner:
      1.   Confinement: The vicious dog must be confined as follows:
         a.   A vicious dog on private premises must be kept indoors or within
an enclosure at all times.
         b.   A vicious dog shall only be allowed outdoors and outside of an
enclosure if:
            (1)   The dog is securely muzzled with a muzzle in a manner that
will prevent it from biting any person or animal, but that will not injure the
dog or interfere with its vision or respiration and is restrained on a
nonretractable leash no longer than six feet (6'), or in the alternative, the
vicious dog is transported in a secure temporary enclosure;
            (2)   Is under the direct control and supervision of the owner or
other adult at least eighteen (18) years of age at all times; and
            (3)   The release is:
               (A) Necessary for veterinary care for the dog;
               (B) Pursuant to a sale or other change of ownership that results
in the removal of the vicious dog from the corporate limits of the village;
               (C) Pursuant to the immediate transfer of the vicious dog to
another enclosure; or
               (D) Necessary for compliance with an order of the hearing
officer or the court having jurisdiction.
      2.   Required Signage: The owner of any dog found to be a vicious dog
must display in a prominent place on the premises where the vicious dog is
confined, and at each entrance to any outdoor enclosure where the dog is kept,
clearly visible signage stating that a vicious dog is kept on the premises.
Each such sign shall be a noncombustible material, weather resistant and one
foot by one foot (1' x 1') in size with text not less than one inch (1") in
height. The text of such sign shall read:
WARNING: VICIOUS DOG KEPT ON THE PREMISES
      3.   Evaluation And Training: The owner of a vicious dog must cause to be
completed, no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the designation of
the dog as a vicious dog, both: a) an evaluation of the vicious dog by a
certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or
another recognized expert in the field; and b) obedience training or other
training or treatment of the vicious dog as deemed appropriate by the
behaviorist or expert.
      4.   Altering And Microchipping: A vicious dog must be altered and
microchipped at the owner's expense, if not already altered and microchipped,
within fourteen (14) days after the designation of the dog as a vicious dog.
      5.   Insurance Coverage: Within fourteen (14) days after the designation
of a dog as a vicious dog, the owner of the vicious dog must obtain and
maintain, and provide the village with satisfactory evidence of liability
insurance coverage in the amount of at least five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00), which coverage includes, without limitation, coverage for animal
bites. In lieu of liability insurance, the owner of a vicious dog may obtain a
surety bond in the value of at least five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).
      6.   Notice Of Designation: No owner shall sell, transfer, or otherwise
place a vicious dog in the permanent possession of any other person, including,
without limitation, any animal shelter, without first notifying that person
that the dog has been designated a vicious dog pursuant to this section and
notifying the jurisdiction to which the dog will be transferred of the dog's
designation as a vicious dog pursuant to this section.
   C.   Failure To Comply:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess,
maintain or have the care or custody of a vicious dog within the corporate
limits of the village unless the dog is kept and maintained in compliance with
this article and with the order entered by the hearing officer or the court
having jurisdiction. Upon finding that a vicious dog has not been so kept or
maintained, the hearing officer or court having jurisdiction may, in addition
to requiring the payment of the penalties provided in this chapter, order that
the license issued for the vicious dog pursuant to subsection
6-4A-1B of this article be revoked and order:
         a.   That the vicious dog be altered and microchipped at the owner's
expense, if not already altered and microchipped, and be permanently removed
from the corporate limits of the village within fourteen (14) days, with the
owner of the vicious dog being responsible for all fees and costs incurred or
charged by the village or the animal control facility utilized by the village
in caring for the vicious dog and the altering and microchipping prior to its
removal from the corporate limits; or
         b.   That the vicious dog be humanely destroyed; except, that the
hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction shall not order the humane
destruction of the vicious dog if the owner of the vicious dog provides the
hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction with written proof that:
            (1)   The vicious dog will be placed in an animal shelter outside
of the village that has been notified of the dog's designation as a vicious dog
under this section and has consented to the shelter and care of the vicious
dog;
            (2)   The animal shelter will accept the vicious dog and the owner
is willing to pay all expenses for transporting the vicious dog to the animal
shelter; and
            (3)   The owner has informed the animal control authority in the
jurisdiction to which the animal is being relocated of the dog's designation as
a vicious dog under this section and the animal control authority, if required
by law, has consented to the relocation.
      2.   If the hearing officer or the court having jurisdiction orders the
permanent removal of the vicious dog pursuant to subsection C1a of this
section, the owner must, within fourteen (14) days of the order to remove the
dog from the corporate limits of the village, provide written evidence to the
village that the owner has informed the person(s) to whom the dog has been
relocated of the dog's designation as a vicious dog under this section and that
person(s) has consented to the shelter and care of the dog, and has informed
the animal control authority in the jurisdiction to which the animal is being
relocated of the dog's designation as a vicious dog under this section and the
animal control authority has consented to the relocation.
   D.   Unlawful Return Of Vicious Dog To Village: It shall be unlawful for any
person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a
vicious dog within the corporate limits of the village after such a vicious dog
has been ordered permanently removed from the corporate limits of the village.
Upon finding that a vicious dog has been kept, maintained or returned to the
corporate limits of the village after having been ordered permanently removed
from the corporate limits of the village, the hearing officer or court having
jurisdiction may, in addition to requiring the payment of penalties provided in
this chapter, order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed.
   E.   Public Nuisance: Any vicious dog that is not confined in accordance
with this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
impounded by any law enforcement authority having jurisdiction and permanently
removed from the corporate limits of the village.
   F.   Vicious Dogs From Other Jurisdictions: Any person desiring to bring a
dog to live in the village that has been previously declared within another
jurisdiction to have behaved in a vicious manner or a similar manner, or has
been designated within another jurisdiction as a vicious dog or any similar
designation, must notify the police department, prior to moving the dog into
the village, of such declaration or designation. Upon moving the dog into the
village, the dog will be considered as a vicious dog pursuant to this article,
and the owner shall comply with the registration and license requirements in
subsection
6-4A-1B of this article and shall comply at all times with each and every
requirement and restriction established in this chapter pertaining to vicious
dogs, including, without limitation, the restrictions set forth in subsection B
of this section. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. Ord. 21-36, 5-18-2021)
6-4A-8: REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS:
   A.   Notice To Owners Of Impoundment: When dogs or cats are apprehended and
impounded, they shall be scanned for the presence of a microchip by the animal
control facility used by the village. The police department and/or the animal
control facility utilized by the village shall make every reasonable attempt to
contact the owner as soon as possible. The animal control facility shall give
notice of not less than seven (7) business days to the owner prior to disposal
of the animal. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the
owner. Testimony of the personnel of the animal control facility who mails such
notice, or the animal control officer, shall be evidence of the receipt of such
notice by the owner of the animal.
   B.   Redemption Procedure: Except as provided in section
6-4-3 of this chapter and sections
6-4A-6 and
6-4A-7 of this article, in case the owner of any impounded dog or cat desires
to make redemption thereof, he or she may do so by doing the following:
      1.   Presenting proof of current rabies inoculation and dangerous or
vicious dog license registration, if applicable.
      2.   Paying for the rabies inoculation of the dog or cat and dangerous or
vicious dog license registration, if applicable.
      3.   Paying the animal control facility for the board of the dog or cat
for the period it was impounded.
      4.   Paying for microchipping if not already done.
      5.   Paying for altering if required by this chapter.
   C.   Disposition Of Unclaimed Dogs Or Cats: When not redeemed by the owner,
agent or caretaker, a dog or cat must be scanned for a microchip. If a
microchip is present, the registered owner must be notified. After contact has
been made or attempted and the dog or cat has not been redeemed, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter with respect to dangerous dogs or vicious
dogs, dogs or cats deemed adoptable by the animal control facility utilized by
the village shall be offered for adoption by the animal control facility
utilized by the village, or made available to a licensed humane society or
rescue group. If no placement is available, it shall be humanely destroyed. The
animal control facility utilized by the village shall not adopt or release any
dog or cat to anyone other than the owner unless the animal has been altered
and microchipped. The animal control facility utilized by the village shall not
release dogs or cats to an individual representing a rescue group, unless the
group has been licensed or has a foster care permit issued by the Illinois
department of agriculture or is a representative of a not for profit out of
state organization. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. Ord. 21-36, 5-18-2021)
6-4A-9: DOG KENNELS:
   A.   Definition: The owner of six (6) or more dogs at least two (2) months
old, whether for pleasure, profit, breeding, or exhibiting, shall be deemed the
operator of a dog kennel.
   B.   Application For License: The application for a kennel license shall
state the name and address of the owner of the kennel, the location of the
kennel, and the number of dogs proposed to be kept. No kennel shall be
established within fifty feet (50') of any dwelling house unless both the owner
and lessee of such dwelling house consent in advance in writing to the same.
(Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
   C.   Kennel Owner's Licensing Options: The owner of a dog kennel may, at
his/her option, in lieu of an individual license for each dog, procure a kennel
license to expire on March 31 next from the village clerk on application and
payment of a fee as established in the annual fee schedule. Such kennel license
shall obviate the necessity of procuring individual licenses for said dogs;
provided, that any such dogs permitted off the owner's premises must be
licensed individually; and provided further, that the vaccination provisions of
this article shall also apply to kennel dogs. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015; amd. 2016
Code)
   D.   License Tags: With each kennel license, the village clerk shall issue
an equal number of tags or checks to the number of dogs authorized to be kept
in the kennel, such tags bearing the number of the kennel license. Each dog
shall wear said tag in lieu of an individual license tag.
   E.   Posting License: Each license shall be posted conspicuously on the
premises where the kennel is located. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
   F.   Transfer Of License: The kennel license is not transferable except on
application by both the old and the new owners and payment to the village clerk
of a transfer fee as established in the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-
2015; amd. 2016 Code)
   G.   Sanitary Conditions; Restraint Of Noisy Dogs: Dog kennels shall be kept
at all times in a clean and sanitary condition, and dogs shall be reasonably
restrained from annoying the neighborhood or the general public by loud,
frequent, or habitual barking, yelping, or howling. (Ord. 15-08, 1-20-2015)
ARTICLE B. ATTRACTING ANIMALS CONTROLLED
SECTION:
6-4B-1: Prohibited Garbage And Refuse Deposits
6-4B-2: Accumulation Of Garbage And Refuse; Containers
6-4B-3: Feeding Birds And Squirrels
6-4B-4: Birdhouses And Birdbaths
6-4B-1: PROHIBITED GARBAGE AND REFUSE DEPOSITS:
   A.   No person shall deposit upon the ground of his property, or accessible
from ground level on his property, any household food, garbage, pet food or
other edible materials whatsoever in such a manner as will attract or feed any
animals, wild or domestic.
   B.   No person shall deposit any household food, garbage, pet food or other
edible materials in any garbage can, bin or other receptacle outside of any
fully enclosed structure that is not so constructed and maintained as to make
the contents thereof inaccessible to all vermin, raccoons and other scavengers,
and other animals, wild or domestic. (Ord. 07-10, 4-17-2007)
6-4B-2: ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE; CONTAINERS:
No person shall allow garbage, other edible products, offal or miscellaneous
waste to accumulate on any premises or to be stored or kept thereon, except by
animalproof means and in a manner that will not be the source of odor,
unsightliness, spawning or breeding of vermin and other pests (including
insects), or endanger health, and shall remain for no longer than the next
garbage or other scavenger services pick up. (Ord. 07-10, 4-17-2007)
6-4B-3: FEEDING BIRDS AND SQUIRRELS:
Birds and tree squirrels shall be fed only from bird feeders or trays which
shall be placed and of such a height and design as to make the contents thereof
inaccessible to vermin, raccoons and other animals whatsoever, wild or
domestic, except birds and tree squirrels. The materials placed in such feeders
and trays shall be moderate in amount and shall consist of commercial bird
food, grains and kernels of corn, seeds, nuts, and bread bits and crumbs. (Ord.
07-10, 4-17-2007)
6-4B-4: BIRDHOUSES AND BIRDBATHS:
A birdhouse and/or birdbath may be maintained so long as it is at least three
feet (3') from the ground. (Ord. 07-10, 4-17-2007)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Aiding In An Offense
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein,
they shall be defined as contained in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-0.5 et
seq., as amended. (2016 Code)
6-5-2: AIDING IN AN OFFENSE:
Whenever in the ordinances of the village any act or omission is made unlawful,
it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or
concealing the fact of such act or omission. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
SECTION:
6-5A-1: Theft
6-5A-2: Retail Theft
6-5A-3: Deceptive Practices
6-5A-4: Criminal Damage To Property
6-5A-5: Trespasses
6-5A-6: Activities On Public Ways Near Schools
6-5A-7: Certain Street Sales Prohibited
6-5A-8: Storing, Depositing Refuse
6-5A-9: Obstructing Stairways, Exits And Storm Drains
6-5A-10: Removal Of Fire Hydrant Locators
6-5A-1: THEFT:
It is unlawful for any person to commit a theft. A person commits theft when he
knowingly:
   A.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   B.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
   C.   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
   D.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him or her to
believe that the property was stolen; or
   E.   Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody of any law
enforcement agency which any law enforcement officer or any individual acting
in behalf of a law enforcement agency explicitly represents to the person as
being stolen or represents to the person such circumstances as would reasonably
induce the person to believe that the property was stolen; and
      1.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
      2.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      3.   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit. (2016 Code)
6-5A-2: RETAIL THEFT:
It is unlawful for any person to commit a retail theft. A person commits the
offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
   A.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
   B.   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of
value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise at less than the full
retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
   C.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving
the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
   D.   Underrings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise; or
   E.   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
   F.   Represents to a merchant that he, she, or another is the lawful owner
of property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts
to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in
exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
   G.   Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft
detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
   H.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner and
thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property when a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it
to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the full retail value of such
property to the lessor in satisfaction of any contractual provision requiring
such, within ten (10) days after written demand from the owner for its return.
A notice in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by
registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by the lessee and shown on
the leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand. (2016 Code)
6-5A-3: DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
It is unlawful for any person to commit a deceptive practice.
   A.   Generally: A person commits a deceptive practice when, with intent to
defraud, the person does any of the following:
      1.   He or she knowingly causes another, by deception or threat, to
execute a document disposing of property or a document by which a pecuniary
obligation is incurred.
      2.   Being an officer, manager or other person participating in the
direction of a financial institution, he or she knowingly receives or permits
the receipt of a deposit or other investment, knowing that the institution is
insolvent.
      3.   He or she knowingly makes a false or deceptive statement addressed
to the public for the purpose of promoting the sale of property or services.
   B.   Bad Checks: A person commits a deceptive practice when:
      1.   With intent to obtain control over property or to pay for property,
labor or services of another, or in satisfaction of an obligation for payment
of tax under the retailers' occupation tax act or any other tax due to the
state of Illinois, he or she issues or delivers a check or other order upon a
real or fictitious depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will
not be paid by the depository. The trier of fact may infer that the defendant
knows that the check or other order will not be paid by the depository and that
the defendant has acted with intent to defraud when the defendant fails to have
sufficient funds or credit with the depository when the check or other order is
issued or delivered, or when such check or other order is presented for payment
and dishonored on each of two (2) occasions at least seven (7) days apart. In
this subsection, "property" includes rental property (real or personal).
      2.   He or she issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real or
fictitious depository in an amount exceeding one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) in payment of an amount owed on any credit transaction for property,
labor or services, or in payment of the entire amount owed on any credit
transaction for property, labor or services, knowing that it will not be paid
by the depository, and thereafter fails to provide funds or credit with the
depository in the face amount of the check or order within seven (7) days of
receiving actual notice from the depository or payee of the dishonor of the
check or order.
   C.   Bank Related Fraud:
      1.   False Statement:
         a.   A person commits false statement bank fraud if he or she, with
intent to defraud, makes or causes to be made any false statement in writing in
order to obtain an account with a bank or other financial institution, or to
obtain credit from a bank or other financial institution, or to obtain services
from a currency exchange, knowing such writing to be false, and with the intent
that it be relied upon.
         b.   For purposes of this subsection C1, a "false statement" means any
false statement representing identity, address, or employment, or the identity,
address, or employment of any person, firm, or corporation.
      2.   Possession Of Stolen Or Fraudulently Obtained Checks: A person
commits possession of stolen or fraudulently obtained checks when he or she
possesses, with the intent to obtain access to funds of another person held in
a real or fictitious deposit account at a financial institution, makes a false
statement or a misrepresentation to the financial institution, or possesses,
transfers, negotiates, or presents for payment a check, draft, or other item
purported to direct the financial institution to withdraw or pay funds out of
the account holder's deposit account with knowledge that such possession,
transfer, negotiation, or presentment is not authorized by the account holder
or the issuing financial institution. A person shall be deemed to have been
authorized to possess, transfer, negotiate, or present for payment such item if
the person was otherwise entitled by law to withdraw or recover funds from the
account in question and followed the requisite procedures under the law. If the
account holder, upon discovery of the withdrawal or payment, claims that the
withdrawal or payment was not authorized, the financial institution may require
the account holder to submit an affidavit to that effect on a form satisfactory
to the financial institution before the financial institution may be required
to credit the account in an amount equal to the amount or amounts that were
withdrawn or paid without authorization.
      3.   Possession Of Implements Of Check Fraud: A person commits possession
of implements of check fraud when he or she possesses, with the intent to
defraud and without the authority of the account holder or financial
institution, any check imprinter, signature imprinter, or "certified" stamp.
(2016 Code)
6-5A-4: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A person commits criminal damage to property when he or she:
   A.   Knowingly damages any property of another;
   B.   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damages property of another;
   C.   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another;
   D.   Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his or her
consent;
   E.   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another any stink
bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intends to interfere with
the use by another of the land or building;
   F.   Knowingly damages any property, other than as described in subsection B
of this section, with intent to defraud an insurer;
   G.   Knowingly shoots a firearm at any portion of a railroad train;
   H.   Knowingly, without proper authorization, cuts, injures, damages,
defaces, destroys, or tampers with any fire hydrant or any public or private
firefighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to firefighting
equipment; or
   I.   Intentionally, without proper authorization, opens any fire hydrant.
(2016 Code)
6-5A-5: TRESPASSES:
   A.   Trespass To Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and
without authority enter any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof
of another without his consent.
   B.   Trespass To Land:
      1.   Whoever enters upon the land or any part thereof of another, after
receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant
that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land of another after
receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart, commits the offense of
trespass.
      2.   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of subsection B1 of this section if he has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such
entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such
land or the forbidden part thereof. (2016 Code)
6-5A-6: ACTIVITIES ON PUBLIC WAYS NEAR SCHOOLS:
It is unlawful for any person to distribute on any public sidewalk, street or
way, unsolicited material of any kind within one hundred feet (100') of the
entrance or exit of any elementary school property between the hours of seven
thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00)
P.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M.; junior high or middle school between the
hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and two
thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. to three twenty five o'clock (3:25) P.M. on days in
which classes are in session. (2016 Code)
6-5A-7: CERTAIN STREET SALES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or give away for
commercial purposes any food, beverage, confection or other item for human
consumption upon a public street right of way, including a sidewalk, in the
village. (2016 Code)
6-5A-8: STORING, DEPOSITING REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as
to create a fire hazard or to store or throw any refuse of any kind on any
street, alley or other public place. (2016 Code)
6-5A-9: OBSTRUCTING STAIRWAYS, EXITS AND STORM DRAINS:
   A.   Stairways And Exits: It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the
obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor or exit in any office building,
factory, hotel, school, church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public
hall, or any building used by two (2) or more tenants or families in such
manner that it interferes with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor
or exit.
   B.   Storm Drains: No person shall obstruct, fill in, damage or interfere
with any storm drain, ditch or swale in any public street or utility easement
in the village in such a way as to obstruct the flow of stormwater. (2016 Code)
6-5A-10: REMOVAL OF FIRE HYDRANT LOCATORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally remove any sign or post
which has been erected, placed or installed for the purpose of indicating the
location of a fire hydrant. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS, HEALTH AND SAFETY
SECTION:
6-5B-1: Assault
6-5B-2: Battery
6-5B-3: Reckless Conduct
6-5B-4: Disorderly Conduct
6-5B-5: Mob Action
6-5B-6: Fighting
6-5B-7: Harassment By Telephone
6-5B-8: Consumption, Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages
6-5B-9: Abandoned Containers
6-5B-10: Assemblies
6-5B-11: Possession, Sale Of Fireworks
6-5B-12: Obstructing A Peace Officer
6-5B-1: ASSAULT:
It is unlawful for any person to commit an assault. A person commits an assault
when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in
reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. (2016 Code)
6-5B-2: BATTERY:
It is unlawful for any person to commit a battery. A person commits battery if
he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification and by any means:
   A.   Causes bodily harm to an individual.
   B.   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual. (2016 Code)
6-5B-3: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person to commit an act of reckless conduct. A person
commits an act of reckless conduct when he causes bodily harm to or endangers
the bodily safety of an individual by any means, or performs recklessly the
acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they otherwise are lawful
or unlawful. (2016 Code)
6-5B-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person to commit an act of disorderly conduct. A person
commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another
and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   B.   Transmits in any manner to the village fire department a false alarm of
fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such fire exists; or
   C.   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is
concealed in such place; or
   D.   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, police officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing
that such an offense has been committed; or
   E.   Enters upon the property of another and, for a lewd or unlawful
purpose, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening therein. (2016 Code)
6-5B-5: MOB ACTION:
Mob action consists of any of the following:
   A.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
   B.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law, for
the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed to
have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence. (2016
Code)
6-5B-6: FIGHTING:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in or encourage a fight on any public
property or other place open to the public so as to endanger the health, safety
or property of another. (2016 Code)
6-5B-7: HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use telephone communication to make a
telephone call or calls, whether or not conversation ensues, with the intent to
abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number. (2016 Code)
6-5B-8: CONSUMPTION, POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor or to hold,
possess or maintain any open can, glass, bottle or other container of alcoholic
liquor on any public property, including, but not limited to, any sidewalk,
street, alley, highway, parkway, park or municipal parking lot or on any
private property area containing nine (9) or more parking spaces which is open
for public access or public accommodation, where the owner or operator of the
private property does not hold a license for consumption of alcoholic liquor
outside of the licensed premises; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful to consume or hold alcoholic liquor in public as described in this
section if there is a public or private gathering for which a special events
liquor license has been obtained. (Ord. 13-13, 4-16-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
6-5B-9: ABANDONED CONTAINERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any refrigerator, icebox or deep
freeze in any place accessible to the public without first removing the doors
of such refrigerator, icebox or deep freeze. (2016 Code)
6-5B-10: ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   Disturbing Assemblies: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb
any lawful assemblage or gathering in the village.
   B.   Prohibited Assemblies: It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a
member of any disorderly crowd or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful
purpose. (2016 Code)
6-5B-11: POSSESSION, SALE OF FIREWORKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, offer for sale, expose for sale
or sell any fireworks as defined in the village fire code. (2016 Code)
6-5B-12: OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER:
No person shall intentionally obstruct, hinder or prevent the lawful execution
of any legal process, civil or criminal, or apprehension of another on a charge
or conviction of a criminal offense or interfere with a peace officer while the
officer is engaged in the performance of official duties for the purpose of
deterring or interfering with the performance of those duties. This section
shall not be interpreted to prohibit verbally protesting any action or to
prohibit verbally urging any officer or other person to take any action. (2016
Code)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES INVOLVING MORALS AND DECENCY
SECTION:
6-5C-1: Obscenity
6-5C-2: Gambling And Related Offenses
6-5C-3: Public Urination, Defecation
6-5C-4: Saggy Clothing
6-5C-5: Electronic Sweepstakes Machines Prohibited
6-5C-1: OBSCENITY:
   A.   Definition: A thing is "obscene" if, considered as a whole, its
predominant appeal is to prurient interest; that is, a shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond
customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. A
thing is "obscene" even though the obscenity is latent, as in the case of
undeveloped photographs.
   B.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit obscenity. A
person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof,
he:
      1.   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or
provide, any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
      2.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
      3.   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
or
      4.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his body for gain; or
      5.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      6.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or
held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   C.   Interpretation Of Evidence:
      1.   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults; except,
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      2.   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the
matter is utterly without redeeming social importance.
      3.   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall
be admissible to show:
         a.   The character of the audience for which the material was designed
or to which it was directed.
         b.   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have
on the behavior of such people.
         c.   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits
of the material, or the absence thereof.
         d.   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state.
         e.   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material.
         f.   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
   D.   Prima Facie Evidence: The creation, purchase, procurement or possession
of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted
for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three (3)
copies of obscene material, shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to
disseminate.
   E.   Affirmative Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      1.   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material. (2016 Code)
6-5C-2: GAMBLING AND RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
    GAMBLING DEVICE: 1. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machine
or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill
or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded,
bet, won or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or other
device designed primarily for use in a gambling place, including any device
that awards credits and contains a circuit, meter, or switch capable of
removing and recording the removal of credits when the award of credits is
dependent upon chance.
      2.   "Gambling device" does not include:
         a.   A coin in the slot operated mechanical device played for
amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical
device, which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the
operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns
to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property.
         b.   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for
the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
         c.   Video gaming terminals.
   GAMBLING PLACE: Any real estate, vehicle, boat or any other property
whatsoever used for the purposes of gambling, other than gambling conducted in
the manner authorized by the riverboat gambling act or by the video gaming act.
   LOTTERY: Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift, sale or some other name.
   POLICY GAME: Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees, by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other
device, that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall, in
the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery, entitle the purchaser
or holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any licensed electronic video game machine offered
for play by licensed establishments operated in accordance with the video
gaming act and as authorized by the Illinois gaming board from time to time.
   B.   Gambling Prohibited; Exemptions:
      1.   A person commits gambling, which is a misdemeanor, when he:
         a.   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of
value.
         b.   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or any
political nomination, appointment or election.
         c.   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling
device.
         d.   Contracts to have or give himself or another the option to buy or
sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or other
commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, where it is, at
the time of making such contract, intended by both parties thereto that the
contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever exercised, or the contract
resulting therefrom, shall be settled, not by the receipt or delivery of such
property, but by the payment only of differences in prices thereof; however,
the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise, endorsement or guarantee, by or through
a person registered with the secretary of state pursuant to section 8 of the
Illinois securities law of 1953, or by or through a person exempt from such
registration under section 8, of a put, call or other option to buy or sell
securities which have been registered with the secretary of state or which are
exempt from such registration under section 3 of the Illinois securities law of
1953 is not gambling within the meaning of this subsection.
         e.   Knowingly owns or possesses any bank, instrument or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been or are recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the course of a bet or
wager.
         f.   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment or election.
         g.   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or
transfers any ticket or share for any lottery.
         h.   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
other similar device.
         i.   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or drafts, prints
or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or similar device, or any advertisement of any lottery or policy game.
         j.   Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or
share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except
for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by
and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state or
foreign government.
         k.   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means, or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except, that nothing in this subsection B1
prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting
of sporting events or contests.
      2.   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be
convicted of gambling:
         a.   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of
chance including, without limitation, contracts of indemnity or guaranty and
life or health or accident insurance.
         b.   Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest.
         c.   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the laws of this state.
         d.   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law.
         e.   The game commonly known as "bingo", when conducted in accordance
with the bingo license and tax act.
         f.   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with the
Illinois lottery law.
         g.   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this subsection, an antique slot
machine is one manufactured twenty five (25) years ago or earlier.
         h.   Raffles when conducted in accordance with the raffles and poker
runs act, approved August 5, 1980, as amended.
         i.   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with the charitable
games act.
         j.   Gambling games when conducted in accordance with the riverboat
gambling act.
         k.   Video gaming when offered for play by licensed establishments
operated in accordance with the video gaming act and as authorized by the
Illinois gaming board from time to time.
      3.   In prosecutions under this subsection, circumstantial evidence shall
have the same validity and weight as in any criminal prosecution.
   C.   Gambling Places: Any person who knowingly permits any premises or
property owned or occupied by him or under his control to be used as a gambling
place shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. When any premises is determined by a
court having jurisdiction to be a gambling place:
      1.   Such premises is a public nuisance and may be proceeded against as
such.
      2.   All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the state or the
village authorizing the serving of food or liquor on such premises shall be
void; and no license, permit or certificate so canceled shall be reissued for
such premises for a period of sixty (60) days thereafter; nor shall any person
convicted of keeping a gambling place be reissued such license for one year
from his conviction and, after a second conviction of keeping a gambling place,
any such person shall not be reissued such license.
      3.   Such premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any provisions of this subsection shall be held liable for and may
be sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any
unsatisfied fine that may be levied under any provisions of this subsection.
   D.   Forfeiture Of Gambling Devices: Gambling devices shall be forfeited to
the city under the conditions specified in and in the manner provided by
section 28-5 of the criminal code of 2012, as now or hereafter amended. (2016
Code)
6-5C-3: PUBLIC URINATION, DEFECATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or on a public
street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, public or
utility right of way, or other public place, other than in a restroom, or in
public view. (2016 Code)
6-5C-4: SAGGY CLOTHING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully appear in view of the public
wearing pants or skirts more than three inches (3") below the top of the hips
(crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or underwear. (2016 Code)
6-5C-5: ELECTRONIC SWEEPSTAKES MACHINES PROHIBITED:
   A.   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
 
             A mechanically, electronically operated machine or device, that is owned, leased
ELECTRONIC   or otherwise possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the
MACHINE OR   sweepstakes sponsor’s or promoter’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or
DEVICE:      contractors; that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses
             energy, and that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other
             mechanism.
ENTER OR     The act or process by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize
ENTRY:       offered in a sweepstakes.
             Visual information capable of being seen by a sweepstakes entrant that takes the
             form of actual game play or simulated game play of games, including, but not
             limited to, a poker game or any other kind of playing card game; a bingo game; a
             craps game; a keno game; a lotto game; an eight-liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a
ENTERTAINMEN game based on or involving the random or chance matching of different pictures,
T DISPLAY:   words, numbers or symbols not dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player;
             a casino or gambling game; and any other video game the outcome of which is not
             in whole or in part dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player that is
             played in the course of revealing a prize as a result of an entry into a
             sweepstakes.
             Any gift award, gratuity, good, service, credit, or anything else of value, which
PRIZE:       may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is actually
             transferred, or placed on an account tor other record as evidence of the intent
             to transfer the prize.
             Any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion, which, with or without
SWEEPSTAKES: payment of any consideration, a person may enter to win or become eligible to
             receive any prize, the determination of which is based on an element of chance.
 
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or place into
operation, an electronic machine or device for the following purposes:
      1.   To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertainment
display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or
      2.   To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an
entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit duly licensed video gaming
terminals as authorized by state law and by the Village Code.
   D.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not
less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand
and five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each offense. Each electronic machine
or device found to be in violation, and each day such violation occurs or
continues, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 21-91, 12-
21-2021)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES INVOLVING CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
6-5D-1: Definitions
6-5D-2: Cannabis Possession And Use Prohibited; Exceptions
6-5D-3: Drug Paraphernalia
6-5D-1: DEFINITIONS:
Words and phrases not defined in this Article shall have the meanings given to
them in the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1, et seq, as amended,
the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100, et seq, as amended,
the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1-1, et seq, as
amended, and the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
410 ILCS 130/1, et seq, as amended. As used in this article, unless the context
otherwise requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102 of
the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/102,
as if that definition were incorporated herein.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are
intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Illinois controlled
substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., or the
methamphetamine control and community protection act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 646/1 et seq. The term includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance.
   B.   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
   C.   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
   D.   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting a
controlled substance by private persons.
   E.   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cocaine, hashish, hashish oil, methamphetamine or other
controlled substances, as defined by law, into the human body including, where
applicable, the following items:
      1.   Water pipes.
      2.   Carburetion tubes and devices.
      3.   Smoking and carburetion masks.
      4.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
      5.   Carburetor pipes.
      6.   Electric pipes.
      7.   Air driven pipes.
      8.   Chillums.
      9.   Bongs.
      10.   Ice pipes or chillers.
      11.   Glass pipes.
      12.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this article. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 20-06, 1-21-2020)
6-5D-2: CANNABIS POSSESSION AND USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21years to possess
any quantity of cannabis.
      1.   Except if otherwise authorized by law, for a person who is 21 years
of age or older and a resident of the State of Illinois, it shall be unlawful
for any person to possess cannabis in excess of the following possession
limits:
         a.   30 grams of cannabis flower;
         b.   No more than 500 milligrams of THC contained in cannabis-infused
product;
         c.   5 grams of cannabis concentrate; and
         d.   For registered qualifying patients, any cannabis produced by
cannabis plants grown under 410 ILCS 705/10-5(b), provided any amount of
cannabis produced in excess of 30 grams of raw cannabis or its equivalent must
remain secured within the residence or residential property in which it was
grown.
      2.   For a person who is 21 years of age or older and who is not a
resident of the State of Illinois, the possession limit is:
         a.   15 grams of cannabis flower;
         b.   2.5 grams of cannabis concentrate: and
         c.   250 milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-infused product.
         The possession limits found in subsections B1 and B2 of this Section
are cumulative. The penalty for possessing more cannabis flower, cannabis
concentrate or THC in a cannabis-infused product than allowed in subsections B1
and B2 shall be a minimum fine of two hundred and no/100 dollars ($200.00) and
a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred and no/100 dollars ($1,500.00).
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or permit the use of,
cannabis contrary to the Illinois Cannabis Tax and Regulation Act, which
prohibits the use of cannabis in any public place. A violation of this
subsection 83 shall be a minimum fine of two hundred and no/100 dollars
($200.00) and a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred and no/100 dollars
($1,500.00).
   B.   Lawful Defense: It shall be lawful and a defense to a violation of
subsection A of this section that a person that is a qualifying patient,
designated caregiver, cultivation center, cultivation center agent, medical
cannabis dispensing organization, medical cannabis dispensing organization
agent, or employee of the State of Illinois as defined and identified by the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act 1  (the "Act") possess
cannabis in compliance with the limitations allowed in the Act. (2016 Code;
amd. Ord. 16-39, 9-6-2016; Ord. 20- 06, 1-21-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
6-5D-3: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Sale Prohibited; Nuisance Declared:
      1.   No person shall keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, or deliver for
any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.
      2.   Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of
drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for
any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful.
      3.   In addition to any other penalties already provided for by law and
this section, a person or store owner convicted of selling drug paraphernalia
shall be subject to having his license to sell tobacco revoked.
   B.   Use Or Possession Prohibited; Exemptions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or to possess an item of
drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing a controlled substance into the human body, or in
preparing a controlled substance for that use. The minimum fine for a violation
of this subsection shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the maximum fine
shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The settlement penalty shall be
the minimum fine. This subsection does not apply to a person who is legally
authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic
Syringes and Needles Act.
      2.   In determining intent under subsection B1 of this section, the trier
of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the controlled substances
to drug paraphernalia or the presence of a controlled substance on the drug
paraphernalia.
   C.   Exemptions:
      1.   This section shall not apply to the following:
         a.   Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling,
or other use of a controlled substance as an incident to lawful research,
teaching, chemical analysis, use in law enforcement activities and which is not
offered for sale.
         b.   Items historically and customarily used in connection with the
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. Items exempt under this
subsection include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles,
baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling papers.
         c.   Items which are used for decorative purposes, when such items
have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any
illicit purpose prohibited by the Act.
         d.   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes
or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act.
      2.   In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under
subsection C1 of this section, the trier of fact should consider, in addition
to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
         a.   The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the
item involved has been put.
         b.   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the
item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the
device upon its functioning.
         c.   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put.
         d.   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the
time and place of sale or commercial delivery.
         e.   Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose
or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs.
         f.   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was
displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or
otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made.
         g.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
         h.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
   D.   Lawful Defense: It shall be lawful and a defense to a violation of this
section that a person that is a qualifying patient, designated caregiver,
cultivation center, cultivation center agent, medical cannabis dispensing
organization, medical cannabis dispensing organization agent, or employee of
the State of Illinois as defined and identified by the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act 1  possess, sell or deliver drug
paraphernalia in compliance with the requirements of the Act. (2016 Code; amd.
Ord. 20-06, 1-21-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
ARTICLE E. OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS
SECTION:
6-5E-1: Concealed Weapons
6-5E-2: Unlawful Use Of Weapons
6-5E-3: Discharge Of Firearms And Slingshots
6-5E-4: Air Rifles
6-5E-5: Hunting
6-5E-6: Manufacture, Sale Of Weapons
6-5E-1: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
It is unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the village unless otherwise
allowed by state or federal law. (Ord. 09-05, 1-20-2009, eff. 1-20-2009)
6-5E-2: UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS:
A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he knowingly:
   A.   Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any bludgeon,
blackjack, slungshot, sand club, sandbag, metal knuckles, throwing star, or
knife commonly referred to as a switchblade knife which has a blade that opens
automatically by hand pressure applied to a button spring or other device in
the handle of the knife, or ballistic knife which is a device that propels a
knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or
compressed gas; or
   B.   Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character; or
   C.   Carries on or about his person or in any vehicle a tear gas gun
projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a nonlethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person eighteen (18) years of
age or older. (2016 Code)
6-5E-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND SLINGSHOTS:
   A.   Firearms: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms in the
village; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to
prohibit any officer of the law to discharge a firearm in the performance of
his duty, nor to any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his
person or property.
   B.   Slingshots: No person shall shoot any slingshot anywhere in the
village. (2016 Code)
6-5E-4: AIR RIFLES:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, "air rifle" means and includes any
air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, pellet gun or any
implement that is not a firearm which impels a pellet constructed of hard
plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force that reasonably is
expected to cause bodily harm.
   B.   Regulations:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to carry or possess on or about his
person within the corporate limits of the village any loaded or uncased air
rifle.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle from or
across any street, sidewalk, road, highway, or public land or any public place
except on a safely constructed target range.
   C.   Permissive Possession: Notwithstanding any provision of subsection B of
this section, it is lawful for any person to have in his possession any air
rifle if it is:
      1.   Kept within his house or residence or other private enclosure.
      2.   Used by any person who is a duly enrolled member of any club, team
or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining as part of its
facilities or having written permission to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range
under the supervision, guidance and instruction of a responsible adult and then
only if said air rifle is actually being used in connection with the activities
of said club, team or society under the supervision of a responsible adult.
      3.   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances
when such air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to
endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in such manner as to
prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside the
limits of such grounds or residence.
   D.   Seizure: A police officer of the village shall seize, take, or remove
any air rifle used in any manner in violation of this section. (2016 Code)
6-5E-5: HUNTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing, trapping or hunting
any animal other than as prescribed by law in the village. (2016 Code)
6-5E-6: MANUFACTURE, SALE OF WEAPONS:
It is unlawful for any firm, business, or corporation within the village to
manufacture for sale or cause to be manufactured, sell, keep for sale, offer,
or dispose of any instrument or weapon of the kind usually known as a pistol,
revolver, shotgun, rifle, air gun, or any other offensive and dangerous weapon
or instrument, or to give or sell a pistol or firearm to any person. (1976 Code
§ 9.36.040)
CHAPTER 6
MINORS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Curfew Regulations
6-6-1-1: Daytime Curfew For Expelled Or Suspended Students
6-6-2: Truancy
6-6-3: Vandalism
6-6-4: Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian
6-6-4-1: Unsupervised Possession Of Weapons And Fireworks By Minors
6-6-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    CURFEW HOURS:
      1.   Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day; and
      2.   Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Friday or Saturday until six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day.
   EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN:
      1.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any unemancipated person under seventeen (17) years of age.
   OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a minor who is:
      1.   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person;
or
      2.   At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
including the right of way, and the common areas of schools, shopping centers,
parking lots, parks, theaters, restaurants, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transportation facilities, and similar areas that are open to the
use of the public.
   REMAIN: To:
      1.   Linger or stay; or
      2.   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for a minor to be or remain in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor or other
person in custody or control of a minor to knowingly permit or, by insufficient
control, allow the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of
any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or any employee of an
establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
   C.   Defenses:
      1.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section
that the minor was:
         a.   Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
         b.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         c.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         d.   Engaged in lawful employment activity, or going to or returning
home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         e.   Involved in an emergency;
         f.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
         g.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a school, church, civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home by a direct route without any detour or
stop within one-half (1/2) hour of the termination of an official school,
religious, or other entertainment activity such as a movie, play, or
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a civic
organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
         h.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
         i.   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
emancipation of minors act 1 .
      2.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B3 of this section
that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   D.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection C of this section is present. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
6-6-1-1: DAYTIME CURFEW FOR EXPELLED OR SUSPENDED STUDENTS:
   A.   Curfew Established; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any juvenile
between the age of seven (7) and seventeen (17) years, who is subject to
compulsory school attendance pursuant to the Illinois school code, whether
attending a public, private or parochial school, who has been expelled or
suspended from attending such school, and who is not otherwise subject to
section
6-6-2 of this chapter, to be upon any public road, street, alley, park or other
lands used for public purposes or in any public place of business or amusement
within the village during the daytime hours when such schools are in session,
except for the following juveniles: (Ord. 96-29, 11-19-1996; amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   Those accompanied by a parent or other person over the age of
eighteen (18) years having legal custody of the juvenile.
      2.   Those engaged in, or going to, or coming from a place of employment,
which employment is allowed under the laws of the state.
      3.   Those seeking medical care or treatment.
      4.   Those attending religious activities.
      5.   Those engaged in interstate travel.
      6.   Those involved in an emergency situation. (Ord. 96-29, 11-19-1996)
   B.   Enforcement: Upon observing, during daytime school hours, a juvenile
between the age of seven (7) and seventeen (17) years upon any public street,
road, alley, park or in a public place of business or amusement, a police
officer shall determine if the juvenile is a truant under the terms of section
6-6-2 of this chapter. If the police officer determines that the juvenile is
not a truant pursuant to the terms of section
6-6-2 of this chapter, the police officer shall determine the age of the
juvenile and inquire into the reasons for his or her appearance in such public
place. If it is determined by the police officer that the juvenile does not
fall within the enumerated exceptions set forth in subsection A of this
section, the juvenile shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. (Ord.
96-29, 11-19-1996; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It shall be unlawful for any
parent or legal guardian of a juvenile found to be in violation of this section
to knowingly permit or allow the juvenile to be upon public lands or in public
places during hours in which school is in session.
   D.   Penalties:
      1.   Juvenile: Any juvenile who is found guilty of violating the terms of
this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense.
      2.   Parent Or Guardian: Any parent or legal guardian found guilty of
violating the terms of this section shall be fined a sum not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for the second offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third
offense, and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the fourth offense. Such
parent or legal guardian may, alternatively or in addition to the monetary
fines set forth herein, be sentenced to community service. (Ord. 96-29, 11-19-
1996)
6-6-2: TRUANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18), subject to
compulsory school attendance, to be absent for a school day or portion thereof
without valid cause pursuant to the school code 1 , as amended. Valid cause for
absence shall be illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the
immediate family, or family emergency, and shall include such other situations
beyond the control of the student as determined by the board of education in
each district, or such other circumstances if permission for such absence has
been obtained from the parent or guardian and such permission is submitted in
writing to the proper school authorities within twenty four (24) hours after
such absence. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 105 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
6-6-3: VANDALISM:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever any of the following terms are used in this
section, they shall have the meanings indicated:
   JUVENILE: A person who has attained ten (10) years of age but who has not
yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a juvenile
by a circuit court of this state or any other state, but does not include a
person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois
juvenile court act.
   PARENT: The lawful father or mother of an unemancipated juvenile, whether by
birth or adoption.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY: Any real estate, including improvements thereof, and personalty,
whether tangible or intangible. (1976 Code § 9.44.010)
   B.   Prohibited Acts: No person shall commit any of the following acts
within the corporate limits of the village:
      1.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly damage, deface or destroy any
property of another person without his consent; or
      2.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly, by means of fire or explosive
device, damage, deface or destroy any property of another person; or
      3.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly start a fire on the land of
another person without his consent; or
      4.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly deposit on the land or in a
building of another person, without his consent, any stink bomb or any
offensive smelling compound, and thereby interfere with the use and occupancy
by another of the land or building; or
      5.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly and without authority, enter
into any building, house trailer, motor vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, or any
part thereof, of another person without his consent. (1976 Code § 9.44.020)
   C.   Responsibility And Liability Of Parent Or Guardian:
      1.   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated juvenile who
resides with such parent or legal guardian is liable for actual damages due to
the wilful or malicious acts of such juvenile which cause injury to a person or
property.
      2.   A juvenile shall be deemed to have committed the offense or offenses
enumerated in subsection B of this section with the knowledge, consent,
acquiescence and permission of the parent or legal guardian, in violation of
this section.
      3.   The parent or legal guardian shall be liable for fine, requirement
of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon the minor defendant for
violation of this section. (1976 Code § 9.44.030)
      4.   The sanctions of this section shall apply after a parent or legal
guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, with a
certificate of personal service returned, from the police department prior to
the institution of any judicial sanction or penalty. (1976 Code § 9.44.040)
   D.   Penalties: The following penalties shall be imposed upon any person
convicted of a violation of this section:
      1.   Such restitution or reparation as the court may require, in an
amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property or pecuniary loss.
Nothing in this subsection shall preclude additional civil remedies available
to a complaining party for any sum not recovered. (1976 Code § 9.44.060)
      2.   In addition to or in lieu of restitution or reparation, as provided
in subsection D1 of this section, a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each such offense. Said fine may be imposed upon the
parent or legal guardian. (1976 Code § 9.44.060; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-4: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
   A.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the
terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    DELINQUENT ACTS: Those acts which violate the statutes of the state of
Illinois or the ordinances of the village or those acts which would cause or
tend to cause a minor to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court act,
as amended, but shall not include violations of the Berkeley vehicle code or
similar violations of the Illinois vehicle code, as amended.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a
circuit court of this state, but does not include a person appointed guardian
or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act, as amended.
   MINOR: A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   It shall be the continuous duty of the parent or legal guardian of any
minor to exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any
delinquent act. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing
with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental
responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have committed a delinquent
act with the knowledge and permission of the parent or legal guardian in
violation of this section, upon the concurrence of the events described as
follows:
      1.   An unemancipated minor residing with a parent or legal guardian who
shall be adjudicated to have committed a delinquent act or shall have incurred
nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting in an admission of
guilt of having committed a delinquent act;
      2.   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service with a certificate of personal service returned, from the
village police department following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction;
and
      3.   If, at any time within one year following the receipt of the notice
set forth in subsection B2 of this section, said minor is adjudicated to have
committed a delinquent act or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from
another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of committing a
delinquent act.
   C.   Any parent, legal guardian or other person commits improper supervision
of a minor when he knowingly permits a minor in his custody or control under
the age of eighteen (18) years to associate with known thieves, burglars,
felons, narcotic addicts or other persons of ill repute, visit a place of
prostitution, commit a lewd act, commit an act tending to break the peace or
violate the curfew ordinance.
   D.   The parent of an unemancipated minor is liable for actual damages for
the wilful or malicious acts of the minor which cause injury or loss to the
property of the public or any person.
   E.   A minor shall be deemed to have committed the offense or offenses
enumerated in this chapter with the knowledge, consent, acquiescence and
permission of the parent.
   F.   The parent shall be liable for restitution or reparation in an amount
equal to the actual loss or damage to the property or for the pecuniary
reimbursement imposed by a court upon the minor defendant for violation of this
section. When the court orders restitution or reparation, the court shall
determine the amount of and conditions for payment. If the parties have not
agreed on the amount of damages, the judge shall conduct a separate hearing on
that issue. The measure of liability shall be the cost of repairing partially
damaged property or the depreciated replacement cost of repairing partially
damaged property or the depreciated replacement cost of the property that is
damaged beyond repair. The amount of the actual loss or damage shall be
presumed to be that amount represented by the lower of not less than two (2)
bona fide itemized estimates of the damages incurred or by an actual bill for
repair or replacement presented by the victim. The defendant shall then have an
opportunity to challenge the reasonableness of the cost set forth in the
documents. If the conditions of payment are not satisfied, the court may, upon
the motion of the village and within the limits set forth in this subsection
impose such additional penalties as it deems appropriate. In cases of actual or
pecuniary loss or damage to public property, the court, on petition of the
village, may, in its judgment and absolute discretion, in addition to or in
lieu of any restitution, reparation or fine, direct that any minor found guilty
perform appropriate and reasonable services to or for any public entity.
   G.   No parent of a minor shall be held liable for damages as provided in
this section unless he or she is made a party defendant in the proceeding in
which the order against the parent is entered. A parent or legal guardian shall
be made a party defendant by having received a written notice setting forth the
charges against the minor either served personally or by certified mail. (2016
Code)
6-6-4-1: UNSUPERVISED POSSESSION OF WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS BY MINORS:
   A.   Definitions:
    KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
   RECKLESSLY: Acting in a manner or under circumstances such as evidencing
disregard of, or indifference to, consequences involving danger to the
property, life, or safety of others.
   UNSUPERVISED: A lack of visual or oral oversight coupled with lack of
sufficient proximity to obtain immediate control over the item or minor.
   WILFUL: Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary intentional motion of the
will.
   B.   Prohibitions: It is declared unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or
other person eighteen (18) years of age or older to wilfully, knowingly or
recklessly permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to come into
unsupervised possession of any of the following items:
      1.   Bowie, switchblade or ballistic knife, or other edged weapons as
defined by Illinois criminal code of 2012, as amended;
      2.   Metallic knuckles;
      3.   Martial arts weaponry including, but not limited to, numchucks and
throwing stars;
      4.   Arrows designed for firing from a bow or crossbow device, except
when such person is engaged in lawful hunting, supervised target shooting, or
the otherwise legal transportation of such device;
      5.   Stun gun or taser;
      6.   Any device or attachment of any kind assigned, used or intended for
use in silencing the report of a firearm;
      7.   Any bomb, bombshell, grenade, bottle or other container containing
an explosive substance of over one-fourth (1/4) ounce for like purposes, such
as, but not limited to, black powder bombs, Molotov cocktails, pipe bombs or
artillery projectiles;
      8.   Firearms, machine guns or the ammunition therefor; and
      9.   Fireworks.
   C.   Exceptions: It shall be an affirmative defense to this section if a
minor in possession of a firearm holds a valid hunting license or FOID card
pursuant to the firearm owners identification card act, as amended, neither the
minor nor the person to be charged is otherwise in violation of any law related
to the sale or possession of weapons including, but not limited to, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1(a)(1), 5/24-3(a), 5/24-3.3, and the minor
is engaged in hunting, supervised target shooting or the otherwise legal
transportation of a firearm for such purposes. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 7
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Prohibited Acts
6-7-3: Accessibility To Graffiti Implements
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER: Any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the
purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing
property.
BROAD TIPPED MARKER: Any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a
flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than
one-fourth inch (1/4"), containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not
water soluble.
ETCHING EQUIPMENT: Any tool, device or substance that can be used to make
permanent marks on any natural or manmade surface.
GRAFFITI: Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted,
or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private
property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not
authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property or, despite
advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the village.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: An aerosol paint container, a broad tipped marker, gum
label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other
device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade
surface.
PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK: Any device containing a solid form of paint,
chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a
surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth inch (1/8") in
width. (2016 Code)
6-7-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Defacement: It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to
any natural or manmade surface on any village owned property or, without the
permission of the owner or occupant, on any nonvillage owned property.
   B.   Possession Of Graffiti Implements:
      1.   Minors At Or Near School Facilities: It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement
while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or
in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property,
or upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner or
occupant of such private property. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to the possession of broad tipped markers by a minor attending or
traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is
participating in a class at the school that formally requires the possession of
broad tipped markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of
this subsection shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to
possess a broad tipped marker.
      2.   Designated Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any person to
possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park,
playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or
structure owned or operated by the village or park district or while within
fifty feet (50') of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar type
of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the village or park district.
(2016 Code)
6-7-3: ACCESSIBILITY TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to
sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be
exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container,
broad tipped marker, or paint stick to any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the
person. (2016 Code)
TITLE 7
BERKELEY VEHICLE CODE
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; ADDITIONAL ACTS; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
7-1-100: Title
7-1-101 - 7-1-399: Reserved
7-1-400: Additional Acts Adopted
7-1-401: Felonies Excluded
7-1-402: Definitions
7-1-100: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the BERKELEY VEHICLE CODE and
which may hereinafter also be cited as "this code". (2016 Code)
7-1-101 - 7-1-399: RESERVED:
(2016 Code)
7-1-400: ADDITIONAL ACTS ADOPTED:
The child passenger protection act 1 , as amended, and the snowmobile
registration and safety act 2 , as amended, are hereby adopted by reference.
(2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.
2 2. 625 ILCS 40/1-1 et seq.
7-1-401: FELONIES EXCLUDED:
All offenses which are classified as felonies by the Illinois vehicle code
shall not be adopted by reference as violations of this title. (2016 Code)
7-1-402: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   State Statutes Adopted: Chapter 1 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference as part of this title.
   B.   Amendment: Chapter 1 of the Illinois vehicle code, as adopted in
subsection A of this section, is hereby amended by amending the definition of
the term "sidewalk" to read as follows:
    SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, or that paved area on
property on which the village has a public access easement, that is intended
for use of pedestrians, vehicles moved exclusively by human power and motorized
wheelchairs. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 3. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
Division 1. General Administration And Enforcement Provisions; Penalties
7-2-101: Authority To Create Emergency Regulations And Post Signs
7-2-102: Parking Violations
7-2-103: Arrest And Bail
7-2-104: Immobilization Of Vehicle For Violations
7-2-105: Obedience To Enforcement Officials
7-2-106: Penalties
Division 2. Towing, Seizure And Impoundment Of Vehicles
7-2-201: Definitions
7-2-201.1: Abandonment Prohibited
7-2-202: Towing Vehicles
7-2-202.1: Authorization For Towing
7-2-202.2: Towing Abandoned Vehicles
7-2-203: Seizure And Impoundment Of Vehicles
7-2-203.1: Violations Resulting In Seizure And Impoundment
7-2-203.2: Authority For Seizure And Impoundment
7-2-203.3: Impoundment Hearings
7-2-204: Redemption Of Impounded Vehicle
7-2-205: Exemptions From Provisions
DIVISION 1. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS; PENALTIES
7-2-101: AUTHORITY TO CREATE EMERGENCY REGULATIONS AND POST SIGNS:
   A.   The Chief of Police may make regulations necessary to make effective
the provisions of this title and to make and enforce temporary regulations to
cover emergencies and special conditions, and also to determine and designate
the character of all traffic signs and signals required by this title.
   B.   The Chief of Police may also erect and maintain, at dangerous
intersections and other hazardous locations, slow, danger, or warning signs or
signals with a speed limitation not inconsistent with 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-601. (2016 Code)
7-2-102: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Prima Facie Proof: Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in
violation of any of the provisions of any ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima
facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalties therefor.
   B.   Notice For Impending Driver's License Suspension: When notice is
required to be sent pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5(f)(2),
as amended, it shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty and
shall state that failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty five
(45) days of the notice date will result in the Village notifying the Secretary
of State that the person's driver's license is eligible for a suspension
pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, as amended. Said notice
shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the
address recorded with the Secretary of State. (2016 Code)
7-2-103: ARREST AND BAIL:
Every person arrested for a violation of this title shall be released upon bail
being furnished in the proper amount according to the procedures prescribed by
the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended. (2016 Code)
7-2-104: IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLE FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   A motor vehicle parked upon the public street or public parking lot at
any time may, by or under the direction of an officer or member of the Village
Police Department, be immobilized in such a manner as to prevent its operation
if there are five (5) or more outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic
violation notices or one or more warrants issued for any such violations
pending against the owner of such motor vehicle.
   B.   1. Upon immobilization of such motor vehicle, the officer or employee
shall cause to be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice
sufficient to warn any individual that such vehicle has been immobilized and
that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage to such vehicle.
As soon as practicable, the officer or employee shall inform the owner of the
immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior outstanding or
unsettled traffic violation notices or warrants for which, on account of which,
such vehicle was immobilized.
      2.   The owner of such immobilized vehicle, or other authorized person,
shall be permitted to secure release of the vehicle upon:
         a.   The depositing of the bond for his appearance in the Circuit
Court to answer for each violation; or
         b.   Depositing the amount of the fine or penalty for each violation
for which there is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic violation
notice or warrant; and
         c.   The payment of the fees as required by subsection D of this
section.
      3.   The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other authorized person,
shall have the right to a postimmobilization hearing to determine the validity
of such immobilization, towing and any towing or storage charges. Such hearing
must be requested within fifteen (15) days after the vehicle is immobilized.
The postimmobilization hearing shall not be determinative of or adjudicate any
citation issued relative to any immobilized vehicle.
   C.   The immobilizing device or mechanism shall remain in place for forty
eight (48) hours unless the owner has complied with subsections B2 and B3 of
this section. If such compliance has not occurred within forty eight (48)
hours, the vehicle shall be towed or impounded. The Village's current towing
and storage fees shall be paid, along with fees specified in subsection D of
this section, before the owner of such vehicle, or authorized person, shall be
permitted to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle, unless the owner
has posted bond and requested a court date as specified in subsections B2 and
B3 of this section.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of an immobilized vehicle to not pay
a fee as established by the annual fee schedule for such immobilization. The
owner of an immobilized vehicle which was subsequently impounded shall pay the
fee established in the annual fee schedule for immobilization, plus the towing
and storage charges actually incurred.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person or persons to attempt
to remove or to remove the vehicle immobilizing device.
   F.   The Chief of Police shall have the authority for implementing the
parking enforcement provisions of this section.
   G.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to deprive any person of the
constitutional right to a hearing or trial as to the violations charged. (2016
Code)
7-2-105: OBEDIENCE TO ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, firefighter or uniformed adult school crossing
guard vested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(2016 Code)
7-2-106: PENALTIES:
   A.   Generally: Unless another penalty is specifically provided for a
violation of any particular section of this title, any person convicted of an
offense under this title shall be punished by a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
A person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during
any portion of which any violation of any provision of this title is committed,
continued or permitted by any such person.
   B.   Class A Misdemeanor Violations: Any person convicted of an offense that
is classified as a Class A misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   C.   Minor Violations:
      1.   Unless another penalty is specifically provided for in this Code,
any person who is issued a complaint for a violation that has a minimum fine of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less, that is not required to appear in
administrative adjudication or Circuit Court or has requested an administrative
adjudication hearing within ten (10) days from the date of the citation not
counting the day of issuance, may settle and compromise that citation by paying
a reduced early settlement payment within the days from the date of the
citation as set forth in the following schedule:
 
If Paid Within 10 If Paid Within 11 To If Paid Within 31 To If Paid After 61
Days              30 Days              60 Days              Days
$50.00            $100.00              $150.00              $200.00
 
      2.   The tickets issued under this subsection C shall be as a courtesy in
lieu of arrest. If the person accused of the violation does not settle the
claim, a complaint or notice to appear may be issued for that violation, and
the person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in subsection A of this
section.
   D.   Certificates Of Title And Registration Of Vehicles Violations: Any
operator of a motor vehicle subject to registration under this title who is
convicted of violating section 7-3-707, adopted by reference in chapter 3 of
this title, shall be required to pay a minimum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). However, no
person charged with violating said section 7-3-707 shall be convicted if such
person produces in court satisfactory evidence that at the time of the arrest
the motor vehicle was covered by a liability insurance policy in accordance
with section 7-7-601, adopted by reference in chapter 7 of this title.
   E.   Parking Violations:
      1.   Parking Tickets: Any person accused of a violation of chapter 11,
division 2 of this title, that is not required to appear in administrative
adjudication or Circuit Court or has requested an administrative adjudication
hearing within ten (10) days from the date of the ticket not counting the day
of issuance, may settle and compromise the claim pursuant to subsection E2 of
this section.
      2.   Settlement Of Penalties: Unless another penalty is specifically
provided in this title, any owner or operator who is issued a ticket for a
parking violation of chapter 11, division 2, "Stopping, Standing And Parking",
of this title may settle and compromise that ticket by paying the prepayment
amount as set forth in the following schedule:
 
A All parking violations except B and C.
B Handicapped parking violations, section 7-11-1301.3 of this title.
C Alley parking violations, section
  7-11-1328 of this title.
 
Violation If Paid   If Paid Within If Paid Within If Paid More
Schedule  Within 10 11 To 30 Days  31 To 60 Days  Than 61 Days Minimum Fine
          Days
A         $ 30.00   $ 60.00        $ 90.00        $120.00      $ 75.00
B         250.00    300.00         300.00         300.00       350.00
C         100.00    150.00         150.00         150.00       200.00
 
   F.   Bicycle Violations: Any person convicted of a violation of section
7-11-1517 of this title shall be punished by a minimum fine of not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or by impoundment of
the violator's bicycle for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or any
combination thereof, or by a prepayment penalty of five dollars ($5.00) if paid
before the offense is filed into administrative adjudication. (Ord. 18-11, 3-6-
2018)
DIVISION 2. TOWING, SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
7-2-201: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the words and terms used in this
division unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/101 et seq.
ABANDONED VEHICLE:
   A.   A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle, on the
public way or in a public parking lot in such a state of disrepair that it is
incapable of being driven; or
   B.   A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle, on the
public way or in a public parking lot that has not been moved for a period of
at least twenty four (24) hours and appears to have been abandoned by its owner
based on:
      1.   Its condition;
      2.   The period during which it has not been moved; or
      3.   Other circumstances indicating abandonment; or
   C.   A vehicle on private property without the consent of the property
owner, proprietor or agent, which person has requested that the vehicle be
towed; or
   D.   A vehicle on private property for a period of not less than seven (7)
days without being moved, having no valid license plates and/or valid
registration and appears to have been abandoned.
   E.   A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle, defined as
abandoned, inoperable or subject to being towed, by any ordinance of the
Village.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE:
   A.   A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or
cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the vehicle; or
   B.   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of
the members of the public; or
   C.   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street or public way that
is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to
pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or
   D.   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper Municipal snow removal
from a public street, way, alley or parking lot.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title to the vehicle or right of possession as
contained in the vehicle registration records of the state in which the vehicle
is registered.
UNLAWFUL VEHICLE:
   A.   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a search
and seizure by the Police Department; or
   B.   A vehicle parked in violation of State Statutes or ordinances of the
Village which prohibit parking at the location in question or for the period of
time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute or the
ordinance authorize the vehicle to be towed, and the signs posted at the
general location note that fact.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, highway, or any public way, except devices
moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
and snowmobiles. (Ord. 14-29, 9-16-2014; amd. Ord. 16-45, 10-4-2016)
7-2-201.1: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to cause an abandoned vehicle or any part thereof
to remain on public or private property anywhere in the Village. (Ord. 16-45,
10-4-2016)
7-2-202: TOWING VEHICLES:
7-2-202.1: AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING:
   A.   Generally: The towing of vehicles by the Village, or by its approved
towing service operators on behalf of the Village, shall be authorized only by
the Police Department and only under the circumstances herein provided. Towed
vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the Police Department
until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   B.   Towing Without Notice; Immediate Tows: Hazardous or unlawful vehicles
may be towed without prior notice; except, that when an unlawful vehicle is one
that has been reported as stolen and is not towable for some other specific
reason, the owner should be, when practicable, notified by telephone or other
means and given the opportunity to claim or move the vehicle, if he/she so
wishes, to avoid incurring the expenses of a police ordered tow. However, the
vehicle may be towed if the owner permitted the tow to be made when the vehicle
was reported stolen or at any time thereafter. Within twenty four (24) hours
after towing a vehicle pursuant to this division, a notice shall be sent to or
personally delivered to the owner of the vehicle affording the opportunity for
a hearing, as provided in this division.
   C.   Towing Abandoned Vehicles With Prior Notice: Abandoned vehicles may be
towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and the affording of an
opportunity for a hearing as provided in this division. (Ord. 14-29, 9-16-2014)
7-2-202.2: TOWING ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   Pretow Notice:
      1.   Notice pursuant to this subsection shall be personally delivered to
the owner by personal service or shall be forwarded by mail, to the address of
the owner of the vehicles as indicated in the most current registration list of
the secretary of state. The notice shall be in the form provided in this
subsection. In the event that an out of state vehicle is proposed to be towed,
inquiry by computer, telephone, or letter shall be made of the secretary of
state of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current
registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be
made as provided herein to the address furnished, though in no case will the
village be required to delay towing more than seven (7) days after the date of
the mailing or personal delivery of the notice if no request for a hearing has
been received within that seven (7) day period.
      2.   A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which
the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the police
department shall be placed on the vehicle.
      3.   The following form may be utilized for the mailing or delivery of
pretow notices to owners:
To:
(Name)
(Address)
Date of Mailing:
Date and Time of and Name of Person making personal delivery:
PRETOW NOTICE
You are listed as the registered Owner or person entitled to possession of the
following described vehicle: (make) (model/year) (other identifying features)
(license plate number and State) which is located on (location) in an
apparently abandoned or unusable condition, to wit: (facts forming basis of
proposed tow) as defined in (ordinance or statutory section).
The Village of Berkeley will tow the vehicle or cause it to be towed after
seven (7) days from the above date of mailing or personal delivery unless you
move the vehicle to a lawful location or request a hearing as set forth below.
Any such hearing will only concern the proposed towing, and will not be
determinative of or adjudicate any parking ticket or other citation concerning
the vehicle. If the vehicle is towed, you will be required to pay all towing
and storage charges before the vehicle is released.
The towing is authorized by the Village Code of the Village of Berkeley.
If you wish to request a hearing on the legality of the present location and
condition of your vehicle, you must contact the office listed below and file in
person or by mail a request for such hearing within 7 days of the above date of
mailing or personal delivery. If you file your request for a hearing by mail,
it must be received by the office listed below within 7 days from the mailing
or personal delivery of this Notice.
   B.   Pretow Hearing Procedures:
      1.   Opportunity For Hearing: The owner or person entitled to possession
of a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven (7) days
after the date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request, in
writing, a pretow hearing. Subsequent to this seven (7) day period, the vehicle
may be towed, if the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the
seven (7) day period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of this
subsection will be deemed waived.
      2.   Request For Hearing: Requests for a hearing are to be made in person
to the chief of police or may be made by mail. Forms for such requests shall be
made available at the police department. At the time of making the request, the
owner will be provided a hearing date and time by mail or in person, as the
circumstances require.
      3.   Preliminary Hearing: If the owner or person entitled to a hearing
requests within seven (7) days after the mailing or personal delivery of the
notice, the preliminary hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer
appointed by the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of
the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. All interested
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard and the formal
rules of evidence will not apply and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only
if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs.
      4.   Written Decision: The hearing officer shall make a written decision
upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is
authorized by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the village, with a
specific statutory or ordinance section cited in the decision. The owner shall
be provided a copy of the pretow hearing decision.
      5.   Decision To Tow; Rates:
         a.   If the preponderance of the evidence supports towing with
compliance of the provisions of this division, the hearing officer shall direct
that the vehicle be towed, with any towing and storage costs to then be imposed
upon the owner. The fees to be charged for towing and storage services shall be
no more than the maximum rates set by the chief of police pursuant to the
provisions of this division. The owner of the vehicle having had such a hearing
may avoid the towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper
location to a proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of
the vehicle.
         b.   The owner shall pay fees to the towing service operator for
towing and storage on police ordered tows at rates that do not exceed maximum
amounts to be administratively established by the chief of police and which may
be revised from time to time. However, nothing in this division is intended to
prevent a competitive towing service operator from charging less than the
established maximum rates for police ordered or any other tows. In arriving at
the maximum rates for various services, the chief of police shall consider such
matters as the prevalent market rates in the area for the different types of
vehicles, the types of storage and area requirements for categories such as
large trucks and commercial vehicles, and the relative difficulties and amount
of work required to perform various types of towing operations. For
particularly difficult or unusual towing jobs, such as large or serious
accidents, the chief of police is authorized to allow towing operators to
charge rates above those established for normal situations. All special charges
must be based upon the cost of services provided, taking into account such
matters as the man hours and equipment time required for the job. A towing
service operator must fully itemize in writing the details of such a billing at
special rates for a particularly difficult or unusual tow, and supply a copy of
the itemized bill to the owner and to the police department. Any special rates
charged must be customary in the towing industry in the area for the nature and
extent of the services provided. Every towing service operator and the police
department shall have available a copy of the complete current rate schedule
and any special rate policy established by the chief of police for vehicle
owners to view upon request. (Ord. 14-29, 9-16-2014)
7-2-203: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
7-2-203.1: VIOLATIONS RESULTING IN SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Violations Authorizing Seizure: A motor vehicle operated with the
permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, that is used in
connection with any of the following violations shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment by the village:
      1.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the criminal code of 2012; or
      2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
section 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code; or
      3.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the cannabis control act; or
      4.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois controlled
substances act; or
      5.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of section 720 ILCS 5/24-1, 24-1.1,
24-1.2, 24-1.5, 24-1.6, 24-1.7, 24-1.8, 24-2.1, 24-2.2, 24-3, 24-1.2-5, 24-3.1,
24-3.2, 24-3.3, 24-3.4, 24-3.5, 24-3.6, 24-3.7, 24-3.8, 24-3.9 or 24-33A of the
criminal code of 1961 or the criminal code of 2012, 625 ILCS 5/11-204 or 624
ILCS 5/11-204.1;
      6.   Driving while a driver’s license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to section 6-303 of the Illinois
vehicle code; except, that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or
due to failure to comply with emission testing; or
      7.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess, an unlawful amount of cannabis, or a
controlled substance, as defined by the cannabis control act or the Illinois
controlled substances act; or
      8.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver’s
license, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code, if the
period of expiration is greater than one year; or
      9.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver’s license or permit, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois
vehicle code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver’s license or permit due to a person’s age; or
      10.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the
Illinois vehicle code; or
      11.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of article 16 of the criminal code
of 1961 or the criminal code of 2012.
      12.   Any vehicle that is used in the commission of prostitution as
defined in the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11 et
seq., solicitation of a sexual act, promoting prostitution, promoting juvenile
prostitution, patronizing a prostitute or patronizing a minor engaged in
prostitution, as defined in said code.
      13.   Any vehicle which is used by a person during the aiding or abetting
or commission of a misdemeanor, felony or forcible felony, as those terms are
defined in the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-11,
5/2-7, and 5/2-8, respectively.
   B.   Driving While Intoxicated; Standard Of Evidence: A sworn report of a
police officer, prepared in conformity with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-501.1, establishing that a person has refused testing or has submitted to a
test that discloses a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more, or any
amount of a drug, substance, or intoxicating compound in the person’s breath,
blood or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis
listed in the cannabis control act, controlled substance listed in the
controlled substances act, or an intoxicating compound listed in the use of
intoxicating compounds act, shall constitute prima facie evidence under this
division sufficient to establish a finding of the vehicle owner’s liability
under this division. The presumption may be rebutted by clear and convincing
evidence. (Ord. 14-29, 9-16-2014; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 20-06, 1-21-2020; Ord.
20-52, 10-6-2020; Ord. 22-19, 4-19-2022)
7-2-203.2: AUTHORITY FOR SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section
7-2-203.1 of this chapter, the police officer shall provide for the towing of
the vehicle to a facility authorized by the village. At the time the vehicle is
towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself/herself
as the owner, or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure and the vehicle
owner's right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 14-29, 9-16-2014)
7-2-203.3: IMPOUNDMENT HEARINGS:
   A.   Preliminary Hearing:
      1.   If the owner of record of the vehicle seized pursuant to this
division desires to appeal the seizure, said owner must make a request within
twenty four (24) hours of the seizure for a vehicle impoundment hearing. Said
request shall be made in person and in writing and filed with the chief of
police or his/her designated agent.
      2.   If the appeal is timely filed, a preliminary hearing shall be
conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the chief of police, with the
consent of the mayor, within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the
written request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
      3.   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing.
      4.   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied
upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
      5.   If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines there is
probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this division, the hearing officer shall order the
continued impoundment of the vehicle, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a
cash bond in the amount of the administrative fine prescribed for the violation
under this division with the village and pays the towing company any applicable
towing and storage fees. If the hearing officer determines that there is no
such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the
vehicle without penalty or other fees.
   B.   Administrative Hearing:
      1.   Notice: Within ten (10) business days after a vehicle has been
seized and impounded pursuant to this division, the village shall notify, by
United States mail, the registered owner of record of the date, time and
location of the scheduled hearing which shall be held pursuant to title 1,
chapter 4, article A of the village code. The name and address of the person to
whom a vehicle is registered as shown on the records of the state in which the
vehicle is registered shall be conclusive evidence of the name and address of
the owner of record of the vehicle, unless the owner of record has given the
village actual written notice of a different name and/or address. The hearing
shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with the requirements of title
1, chapter 4, article A of the village code.
      2.   Hearing:
         a.   If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a
preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with a
violation set forth in this section
7-2-203, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record
of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for the administrative fine
prescribed for the violation under this division and requiring the vehicle to
continue to be impounded until the owner pays the administrative penalty to the
village, plus fees to the tower for the towing and storage of the vehicle.
         b.   If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the
hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village.
         c.   If the hearing officer finds that no such violation occurred, the
hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the owner’s vehicle or cash
bond without fees.
      3.   Administrative Fine; Fees:
         a.   Unless otherwise set forth in this subsection a(i or ii), the
owner of record of any vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment under section
7-2-203 shall be liable to the Village for an administrative fine in the amount
of $500, plus any applicable fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle.
            i.   A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of the offense
of driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, as prescribed
in Section
7-2-203.1.A.2, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment and the owner of
record of any vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment shall be liable to the
Village for an administrative fine in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), plus any applicable fees for the towing and storage of the
vehicle.
            ii.   A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of any of the
weapons-related offenses prescribed in Section
7-2-203.1.A.5 shall be subject to seizure and impoundment and the owner of
record of any vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment shall be liable to the
Village for an administrative fine in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), plus any applicable fees for the towing and storage of the
vehicle.
            iii.   A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of an offense
in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-204 or 625 ILCS 5/11-204.1 shall be subject to
seizure and impoundment and the owner of record of any vehicle subject to
seizure and impoundment shall be liable to the Village for an administrative
fine in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus any applicable
fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle.
         b.   If an administrative fine is imposed pursuant to this subsection
B, such fine shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village. If a cash
bond has been posted pursuant to this subsection B, the bond shall be applied
to the fine. If a vehicle has been impounded when such a fine is imposed, the
village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment
against the vehicle as provided by law.
         c.   Except as provided otherwise in this subsection B, a vehicle
shall continue to be impounded until the fine is paid to the village and any
applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the tower, in which case,
possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled
to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to
satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law.
         d.   If the administrative fine and applicable fees are not paid
within thirty five (35) days after an administrative fine is imposed against an
owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing, the vehicle
shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by
law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the
administrative fine and applicable fees are not paid within thirty five (35)
days after the expiration of time at which administrative review of the hearing
officer’s determination may be sought, or within thirty five (35) days after an
action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the village,
whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed
vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 14-29, 9-16-2014; amd. Ord. 20-
52, 10-6-2020; Ord. 22-19, 4-19-2022)
7-2-204: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder or other
person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded
under this division until the administrative fine and applicable fees under
this division have been paid. However, whenever a person with a lien of record
against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession
of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he/she agrees in writing to
refund the village the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less
any amounts required to pay lienholders of record, not to exceed the
administrative fine prescribed for the violation under this division, plus the
applicable fees. (Ord. 14-29, 9-16-2014; amd. Ord. 20-52, 10-6-2020)
7-2-205: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This division shall not apply to:
   A.   A vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time of the violation
and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty
four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been
discovered;
   B.   If the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or
   C.   The owner proves that the item found is not unlawful. (Ord. 14-29, 9-
16-2014)
CHAPTER 3
CERTIFICATES OF TITLE AND REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-3-001: State Regulations Adopted
7-3-001: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Chapter 3 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as part of this title except for sections 3-116(c), 3-117.1(c), 3-
117.1(d), 3-710 and articles VIII through XI. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/3-100 et seq.
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 6
DRIVER LICENSING
SECTION:
7-6-001: State Regulations Adopted
7-6-001: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Chapter 6 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as part of this title except for article IV 2 . (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/6-100 et seq.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/6-401 et seq.
CHAPTER 7
SAFETY RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
7-7-001: State Regulations Adopted
7-7-001: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Chapter 7 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as part of this title. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/7-100 et seq.
CHAPTER 8
RESERVED
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 9
RESERVED
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 10
RESERVED
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 11
RULES OF THE ROAD
SECTION:
Division 1. General Regulations
7-11-001: State Regulations Adopted
7-11-002: Through Streets
7-11-003: Stop And Yield Intersections
7-11-004: One-Way Streets And Alleys
7-11-005: Right Turn On Red Prohibited
7-11-006: Motorized Vehicles On Bicycle Paths
7-11-100 - 7-11-600: Reserved
7-11-601: Speed Restrictions
7-11-602 - 7-11-1302: Reserved
Division 2. Stopping, Standing And Parking
7-11-1303: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
7-11-1304 - 7-11-1319: Reserved
7-11-1320: Additional Parking Prohibitions In Specified Places
7-11-1321: Parking Prohibited On Specific Streets
7-11-1322: Time Limit Parking On Specific Streets
7-11-1323: Parking Truck-Tractors Or Semitrailers
7-11-1324: Parking During Snow Removal
7-11-1325: Parking Vehicles For Sale Or For Selling Merchandise
7-11-1326: Parking On Private Property
7-11-1327: Late Night Parking
7-11-1328: Alley Parking
7-11-1329: Parking In Taxicab Or Bus Zones
7-11-1330: Parking On Park And Recreational Properties
7-11-1331: Parking In Library Parking Lot
7-11-1332: Parking In Village Parking Lots
7-11-1333: Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicles
Division 3. Bicycles, Motor Driven Scooters, Roller Skates, Skateboards And Toy
Vehicles
7-11-1517: Bicycles
7-11-1517.1: Tampering With Serial Number Prohibited
7-11-1517.2: Licensing Provisions
7-11-1517.3: Rental Agencies
7-11-1517.4: Operation Of Bicycles
7-11-1517.5: Condition Of Bicycle; Required Equipment
7-11-1518: Motor Driven Scooters
7-11-1519: Roller Skates And Skateboards
7-11-1520: Toy Vehicles
DIVISION 1. GENERAL REGULATIONS
7-11-001: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
   A.   Chapter 11 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference as part of this title except as amended herein.
   B.   Any regulation found in the Illinois vehicle code may be cited as a
regulation of this code by placing before it the prefix "7" i.e., 7-11-501. Any
regulation adopted by reference from the Illinois vehicle code into this code
shall be cited as a section "7-" and then adding the section of the Illinois
vehicle code without the act number, such as "
7-11-1303" for parking regulations. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-100 et seq.
7-11-002: THROUGH STREETS:
Through streets shall be those streets that are arterial, major collector or
local collector streets. All vehicles must be brought to a stop before entering
or crossing any through street unless the intersection is controlled by traffic
control signals. When both intersecting streets are through streets, all
traffic shall be controlled by traffic control signals or stop signs at the
approaches of either or both streets as may be determined by the superintendent
of public works upon the basis of an engineering or traffic study. (2016 Code)
7-11-003: STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Every operator of a vehicle or other conveyance traveling upon any
street and approaching a stop intersection, as indicated in section
7-11-002 of this chapter, shall bring such vehicle or conveyance to a full stop
at the place where such street meets the prolongation of the nearest property
line of the through street at the intersection, unless said intersecting street
is determined to be a yield street, as herein described, in which case, every
operator shall reduce the speed of his vehicle to not more than twenty (20)
miles per hour and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have
entered the intersecting street, either from the right or left, or which are
approaching so closely on said intersecting street as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as
a safe interval occurs, subject, however, to the direction of any traffic
control sign or signal or any police officer at such stop or yield
intersection.
   B.   The operator of any vehicle who has come to a full stop as required in
subsection A of this section or who has passed a yield sign, upon entering the
through street, as well as operators of vehicles on such through street, shall
be subject to the usual right of way rules prescribed by law and applicable to
vehicles at intersections.
   C.   Whenever the red lens of a school crossing is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign at the following
locations:
      St. Charles Road and Taft Avenue.
      St. Charles Road and Wolf Road.
(2016 Code)
7-11-004: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys designated
by ordinance as one-way streets or alleys in any direction other than that so
designated. (2016 Code)
7-11-005: RIGHT TURN ON RED PROHIBITED:
In the interests of pedestrian safety, the intersection of St. Charles Road and
Taft Avenue shall be designated "No Right Turn On Red" when pedestrians are
present and "No Right Turn On Red" at the intersection of St. Charles Road at
Wolf Road. (2016 Code)
7-11-006: MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON BICYCLE PATHS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall operate any motorized vehicle upon any
bicycle path. Signs giving reasonable notice of the foregoing regulation shall
be posted.
   B.   Exemptions:
      1.   Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, village vehicle or park district
vehicle driven by an employee in the course of his/her duties shall be
permitted to use any bicycle path when it is necessary in the performance of
those duties.
      2.   Motorized wheelchairs shall be permitted on any bike path. (2016
Code)
7-11-100 - 7-11-600: RESERVED:
(2016 Code)
7-11-601: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   1. Unless some other speed restriction is established under this
chapter, the maximum speed limit in the village for all vehicles is twenty (20)
miles per hour.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle in any alley in the
village in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle in excess of twenty five
(25) miles per hour upon any of the following streets in the village:
         McDermott Drive.
         Proviso Drive from Wolf Road west 2,250 feet to a cul-de-sac.
      4.   It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle in excess of thirty (30)
miles per hour upon any of the following streets in the village:
         Wolf Drive south of St. Charles Road. (2016 Code)
7-11-602 - 7-11-1302: RESERVED:
(2016 Code)
DIVISION 2. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
7-11-1303: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device, no person shall:
      1.   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
         b.   On a sidewalk or parkway.
         c.   Within an intersection.
         d.   On a crosswalk.
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
         f.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
         h.   On any railroad tracks. A violation of any part of this
subsection shall result in a mandatory fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or fifty (50) hours of community service.
         i.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
         j.   On any controlled access highway.
         k.   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
         l.   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending
registration.
      2.   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge passengers:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway.
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of
a roadway.
         e.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted).
         f.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      3.   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.
         b.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
   C.   At no time shall any portion of any parked vehicle extend into any
roadway. (2016 Code)
7-11-1304 - 7-11-1319: RESERVED:
(2016 Code)
7-11-1320: ADDITIONAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any village owned
property without the prior consent of the president and board of trustees.
Parking shall be permissible in areas specifically designated for such purposes
by the village.
   B.   Upon any street within twenty feet (20') of any mailbox designed and
arranged to permit deposit of mail from vehicles.
   C.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a public or private driveway except in a
residence district.
   D.   Along the north, west, and south driveways adjacent to the village
hall. (2016 Code)
7-11-1321: PARKING PROHIBITED ON SPECIFIC STREETS:
No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   Arthur Avenue:
      Arthur Avenue extension from Park Avenue south to the Chicago
Northwestern Parking Lot.
   From Park Avenue to Chicago Avenue, between 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M., except
on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
   Atwood Avenue (Lind Avenue), west side, beginning north of the driveway at
2120 Atwood Avenue south 30 feet to the alley.
   Chicago Avenue, between 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 A.M., except on Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays.
   Electric Avenue, from 150 feet west from Taft Avenue.
   Hawthorne Street, east of Wolf Road.
   Herbert Avenue, from Park Avenue to Chicago Avenue, between 7:00 A.M. and 9:
00 A.M., except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
   Howard Avenue, west side, from St. Charles Road north 150 feet to the alley.
   Huron Street, truck parking between Taft Avenue and Arthur Avenue and
between Taft Avenue and Ashbel Avenue.
   Kouba Drive, south side and the south 1/2 of the cul-de-sac on the west end
of Kouba Drive.
   Proviso Drive, south side.
   Richard Avenue, from Park Avenue to Chicago Avenue, between 7:00 A.M. and 9:
00 A.M., except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
   Ridge Avenue, from 40 feet west from Taft Avenue.
   St. Charles Road:
      No truck parking on the south side from Rohde to Jerele.
      No truck parking 90 feet east of Morris Avenue to the easterly village
limits.
      North side, from the corporate limits 1,245 feet east.
      300 feet from the intersection with Wolf Road.
      North side, 110 feet west and 90 feet east of Morris Avenue.
   Sunnyside Drive, 1300 block, between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., Monday through
Friday, except by permit issued by the village board and displayed attached to
the front window of the vehicle.
   Taft Avenue:
      West side, from 200 feet north of Electric Avenue south to Electric
Avenue.
      East side, from the alley at the Kraft property north to Huron Street,
between 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and from 4:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M., Monday through
Friday.
      East side, from St. Charles Road to the east/west alley.
      Truck parking in the 1200 and 1300 blocks.
      From St. Charles Road to Butterfield Road.
      West side, from 150 feet south of Park Avenue, from 9:00 A.M. to 5:00
P.M., Monday through Friday.
   Wolf Road.
(2016 Code)
7-11-1322: TIME LIMIT PARKING ON SPECIFIC STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle on any of the
following designated streets posted with an official sign during the hours when
parking or standing is prohibited, and such vehicles may be removed and towed
away as provided in section
7-11-1333 of this chapter:
   A.   Fifteen (15) minute parking:
      St. Charles Road, north side, from Wolf Road west 300 feet.
      Wolf Road, west side, from St. Charles Road south to Bohlander Avenue.
   B.   One hour parking:
      McDermott Drive, between Wolf Drive and Taft Avenue, between 8:00 A.M.
and 4:30 P.M., Monday through Friday.
      Park Avenue, between Taft Avenue and Arthur Avenue, between 8:00 A.M. and
4:30 P.M., Monday through Friday.
      Sunnyside Drive, 1300 block, between 8:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M., Monday
through Friday.
      Taft Avenue, from McDermott Drive to the Chicago And Northwestern Railway
right of way, between 8:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M., Monday through Friday.
   C.   Ninety (90) minute parking:
      Electric Avenue:
         Between Taft Avenue and the east property line of the village hall
property.
         North side, between Taft and the village limits.
         Taft Avenue, west side, between Electric Avenue and Elm Avenue.
   D.   Two (2) hour parking:
      Elm Street, north side, from Taft Avenue west for a distance of 475 feet.
      Lee Boulevard, from St. Charles Road to Bohlander Avenue, between 8:00
A.M. and 4:30 P.M.
      Morris Avenue, from St. Charles Road to Bohlander Avenue, between 8:00
A.M. and 4:30 P.M.
      Rohde Avenue, from St. Charles Road to Bohlander Avenue, between 8:00
A.M. and 4:30 P.M.
      St. Charles Road, south side, from Rohde Avenue to a point 150 feet east
of Wolf Road, from St. Charles Road to Bohlander Avenue, between 8:00 A.M. and
3:00 P.M., except on Sundays and holidays.
      Speechley Boulevard, from St. Charles Road to Bohlander Avenue, between
8:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M.
      Spencer Avenue, from St. Charles Road to Bohlander Avenue, between 8:00
A.M. and 4:30 P.M.
   E.   Three (3) hour parking:
      Proviso Drive, south side.
(2016 Code)
7-11-1323: PARKING TRUCK-TRACTORS OR SEMITRAILERS:
It shall be unlawful to park truck-tractors and/or semitrailers on the
following off street private parking facilities except when temporarily and
actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or in a designated off
street loading berth. (2016 Code)
7-11-1324: PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in the village at
any time within twenty four (24) hours after a snowfall of two inches (2") or
more has occurred, except on those streets where late night parking is
permitted in section
7-11-1327 of this chapter, and that within twenty four (24) hours after a
snowfall of two inches (2") or more, vehicles shall be parked only on the side
of the street on the day during which late night parking is permitted. (2016
Code)
7-11-1325: PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE OR FOR SELLING MERCHANDISE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale or to park any vehicle upon any business
street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within the off street parking
area of a shopping center for the purpose of displaying it for sale. (2016
Code)
7-11-1326: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the prior consent of the owner, lawful agent of the owner, or lawful
occupant of such property. The inability of the owner or operator of any motor
vehicle which is parked on private property to identify the owner, the lawful
agent of the owner, or the lawful occupant of such property, and the date on
which the consent of such person was given to such vehicle owner or operator
shall be prima facie evidence of violation hereof.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a second division motor
vehicle including semitrailers, except class B and D licensed vehicles, in any
off street parking facility in a B-1 or B-2 zoning district for more than two
(2) hours except in a permitted off street loading facility or when loading,
unloading or otherwise permitted by the village. (2016 Code)
7-11-1327: LATE NIGHT PARKING:
No person except physicians shall park any vehicle on any street in the village
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any
day. (2016 Code)
7-11-1328: ALLEY PARKING:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway
entrance to any abutting property. (2016 Code)
7-11-1329: PARKING IN TAXICAB OR BUS ZONES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab zone, when any such stop or stand has been
officially designated and appropriately signed; except, that the driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(2016 Code)
7-11-1330: PARKING ON PARK AND RECREATIONAL PROPERTIES:
   A.   No person shall park any vehicle, except a vehicle owned or leased by a
park district, on any park property, including, without limitation, any parking
lot owned and/or operated by the district, between the hours of twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight and five thirty o'clock (5:30) A.M. without a permit from the
park district. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle
owned or leased or in control of such person to be parked upon any park
property between the hours above set forth without a permit from the district.
   B.   No person shall park in any manner at any time as to partially or
totally block, restrict, or impede another parked vehicle, normal traffic flow,
road, driveway, sidewalk, doorway, or recreational area. (2016 Code)
7-11-1331: PARKING IN LIBRARY PARKING LOT:
It is unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in the Berkeley Public
Library Parking Lot at the northeast corner of Taft Avenue and Maple Street
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the
following day. (2016 Code)
7-11-1332: PARKING IN VILLAGE PARKING LOTS:
It shall be unlawful to park on any parking lot owned by the village between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. except for
vehicles authorized by the village. (2016 Code)
7-11-1333: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   The police department, and all authorized personnel thereof, are hereby
authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by a
commercial towing service, any vehicle illegally parked in any place where such
vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire
hydrant, or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle,
any vehicle which has been illegally parked in any public street or other
public place for a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours, or for such
other period of time where towing is authorized pursuant to the provisions of
this title, and any vehicle parked or left standing within a tow away zone.
   B.   Any vehicle so towed away shall be stored on any village property or in
a public garage or parking lot. The restoration to the owner or operator of any
vehicle and the collection of any fee charged in connection with the towing
and/or storage of any such vehicle shall occur in the manner and form provided
by law. (2016 Code)
DIVISION 3. BICYCLES, MOTOR DRIVEN SCOOTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND TOY
VEHICLES
7-11-1517: BICYCLES:
7-11-1517.1: TAMPERING WITH SERIAL NUMBER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to destroy, remove, alter, permanently cover, or deface
the manufacturer's serial number on any bicycle. It shall be unlawful for any
person to own or have custody of a bicycle in which the manufacturer's serial
number has been destroyed, removed, altered, permanently covered or defaced. In
the event a bicycle which has been purchased does not bear a manufacturer's
serial number, the permanent license number affixed to such bicycle by the
police department shall be considered the manufacturer's serial number for
purposes of this title. (2016 Code)
7-11-1517.2: LICENSING PROVISIONS:
   A.   License Required: No person who resides within the village boundaries
shall operate a bicycle within the village unless such bicycle has been
licensed and a permanent license number is attached thereto as provided herein.
   B.   Issuance Procedure:
      1.   The parent or guardian of any minor below the age of sixteen (16)
years owning a bicycle shall obtain a permanent license number for each
bicycle. Any person sixteen (16) years of age or over, owning a bicycle, shall
obtain a permanent license number for such bicycle. Such license is not
transferable except as provided herein.
      2.   The chief of police, or someone designated by him, shall issue a
permanent license number to the owner of a bicycle, if the bicycle meets the
requirements of this title and the owner successfully demonstrates a working
knowledge of safe bicycle operation.
   C.   Records Kept; Contents Of License: The police department shall keep on
file a permanent list of bicycle registrations for official use. The license
application shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the owner
and the make, type, size, color and serial number of the bicycle.
   D.   Transfer Of Ownership: Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed
bicycle, the new owner of such bicycle shall report such transfer of ownership
to the police station and provide such information as is required to amend the
permanent registration of such bicycle.
   E.   No Fee: Permanent license numbers and registration thereof shall be
issued or transferred for no fee.
   F.   License Number:
      1.   The permanent license number shall contain the number assigned to
the bicycle.
      2.   The chief of police, or someone designated by him, shall cause the
permanent license number to be firmly attached to the frame of the bicycle or
in such other manner as is designated by the chief of police.
      3.   No person shall remove a permanent license number from a bicycle,
except upon a transfer of ownership wherein the new owner is not a resident of
the village or in the event the bicycle is permanently dismantled and no part
thereof is used in the fabrication or construction of another bicycle. (2016
Code)
7-11-1517.3: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent within the village
unless the bicycle is licensed and a permanent license number is attached
thereto and such bicycle bears a current inspection emblem. (2016 Code)
7-11-1517.4: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
No person shall operate a bicycle in the village in violation of the following
provisions:
   A.   License Or Inspection Emblem Required: No person who is a resident of
the village shall operate a bicycle within the village unless such bicycle
bears a permanent license number and a current annual inspection emblem,
provided this subsection shall not apply to those owners who have been
residents of the village for less than sixty (60) days.
   B.   Riding On Bicycles:
      1.   No driver of a bicycle shall carry any other person upon the
handlebars or frame of such bicycle. This restriction is not applicable to
carrying other persons on a bicycle containing special equipment designed for
such purpose.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to engage in
any type of trick or unsafe riding, except at a duly authorized exhibition.
   C.   Riding On Public Ways Or Bicycle Paths:
      1.   Persons riding on bicycle paths shall ride right of the center of
the path in the direction they are proceeding.
      2.   Persons operating bicycles upon a roadway shall stop for school
buses loading or unloading children regardless of the direction from which the
bicycle driver is approaching such bus.
      3.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
      4.   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and not use the roadway.
   D.   Speed: No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
   E.   Entering Public Ways: The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley,
driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on such
sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right
of way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway.
   F.   Parking:
      1.   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than against the
curb or on a sidewalk in such a way as not to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
      2.   No bicycle shall be parked within four feet (4') of a building
located within a district zoned commercial, nor shall any bicycle be parked
within four feet (4') of any window or door or any building open to the public.
      3.   No bicycle shall be parked in such a manner as to obstruct the
ingress or egress from a building.
   G.   Operating On Private Property: No person shall operate a bicycle on
private property without the consent of the owner of such property.
   H.   Reckless Driving: No driver of a bicycle shall operate a bicycle in a
reckless manner. (2016 Code)
7-11-1517.5: CONDITION OF BICYCLE; REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
No person shall drive a bicycle which is not in safe operating order or which
does not have affixed thereto the required equipment stated in the Illinois
vehicle code. (2016 Code)
7-11-1518: MOTOR DRIVEN SCOOTERS:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, a "motor driven scooter"
is defined as any electric or gas driven wheeled scooter, cycle, or other
vehicle for which the state of Illinois does not issue a title document, and
does not issue license plates or registration documents.
   B.   Use Prohibited; Exceptions: No person shall operate a motor driven
scooter upon any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, bike path, park, or on
any other public property. The following shall be exempt from the prohibitions
contained in this subsection:
      1.   Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, municipal vehicle, park district
vehicle, county vehicle, or forest preserve district vehicle driven by an
employee in the course of his or her duties.
      2.   Motorized wheelchairs. For purposes of this subsection, a "motorized
wheelchair" means any motorized vehicle designed for and used by a person with
disabilities.
      3.   Electric personal assistance mobility devices, as defined in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-117.7.
   C.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It shall be unlawful for a parent
or legal guardian to allow a minor under his or her direct control or with his
or her consent to violate this section. (2016 Code)
7-11-1519: ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS:
No person shall skate or ride upon a skateboard in the village in violation of
the following regulations:
   A.   Any person on skates or a skateboard on a roadway shall obey the
instruction of official traffic signals and signs unless otherwise directed by
a police officer.
   B.   No person on skates or a skateboard on the roadway shall operate in a
reckless manner.
   C.   Every person on skates or a skateboard on a roadway shall ride as near
as possible to the right hand side of the roadway and exercise due care when
passing a standing vehicle.
   D.   Whenever a person on skates or a skateboard is operating upon a
sidewalk, the person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian.
   E.   No person on skates or a skateboard shall attach himself to any motor
vehicle located or moving upon a public roadway.
   F.   No person on skates or a skateboard shall be upon the roadway between
sunset and sunrise. (2016 Code)
7-11-1520: TOY VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon a coaster, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device to go upon any roadway except while crossing the street in a
crosswalk and, when so crossing, shall be granted all the rights and shall be
subject to all the duties applicable to pedestrians. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 12
EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-12-001: State Regulations Adopted
7-12-100 - 7-12-602.1: Reserved
7-12-602.2: Mechanical Exhaust Braking Devices
7-12-603.1: Seat Safety Belts
7-12-001: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Chapter 12 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as part of this title. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-100 et seq.
7-12-100 - 7-12-602.1: RESERVED:
(2016 Code)
7-12-602.2: MECHANICAL EXHAUST BRAKING DEVICES:
No person shall operate, or cause to be used or operated within the village any
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any
vehicle by converting engine power to compressed air. It shall be an
affirmative defense that the person operating such mechanical exhaust device
that emits excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a collision with a person
or another vehicle on the highway. (2016 Code)
7-12-603.1: SEAT SAFETY BELTS:
   A.   Any village police officer may stop any motor vehicle, or driver or
passenger of such vehicle, solely on the basis of a violation or suspected
violation of this section while such motor vehicle is being operated on any
roadway in the village. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 13
INSPECTION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-13-001: State Regulations Adopted Generally
7-13-002: State Emissions Inspections Adopted
7-13-001: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED GENERALLY:
Chapter 13 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as part of this title. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/13-100 et seq.
7-13-002: STATE EMISSIONS INSPECTIONS ADOPTED:
Chapter 13C of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as part of this title. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 625 ILCS 5/13C-1 et seq.
CHAPTER 14
RESERVED
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 15
SIZE, WEIGHT, LOAD AND PERMITS
SECTION:
7-15-001: State Regulations Adopted
7-15-100 - 7-15-119: Reserved
7-15-120: Truck Restrictions
7-15-121: Permit Requirements For Overweight Or Overdimension Vehicles
7-15-122: Maximum Axle Weight; Exceptions
7-15-123: Maximum Gross Weight; Exceptions
7-15-124: Violations; Penalties
7-15-124.1: Violations; Sentence Of Permit Moves
7-15-124.2: Violations; Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Axle Weights
7-15-124.3: Violations; Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Gross Weight
7-15-001: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Chapter 15 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as part of this title except article III and as amended herein. (2016
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq.
7-15-100 - 7-15-119: RESERVED:
(2016 Code)
7-15-120: TRUCK RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to drive any motor truck on any portion
of any street in the corporate limits of the village except on the following
designated streets: St. Charles Road, Wolf Road, McDermott Road, Butterfield
Road and Taft Avenue north and south of St. Charles Road, except for the
purpose of delivering or picking up material or merchandise.
   B.   No such motor truck traffic shall be permitted to enter upon any
prohibited street except at the intersection nearest the destination of the
motor truck, and such motor truck shall not proceed further thereon than the
nearest intersection thereafter.
   C.   No person shall drive any motor truck on any portion of the alley south
of Chicago Avenue between Taft Avenue and Hillside Avenue except to deliver or
pick up material or merchandise. (2016 Code)
7-15-121: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR OVERWEIGHT OR OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES:
   A.   Permit Authorized; Application: The village, with respect to any street
or highway under its jurisdiction, may, upon application to the public works
department on forms provided by the village and good cause being shown
therefor, issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load
exceeding the maximum specified in this chapter. The applicant shall furnish
the following information in the special permit application:
      1.   The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle;
      2.   Applicant's name;
      3.   Type of permit request, whether it be for a single trip, round trip,
or multiple routing;
      4.   Whether the applicant is an authorized carrier under the Illinois
commercial transportation law 1 , and if so, his certificate, registration or
permit number issued by the state commerce commission (i.e., description and
registration of the power unit);
      5.   Description of the vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or
moved, if the vehicle or vehicle combinations are registered by the department
of transportation, as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-319, then
only the state department of transportation (IDOT) registration number of
classification need be given;
      6.   The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles;
      7.   Gross weight of the vehicle;
      8.   The width, length, and height of the vehicle and load;
      9.   Requested routing over village streets and to a specific location,
including the point of origin and destination;
      10.   Whether the vehicle or loads are being transported for hire; and
      11.   Except for an application to move directly across a highway, a
statement by the applicant that the load to be moved by such vehicle or
combination of vehicles cannot reasonably be dismantled or disassembled.
   B.   Approval And Issuance Of Permit; Contents:
      1.   The superintendent of public works or his designee is authorized to
approve the permit application. Upon approval, the superintendent of public
works shall issue a permit allowing passage of the oversize and/or overweight
vehicle over village streets. The permit shall be specific and contain:
         a.   Permit number;
         b.   The date the permit is valid;
         c.   Whether the permit is single, round trip, or multiple routing;
         d.   The description of object or vehicle to be moved;
         e.   Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length, and height;
         f.   The authorized routing over village streets including the origin
and termination point within the village; and
         g.   The date and signature of the superintendent of public works or
his designee.
      2.   In addition, the permit shall specify general conditions that the
permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for the
protection of the general public and village streets. A copy of all permits
issued will be provided to the police department for information and
enforcement purposes.
   C.   Effect Of Permit: Permits are valid only for the date specified on the
permit and for the specific vehicle, load, and routing as established by the
superintendent of public works or his designee. No substitution of vehicle,
load, or routing is permitted without the express written permission by the
superintendent of public works or his designee and carried in the vehicle to
which the permit applies.
   D.   Responsibilities Of Permittee:
      1.   It is the duty of the permittee to read and understand the permit
provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move is deemed prima facie
evidence of acceptance of the permit and that:
         a.   The permittee is in compliance with all operational requirements;
         b.   All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will
not be exceeded;
         c.   There has been compliance with all operation, registration, and
license requirements;
         d.   All financial responsibilities, obligations, and other legal
requirements have been met; and
         e.   The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to
persons or to public or private property, including his own, or to the object
being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation or
movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit.
      2.   The permittee agrees to hold the village harmless from all suits,
claims, damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the village for
any claim it may be required to pay arising from the movement.
   E.   Permit Carried In Vehicle: The permit shall be carried in the vehicle
to which the permit applies at all times while operating on streets within the
village and shall be exhibited upon demand to any enforcement officer, police
officer, or other authorized official of the village.
   F.   Violations: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of a village permit, whether it be by size, weight, or general
provisions, either or both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty and either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be
prosecuted for such violation. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/18C-1101 et seq.
7-15-122: MAXIMUM AXLE WEIGHT; EXCEPTIONS:
Except on St. Charles Road, Wolf Road, McDermott Road, Butterfield Road and
Taft Avenue south of St. Charles Road, no vehicle or combination of vehicles
equipped with pneumatic tires shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon the
highways of the village when the gross weight on the road surface through any
single axle thereof exceeds five thousand (5,000) pounds, except as otherwise
provided herein. (2016 Code)
7-15-123: MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT; EXCEPTIONS:
Except on St. Charles Road, Wolf Road, McDermott Road, Butterfield Road and
Taft Avenue south of St. Charles Road, the gross weight of vehicles and
combination of vehicles including the weight of the vehicle or combination and
its load on any street in the village, except those provided for above, shall
not exceed ten thousand (10,000) pounds. The above described vehicle load
limits shall not apply to vehicles making a delivery or picking up a load but
only when the vehicle is driven on such street for not more than the minimum
distance necessary for that purpose. (2016 Code)
7-15-124: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   1. Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of
section
7-15-122 of this chapter or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 or 5/3-401
(c), the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such
violation, and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted
for such violation. Any person charged with a violation of any of these
provisions who pleads not guilty shall be present in court for the trial on the
charge. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of section
7-15-122 of this chapter or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, including,
but not limited to, a maximum axle or gross limit specified on a regulatory
sign posted in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111(g),
shall be fined according to the following schedule:
Violation Fine
Violation                                   Fine
Up to and including 2,000 pounds overweight $ 50.00
From 2,001 through 2,500 pounds overweight  135.00
From 2,501 through 3,000 pounds overweight  165.00
From 3,001 through 3,500 pounds overweight  260.00
From 3,501 through 4,000 pounds overweight  300.00
From 4,001 through 4,500 pounds overweight  425.00
From 4,501 through 5,000 pounds overweight  475.00
From 5,001 or more pounds overweight, the fine shall be computed by assessing
$750.00 for the first 5,000 pounds overweight and $75.00 for each additional
increment of 500 pounds overweight or fraction thereof.
 
      2.   In addition, any person, firm or corporation convicted of four (4)
or more violations of section
7-15-122 of this chapter or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 within any
twelve (12) month period shall be fined an additional amount of two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the fourth and each subsequent conviction
within the twelve (12) month period. Provided, however, that with regard to a
firm or corporation, a fourth or subsequent conviction shall mean a fourth or
subsequent conviction attributable to any one employee-driver.
   B.   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102, 5/15-103 or 5/15-107, the owner or driver
of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either may be
prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any
violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102, 5/15-103 or 5/15-107
shall be fined for the first or second conviction an amount equal to not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and
for the third and subsequent convictions by the same person, firm or
corporation within a period of one year after the date of the first offense,
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). (2016 Code)
7-15-124.1: VIOLATIONS; SENTENCE OF PERMIT MOVES:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit
issued under section
7-15-121 of this chapter operating under a fraudulent permit or under a permit
not specifically covering the move, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall
be deemed guilty of a business offense, and either the owner or the driver of
such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. When any person, firm, or
corporation is convicted of such violation, the permit shall be null and void
and the person, firm, or corporation shall be fined in an amount not less than
ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound the gross weight of the vehicle
exceeds the gross weight of such vehicle allowable under this chapter.
Penalties for violations of this section shall be in addition to any penalties
imposed for violation of section
7-15-124.2 or
7-15-124.3 of this chapter. (2016 Code)
7-15-124.2: VIOLATIONS; SENTENCE OF PERMIT MOVES EXCEEDING AXLE WEIGHTS:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit
issued under section
7-15-121 of this chapter by operating with axle weights in excess of those
authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a business offense, and either the owner or driver of the vehicle may
be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of
such violation shall be fined in an amount not less than two cents ($0.02) nor
more than five cents ($0.05) per pound for each pound of excess weight on such
axle or tandem axle in excess of the weight authorized in the permit when the
excess is one thousand (1,000) pounds or less; not less than five cents ($0.05)
nor more than ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound of excess weight when
the excess exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000)
pounds or less; not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than fifteen cents
($0.15) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two
thousand (2,000) pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; and not
less than fifteen cents ($0.15) nor more than twenty cents ($0.20) per pound
for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds three thousand (3,000)
pounds. Penalties for violations of this section shall be in addition to any
penalties imposed in section
7-15-124.1 of this chapter. (2016 Code)
7-15-124.3: VIOLATIONS; SENTENCE OF PERMIT MOVES EXCEEDING GROSS WEIGHT:
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit
issued under section
7-15-121 of this chapter by operating with the gross weight in excess of that
authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a business offense, and either the owner or the driver of the vehicle
may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm, or corporation
convicted of such violation shall be fined in an amount not less than two cents
($0.02) nor more than five cents ($0.05) per pound for each pound of excess
weight in excess of the gross weight authorized in the permit when the excess
is one thousand (1,000) pounds or less; not less than four cents ($0.04) nor
more than seven cents ($0.07) per pound for each pound of excess weight when
the excess exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000)
pounds or less; not less than seven cents ($0.07) nor more than ten cents
($0.10) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two
thousand (2,000) pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; not less
than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than fifteen cents ($0.15) per pound for each
pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds three thousand (3,000) pounds
and is four thousand (4,000) pounds or less; not less than fifteen cents
($0.15) nor more than twenty cents ($0.20) per pound for each pound of excess
weight when the excess exceeds four thousand (4,000) pounds and is five
thousand (5,000) pounds or less; and not less than seventeen cents ($0.17) nor
more than twenty five cents ($0.25) per pound for each pound of excess weight
when the excess exceeds five thousand (5,000) pounds. Penalties for violations
of this section shall be in addition to any penalties imposed in section
7-15-124.1 of this chapter. (2016 Code)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Village Datum
8-1-2: Construction Of Streets And Sidewalks
8-1-3: Maintenance And Repair
8-1-4: Excavations
8-1-5: Openings And Stairways
8-1-6: Barricades And Lights
8-1-7: Use Of Streets During Construction
8-1-8: Obstructions And Encroachments
8-1-9: Scaffolds
8-1-10: Articles On Window Ledges
8-1-11: Lawn Irrigation Systems In Rights Of Way
8-1-12: Right Of Way Encroachment Waivers
8-1-1: VILLAGE DATUM:
The datum for the establishment of grades in the village is established as a
horizontal plane 46.23 feet below the top of the stone water table at the
southeast corner of the brick schoolhouse located at the northwest corner of
Wolf Road and St. Charles Road in the village. (1976 Code § 1.20.010)
8-1-2: CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Permit Required; Application And Fee: It is unlawful to construct or
lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way in
the village without having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permits shall be made to the village clerk, and shall be accompanied by a fee
as established in the annual fee schedule, and shall state the nature of the
intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is
to do the actual construction work.
   B.   Bond Required: Each applicant shall file a bond, with surety to be
approved by the village, conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss or
damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same.
(1976 Code § 12.04.010; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Specifications: All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in
conformity with specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the
village board. (1976 Code § 12.04.020)
8-1-3: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
   A.   Repairs: All public street, alley, and sidewalk pavements shall be kept
in good repair. Such repair work, whether done by the village or by the
abutting owner, shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of public
works. (1976 Code § 12.04.030)
   B.   Defects: It shall be the duty of every village officer or employee
becoming cognizant of any defect in any street, alley, or sidewalk, or any
obstruction thereof, to report the same to the village board as soon as
possible. (1976 Code § 12.04.040)
8-1-4: EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful to make any excavation in any public
street or alley without having first secured a permit therefor from the
building department.
   B.   Restoration Of Excavated Area: It shall be the duty of the contractor
and of the person who has obtained the permit required by this section to fill
the excavation, upon completion, with material required by chapter 2 of this
title and restore the surface with the same type and quality of material as
that which was removed. (1976 Code § 12.16.110; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-5: OPENINGS AND STAIRWAYS:
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public
sidewalk or street or alley without a permit from the building department. All
such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable, strong cover
or railing to the approval of the building official. (1976 Code § 12.16.140;
amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-6: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
   A.   Barricades And Lights Required:
      1.   Any person, firm, or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on
a street, sidewalk, or other public place, or making an excavation in any such
place, shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or
vehicle by reason of the work. Such barricades shall be protected by a light at
nighttime.
      2.   Any defects in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any
injury. Any person, firm, or corporation properly maintaining any opening or
excavation in any such place shall guard the opening or excavation while the
same remains open by proper barricades and lights. (1976 Code § 12.16.020)
   B.   Disturbing Barricades And Lights: It is unlawful to disturb or
interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any
new pavement, excavation, or opening in any public street, alley, or sidewalk.
(1976 Code § 12.16.030)
8-1-7: USE OF STREETS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Use Permit Required; Occupancy Limited: It is unlawful to occupy with
building materials any street or any part thereof without first having had or
obtained the written permission of the building official, and in no event shall
any part of any street, other than that immediately in front of the lot or land
on which the building is being erected or work done, be occupied nor shall more
than one-third (1/3) of the street, from the curb line, be occupied.
   B.   Bond: A bond shall be filed, with sureties to be approved by the
village board, to indemnify the village from any loss or liability which may
arise because of such use of the streets. (1976 Code § 12.16.120)
   C.   Compliance With Village Provisions; Supervision: Such permit to occupy
any public street for private use in connection with actual building operations
is subject to the provisions of all ordinances of the village and to the
supervision and direction of the superintendent of public works. (1976 Code §
12.16.120; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Warnings And Lights: Proper warnings and lights shall be maintained on
any material so stored to prevent injury to any person or property. (1976 Code
§ 12.16.120)
   E.   Dumpsters; Permit Required: A permit is required prior to the placement
and use of dumpsters for building construction on any public way for a time
period to be determined by the superintendent of public works. (Ord. 02-63, 12-
17-2002; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-8: OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Obstructions: It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
cause, create, or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk, or
other public way, except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by
the village board. (1976 Code § 12.16.010)
   B.   Encroachments: It is unlawful to erect or maintain any building or
structure which encroaches upon any public street or property. (1976 Code §
12.16.050)
   C.   Drains: It is unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or
alley. (1976 Code § 12.16.080)
8-1-9: SCAFFOLDS:
   A.   Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang
or can fall onto any public street, alley, or other public way in the village
shall be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded.
   B.   It is unlawful to place or leave any tools or articles on any such
place in a manner that the same can fall onto a street, sidewalk, or other
public way from a greater height than four feet (4'). (1976 Code § 12.20.090)
8-1-10: ARTICLES ON WINDOW LEDGES:
It is unlawful to place any movable article on any window ledge or other place
abutting on a public street, alley, or other public place and at a height above
four feet (4') from the ground in such a manner that the same can fall or is in
danger of falling onto a street, sidewalk, or other public place. (1976 Code §
12.20.100)
8-1-11: LAWN IRRIGATION SYSTEMS IN RIGHTS OF WAY:
A property owner who installs a lawn irrigation system in the village right of
way shall:
   A.   Obtain and comply with the conditions of a building permit for that
installation.
   B.   Not place or operate sprinkler heads to create a hazard or nuisance.
   C.   Not use the lawn irrigation system when the temperature in the next
twenty four (24) hours is to fall below forty degrees Fahrenheit (40°F).
   D.   Relocate or remove the lawn irrigation system from the right of way in
the event said relocation or removal is required by the village or other
utility company authorized to use the village right of way.
   E.   Defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the village, its officials and
employees, from and against any and all claims and liability for all loss,
damage, or injury arising directly or indirectly from the lawn irrigation
system or to the system that is permitted in the village right of way. (2016
Code)
8-1-12: RIGHT OF WAY ENCROACHMENT WAIVERS:
   A.   Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary, the village
administrator, or his or her designee, in his or her sole and absolute
discretion, may grant a right of way encroachment waiver, as a non-possessory
interest in right of way owned or controlled by the village, for the
construction, installation and/or maintenance by a person, firm or corporation
for carriage walks, automatic lawn sprinkling systems and other similar
improvements. No person shall make use of such right of way unless a right of
way encroachment waiver has been approved in accordance with this code.
   B.   A right of way encroachment waiver shall be granted pursuant to the
terms of an agreement between the benefitted real property owners and the
village, and shall subject to the following conditions.
      1.   The benefitted real property owner shall present to the village such
drawings, plans and specifications for the improvement as the village may
require for review and consideration of the request for a right of way
encroachment waiver.
      2.   All benefitted real property owners shall execute a right of way
encroachment waiver agreement in the form provided by the village which
contains the following information and meets the following conditions:
         a.   The legal description of the benefitted real property;
         b.   All benefitted real property owners shall agree to indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the village and its officers, appointed and elected
officials, president and board of trustees, employees, volunteers, and agents
against any causes of action arising out of the construction, installation and/
or maintenance of such improvement;
         c.   That the agreement be terminated by the village and the
encroachments removed when directed by the village; and
         d.   The agreement shall be recorded with the Cook County recorder of
deeds, at the expense of the benefitted real property owners, against title to
the benefitted real property, and shall run with title to the benefitted real
property.
   C.   Before the right of way encroachment waiver agreement is approved, the
benefitted real property owner shall pay the fee set in the village's annual
fee schedule for a right of way encroachment waiver agreement, if any. (Ord.
18-51, 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE A. DRIVEWAYS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Driveways Across Public Sidewalks
8-1A-2: Driveways Or Sidewalks On Private Property
8-1A-3: Nonconforming Off Street Parking Facilities
8-1A-1: DRIVEWAYS ACROSS PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful to construct or maintain any driveway
in or across any public sidewalk in the village without having first obtained a
permit therefor from the village building official.
   B.   Application For Permit; Compliance With Specifications: Applications
for such driveway permits shall state the size of the driveway, the location,
and material to be used. It is unlawful to depart from such specifications or
vary from them without the permission of the village building official. (1976
Code § 12.08.010; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Bond Requirements: It is unlawful to construct or maintain any such
driveway for the habitual or continual use of vehicles belonging to any person
other than the owner or occupant of the premises abutting on such driveway or
to which it leads, or for any commercial use, unless a bond or indemnity policy
is first filed by the person so constructing or maintaining the driveway in an
amount determined by the superintendent of public works directly related to
estimated village costs if the permittee fails to perform restoration. Such
bond shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss, damage, or
liability suffered or incurred by reason of the existence, construction, or use
of such driveway, and shall have a surety corporation licensed and authorized
to do business in Illinois as a surety company. (1976 Code § 12.08.020; amd.
2016 Code)
   D.   Free From Obstructions; Maintenance: It shall be the duty of any
person, firm, or corporation maintaining any driveway to keep the same free
from snow and ice or any obstruction, and to keep the same in good repair,
where the same crosses a public sidewalk. (1976 Code § 12.08.030)
8-1A-2: DRIVEWAYS OR SIDEWALKS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or replace a
driveway or a sidewalk on any private property located within the corporate
limits of the village without first securing a permit therefor. (1976 Code §
12.08.040)
   B.   Application For Permit; Fee: The fee to secure the permit required in
subsection A of this section is established in the annual fee schedule.
Application for such permit shall be made at the building department and shall
state the location of the intended work, the contractor who is going to perform
said work, and the estimated total price of the work to be performed, excluding
the cost of removing any previous cement or asphalt. (1976 Code § 12.08.050;
amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Minimum Standards: The minimum standards for construction of a sidewalk
or driveway shall be those set forth in title 11 of this code. (1976 Code §
12.08.055; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Contractor Registration; Bond Requirements: Registration and surety
bond shall be required of any contractor constructing or replacing a driveway
or sidewalk on private property within the boundaries of the village.
Contractors or property owners constructing their own driveways or sidewalks
shall be permitted to post a cash bond in lieu of the surety bond. Cash bonds
will be refunded to the property owner after final inspection by the village
building official or his designee. (1976 Code § 12.08.057; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1A-3: NONCONFORMING OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dwelling which has legal nonconforming
off street parking facilities, including driveways, parking spaces or aprons,
to not bring the off street parking facilities into full compliance with this
code whenever the parking facilities are replaced or resurfaced. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE B. STREETLIGHTS
SECTION:
8-1B-1: Scope
8-1B-2: Compliance Required
8-1B-3: Permit And Bond Requirements
8-1B-4: Work Specifications
8-1B-5: Enforcement; Stop Work Order
8-1B-1: SCOPE:
This article relates to and regulates the repair and construction of only those
streetlights and streetlight connections which are the property of the village,
and shall not be deemed as regulating any streetlights or streetlight
connections owned by any public utility. (1976 Code § 12.24.010)
8-1B-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No repair, alteration, connection, disconnection, relocation, construction, or
reconstruction of any streetlight or streetlights located within the village
shall be made except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
article. (1976 Code § 12.24.020)
8-1B-3: PERMIT AND BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: Prior to the commencement of any work in accordance
with section
8-1B-2 of this article, the electrical contractor who is charged with the
performance of such work shall first obtain from the building official a permit
to repair, alter, connect, disconnect, relocate, construct, or reconstruct such
streetlight or streetlights, which permit shall specify the nature of the work
to be done and the location of the streetlight or streetlights upon which such
work shall be performed.
   B.   Bond: The contractor shall give bond in the sum as provided in section
4-7-3 of this code conditioned upon the performance of his work in accordance
with the provisions of this article. (1976 Code § 12.24.030; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1B-4: WORK SPECIFICATIONS:
All connections, reconnections, alterations, relocations, repairs,
construction, and reconstruction of any streetlight or streetlights shall be
performed in such a manner that the electrical connection between two (2) or
more streetlights shall be uninterrupted from pole to pole without any ties,
splices, or other mechanical method or joint. All such electrical connections
from pole to pole shall be constructed of one continuous underground cable of
the same type and quality as the cable existing therein or, if there is no
cable existing therein, of the type and quality generally existing within the
street lighting system of the village. (1976 Code § 12.24.040)
8-1B-5: ENFORCEMENT; STOP WORK ORDER:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the village building official to see to the
enforcement of this article, and he is empowered to order the stopping of any
work which is not in compliance with the provisions of this article. (1976 Code
§ 12.24.050; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   A stop work order shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of
the violation upon which the order is based. The order may be served by posting
in a conspicuous place at the location of the work or by delivery to the person
in charge of the work. Any officer, police officer, inspector, or other village
official may serve a stop work order. (1976 Code § 12.24.050)
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
8-2-1: Purpose; Intent; Scope; Interpretation
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Annual Registration Required
8-2-4: Permit Requirements
8-2-5: Insurance; Indemnity; Security
8-2-6: Change Of Ownership, Identity Or Legal Status
8-2-7: General Construction Standards
8-2-8: Traffic Control
8-2-9: Location Of Facilities
8-2-10: Construction Methods And Materials
8-2-11: Vegetation Control
8-2-12: Removal, Relocation Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
8-2-13: Cleanup And Restoration
8-2-14: Maintenance And Repairs
8-2-15: Variances
8-2-16: Penalties
8-2-1: PURPOSE; INTENT; SCOPE; INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights of way and the village as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the village residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   C.   Scope: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the jurisdiction of the
village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date hereof may
continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable
franchise, license or similar agreement.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require
utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the
privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within the village rights of way. Utilities that are not required by
law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into
such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
      2.   In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider
has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      3.   In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or
similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the
provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension
thereof.
   E.   Conflicting Provisions:
      1.   This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted
prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
      2.   In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with
the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without
violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   F.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
thereto in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30 unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society For Testing And Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area.
The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the "AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Berkeley.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: Any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a
material adverse effect on the use of the right of way for its intended use.
Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other
cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment,
devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of
the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a
manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The village engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
village engineer and/or superintendent of public works to pose an unreasonable
and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to,
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-100 et seq.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under rights of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to this
chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at the local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include
any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to subsection 8-2-5C
of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village superintendent of public works or
his or her designee.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
   A.   Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private
line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications
services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile
or portable one-way or two- way communications, and any other transmission of
messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points
by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar
facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a
single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified
locations to one or more other specified locations.
   B.   "Telecommunications" shall not include:
      1.   Value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission.
      2.   Purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider
to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end
communications.
      3.   The provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now
or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined
in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500
and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail, as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this section.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable
and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 08-07, 2-
19-2008; amd. 2016 Code)
8-2-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies a right of way within the village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the superintendent of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in subsection 8-2-5A of this chapter, in the
form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required; Exemptions: No person shall construct (as defined in
section
8-2-2 of this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within any village right of way which: 1) changes the location of
the facility; 2) adds a new facility; 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined
in section
8-2-2 of this chapter); or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the
right of way without first filing an application with the village
superintendent of public works and obtaining a permit from the village
therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall be
required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customer
premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed
on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number of
duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate
those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by
clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
      2.   The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized
representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
         a.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy
numbers;
         b.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and interest in the work;
         c.   The names, addresses, telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
         d.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
         e.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
            (1)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
            (2)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature
of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
         f.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
         g.   Evidence of insurance as required in subsection 8-2-5A of this
chapter;
         h.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
subsection 8-2-5C of this chapter;
         i.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
8-2-15 of this chapter); and
         j.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
      3.   In addition to the requirements of subsection B2 of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the
specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
         a.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
         b.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
         c.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
         d.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land
and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection
agency, division of water pollution control, and the metropolitan water
reclamation district have been satisfied; or
         e.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and design
standard to be followed.
      4.   Throughout the entire permit application review period and the
construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information
contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing
to the village within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the
amendment. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
   C.   Fee; Exemptions: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee as established in the annual fee schedule, which may be
waived at the discretion of the village administrator. No application fee is
required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Action On Applications:
      1.   Review Of Applications; Grant Or Denial Of Permit: Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
village engineer and/or superintendent of public works within a reasonable time
after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village
engineer and/or superintendent of public works shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the village engineer and/or
superintendent of public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to
the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the village engineer and/or superintendent of public works
shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it
shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
village engineer and/or superintendent of public works, that the construction
proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Additional Review Of Telecommunications Retailers' Applications:
         a.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The village
engineer and/or superintendent of public works shall specify the portion of the
right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
         b.   In the event that the village engineer and/or superintendent of
public works fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either: 1) ten (10) days after service of
notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
not involving excavation for new construction; or 2) twenty five (25) days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
         c.   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to subsections A, B and C of this section,
the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for
a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to
the requirements of subsection D1 of this section.
      3.   Additional Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization
Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a utility
that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video
competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided
the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
   E.   Effect Of Permit:
      1.   Authority Granted: A permit from the village authorizes a permittee
to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village
rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the
permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
rights of way.
      2.   Term Of Permit: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid
for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
      3.   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting
shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such
village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
      4.   Compliance With Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
   F.   Revised Permit Drawings: In the event that the actual locations of any
facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the
plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the
permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within
ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised
drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual
facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation
from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall
be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section
8-2-15 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor.
   G.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Grounds: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
         a.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
         b.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
         c.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of
way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare; or
         d.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
      2.   Notice Requirements: The village shall send written notice of its
intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter stating
the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives
available to the permittee under this subsection.
      3.   Options Of Permittee:
         a.   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
            (1)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
            (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
            (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights
of way to the satisfaction of the village, providing written proof of such
removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice
of revocation.
         b.   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this subsection G3.
      4.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection
G1 of this section.
      5.   Failure Or Refusal Of Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to
comply with the provisions of subsection G3 of this section, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village: a) correct the deficiencies; b)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or c) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-5: INSURANCE; INDEMNITY; SECURITY:
   A.   Insurance Requirements:
      1.   Coverages And Limits:
         a.   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying a right of way or constructing any facility
in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees, as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1a(1) and A1a(2) of this
section.
            (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as X, C, and U coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
               (A)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or
death to each person;
               (B)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
               (C)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types
of liability;
            (2)   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
personal injury and property damage for each accident;
            (3)   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
            (4)   Employers' liability insurance with limits of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
         b.   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this subsection A.
      2.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this
subsection A may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella
policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over
underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered
by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess
or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
      3.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this subsection A to the village within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
      4.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
         a.   The insurance policies required by this subsection A shall
contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to cancel
or not to renew.
         b.   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice,
and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this subsection A.
      5.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A1 of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A1 of this section, or the requirements of
subsections A2, A3 and A4 of this section. A utility that elects to self-
insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements
required under subsection A1 of this section, such as evidence that the utility
is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
      6.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this subsection A shall not be limited by such insurance policies
or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
      7.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this
subsection A shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of
Illinois. (All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated A-
or better and of a class size X or higher by A.M. Best Company.)
   B.   Indemnification: By occupying or constructing facilities in the right
of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the
village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to
arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts,
omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates,
officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction
of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar
agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations
hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct
or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees,
agents or representatives.
   C.   Security:
      1.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this subsection C. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this subsection C at the permittee's
sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the
permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:
         a.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
         b.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village
occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and
         c.   The payment by the permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee in violation of this chapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village must
perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's
failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the
permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
      2.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village
in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
         a.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
         b.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection
by the village of any amounts covered thereby; and
         c.   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
      3.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient
to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the village engineer and/or superintendent of public
works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village
estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each
phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related
group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase
or phases, the village engineer and/or superintendent of public works may, in
the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount
of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under
the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be
equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions
of this subsection C3 for any single phase.
      4.   Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund;
provided, that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
         a.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
         b.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due
and unpaid;
         c.   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
         d.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the
village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.
      5.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C3 of this section.
      6.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the
village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village; provided,
that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum
balance required in subsection C3 of this section.
      7.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation;
provided, that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
      8.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect
to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village,
whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-
2008)
8-2-6: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village right of
way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 08-07, 2-
19-2008)
8-2-7: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items"; (Ord. 08-07, 2-
19-2008)
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". (Ord. 08-07,
2-19-2008; amd. 2016 Code)
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   Interpretation Of Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists
between or among differing principles and standards required by this chapter,
the village engineer and/or superintendent of public works shall determine, in
the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply, and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the village engineer and/or
superintendent of public works shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-8: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
8-2-14 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the village
engineer and/or superintendent of public works determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village
utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village utility facilities.
      2.   The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible
interference with the use of the right of way and shall cause only the minimum
possible impact upon, and interference with, the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of way.
      3.   No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes
with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit
visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by
the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line
and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line, and any
aboveground appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility, other than a power or
communication facility, crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Location Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that
facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not highways,
rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   F.   Aboveground Facilities: Aboveground facilities may be installed only
if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable. The installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk, and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   H.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 08-
07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-10: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village
engineer and/or superintendent of public works from the edge of the pavement.
Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48)
hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty
eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits
are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring
shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will
safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it
during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accordance with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the village engineer and/or superintendent
of public works.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the engineer and/or superintendent of public works, the utility, at
its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the engineer and/or superintendent of public works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section
8-2-15 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6, or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the engineer and/or superintendent of public works.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as a clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair;
and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                    determined by village)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 m)
Water lines                              Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
lines                                    protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing; provided,
that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               (A)   The crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip
augers", or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
               (B)   The installation is by the open trench method which is
only permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the "federal code of the office of
pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety
standards" (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI "standard code
for pressure piping" (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Sewer Lines Or Drainage
Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines
within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
"Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the engineer and/or superintendent of public
works. With the approval of the engineer and/or superintendent of public works,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of a vegetation
free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a
neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the village engineer and/or
superintendent of public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe,
conduit, wire, poles, crossarms, or other materials shall be distributed along
the right of way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize
hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to
the right of way and other property. If material is to be stored on right of
way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the engineer and/or
superintendent of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital
utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction
are those set forth in subsection 5-11-4D of this code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. 08-07,
2-19-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
8-2-11: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming
and vegetation control activities in the right of way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local
franchise or other agreement with the village as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities:
      1.   Permit Requirements:
         a.   Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility
with facilities in the right of way and that is not performed pursuant to
applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing the same, shall
not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the
application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit
required under this chapter.
         b.   Application For Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits
shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers
with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree
trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring
that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society Of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection D2 of this section, no utility
shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or
vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects or disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the engineer and/or superintendent of public works that such spraying is the
only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-12: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Compliance With Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written
notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the
corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance,
or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the
village in or upon, the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the village shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within
ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice, the village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village engineer
and/or superintendent of public works determines that such removal will be in
the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that
the village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove
it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility
shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion
of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-13: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
is disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the village engineer and/or superintendent of
public works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to
restore the right of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which
existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in
this section may be extended by the village engineer and/or superintendent of
public works for good cause shown. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-14: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
   A.   General Maintenance Requirements: Facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the
utility in a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
village engineer and/or superintendent of public works or his or her duly
authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have
been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to
make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to
interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be
notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file, in writing, with the village
a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
8-2-15: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the village engineer
and/or superintendent of public works as a part of the permit application. The
request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The village engineer and/or
superintendent of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized
for each provision of this chapter identified in the variance request on an
individual basis.
   C.   Conditions:
      1.   The village engineer and/or superintendent of public works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
         a.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
         b.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities
that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
      2.   As a condition for authorizing a variance, the village engineer and/
or superintendent of public works may require the utility requesting the
variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of
this chapter.
   D.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the village
engineer and/or superintendent of public works under the provisions of this
chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village board, or such other
board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the
date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The village board
shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly
scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the
appeal. The village board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 08-07, 2-19-
2008)
8-2-16: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and
this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility that does not pay the costs apportioned thereto.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-07, 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 3
TREES AND PLANTS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Purpose
8-3-2: Definitions
8-3-3: Administration And Enforcement Officials
8-3-4: Permit Requirements
8-3-5: Standards Adopted
8-3-6: Planting Specifications
8-3-7: Permitted And Prohibited Species
8-3-8: Obstructions And Hazardous Trees
8-3-9: Tree And Plant Diseases
8-3-10: Protection Of Trees
8-3-11: New Developments
8-3-1: PURPOSE:
In order to enhance the aesthetics of the public rights of way and other open
areas of the village and to ensure a proliferation of good quality, durable
trees which will improve the environment, and in order to protect the public
safety, it is the purpose of this chapter:
   A.   To regulate the planting, preservation and protection, and removal of
trees along the public streets and parkways of the village, except as regulated
by the subdivision regulations ordinance of the village, as well as on other
municipally owned property.
   B.   To provide for the issuance of permits for the planting and removal of
trees along the public streets or parkways of the village, except for the
planting and maintenance of trees required for new developments under the
subdivision regulations ordinance of the village, as well as on other
municipally owned property.
   C.   To provide requirements for the pruning and removal of trees and other
vegetation on private property adjoining public streets or other public access
easements which endanger the public safety.
   D.   To provide for the prevention and control of diseases which threaten
trees along the public streets or parkways of the village, as well as on other
municipally owned property.
   E.   To provide for the protection of existing trees along any public
streets and parkways of the village, as well as on other municipally owned
property. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
dbh OR DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT: The diameter of the tree measured at four and
one-half feet (4.5') above the existing grade at the base of the tree.
PARKWAY: That part of any street that lies between the pavement edge or back of
curb and the nearest property line.
PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENT: An easement granted to the public by recorded document
for the purposes of public access (either for vehicles and pedestrians or
solely for pedestrians). A public access easement need not be improved with a
paved or concrete surface.
STREET: All land dedicated to or used by the public for thoroughfare or highway
purposes.
TREE: Any self-supporting woody plant having a well defined, elongated main
stem and a well defined crown, with few or no branches on its lower part.
VILLAGE ARBORIST: A public works department full time employee who may be a
certified arborist.
VILLAGE FORESTER: A professional forester who may be retained as a consultant
by the village of Berkeley. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995)
8-3-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The village superintendent of public works, with the professional assistance of
a village forester, a village arborist or such other assistants designated by
the village board, shall have the authority and jurisdiction to regulate the
planting, maintenance and removal of trees and other vegetation on public
streets and parkways, as well as other municipally owned property, and shall
have the authority and jurisdiction to enforce all other provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995)
8-3-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve,
prune, remove, cut aboveground or otherwise disturb any tree on any public
street, parkway or other municipally owned property without first filing an
application for and obtaining a permit.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a permit shall be made upon
forms provided. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following
information:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
      2.   Location of the proposed work, including a simple sketch indicating
the location of each tree.
      3.   Nature of and reason for the proposed work.
      4.   Any other information, as shall be required.
   C.   No Permit Fee: There shall be no fee for a permit under the provisions
of this chapter.
   D.   Issuance Of Permit: A permit shall be issued following review of the
application if, in the judgment of the village, the proposed work will foster
the purposes of this chapter, and the proposed methods conform to the standards
set forth herein.
   E.   Duration Of Permit: Any permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire ninety (90) days after its issuance, or as specified on
the permit. The work authorized shall be completed in the time indicated on the
permit and in the manner therein described.
   F.   Revocation Of Permit; Penalty: Failure of the holder of a permit to
comply with the terms of the permit or with any provisions of this chapter
shall result in revocation of the permit. In addition, any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions of title
1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995)
8-3-5: STANDARDS ADOPTED:
Performance standards for activities required under this chapter shall be in
accordance with the then latest available revision of the applicable standards
as herein described, unless specific exceptions are approved by the village
administrator upon receipt of a recommendation from the village forester or a
certified arborist retained by the village. Said standards, including those
contained in the American National Standards Institute publication Z133.1
("American National Standard For Tree Care Operations - Pruning, Trimming,
Repairing, Maintaining, And Removing Trees, And Cutting Brush - Safety
Requirements") and "American Standard For Nursery Stock", published by the
American Association Of Nurserymen, as such may be amended from time to time,
are hereby incorporated and adopted by reference as the standards of the
village for the purposes of this chapter. At least three (3) copies of such
standards, including any subsequent amendments thereto, shall be on file with
the village clerk and made conveniently available for public inspection, use
and examination. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995; amd. 2016 Code)
8-3-6: PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS:
The grade of all planting stock regulated by this chapter shall be in
conformance with the "American Standard For Nursery Stock", published by the
American Association Of Nurserymen. Park grade trees shall not be allowed. The
planting of trees and other vegetation shall be in accordance with accepted
horticultural practices, including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Tree Standards: The following general standards for trees to be planted
on village streets, parkways, or other municipally owned property shall be
applicable:
      1.   All trees selected shall be grown in a nursery located in the
northern half of the state.
      2.   All trees selected shall be healthy and shall be free of insects and
diseases, bark bruises and scrapes on the trunk or limbs before and after
planting.
      3.   Each tree selected shall be consistent in form and character with
the species and shall have a straight trunk with limbs not lower than six feet
(6') above the ground.
      4.   All trees selected shall have a trunk diameter, measured six inches
(6") above the ball, of not less than three inches (3").
   B.   Spacing And Location: Trees to be planted in the parkway shall be
spaced no more or less than forty feet (40') apart, unless otherwise approved.
They shall be no closer than:
      1.   Five feet (5') back from the curb or, in the case of streets without
curbs, five feet (5') back from the pavement edge or from the edge of any swale
or ditch.
      2.   Forty feet (40') from the nearest corner of the pavement of
intersecting streets, said distance to be measured away from the corner along
both of the streets.
      3.   Ten feet (10') from driveways.
      4.   Fifteen feet (15') from streetlights.
      5.   Five feet (5') from fire hydrants, buffalo boxes, vaults, and the
like.
      6.   Five feet (5') from sidewalks, unless otherwise required or
approved.
   C.   Planting Seasons: The fall planting season shall be from October 1 to
December 1, and the spring planting season shall be from March 15 to May 15,
unless otherwise specifically approved by the village board.
   D.   Planting Standards: The following general standards for the planting of
trees on village streets, parkways, or other municipally owned property shall
be applicable:
      1.   Trees shall be balled and burlapped and shall not be dug for removal
from the nursery until immediately prior to their planting.
      2.   The planting hole shall be twelve inches (12") larger in diameter
than the diameter of the ball.
      3.   All trees shall be hand planted and planted straight.
      4.   The tree shall be planted the depth at which it was growing in the
nursery. The ball shall be placed in undisturbed soil on the bottom of the hole
to prevent settling.
      5.   In most instances, the backfill around the ball shall be the same
soil as that which was removed from the hole; however, in cases where rocks,
stones, etc., are encountered, topsoil shall be used.
      6.   Any excess soil, debris or trimmings shall be removed from the
planting site immediately upon completion of planting.
      7.   Where necessary, trees shall be staked to ensure that they remain
straight.
      8.   All tags, wires, plastic ties and wire baskets shall be removed from
each tree.
      9.   Tree holes may be machine dug, but if the existing lawn is damaged,
it shall be the responsibility of the permittee to restore the lawn to its
original condition, using sod. The sides of all holes that are machine dug
shall be hand shaped to eliminate glazing.
      10.   The permittee shall also secure all necessary underground utility
locations prior to planting. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995)
8-3-7: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED SPECIES:
   A.   Permitted Species: A list of permitted plant species shall be
maintained in the village "Tree Administration Manual", as such may be amended
from time to time. The approval of a species for a particular site shall be
dependent upon the following criteria:
      1.   Compliance with permitted species list.
      2.   Compatibility of the species with the site.
      3.   The overall species balance in the immediate area surrounding the
proposed location, as well as the overall species balance in the village.
   B.   Prohibited Species: The following plant species shall not be planted on
any public street, parkway, or other municipally owned property: (Ord. 95-03,
4-10-1995)
Botanic Name Common Name
Botanic Name           Common Name
Acer negundo           Box elder
Acer saccharinium      Silver maple
Ailanthus altissima    Tree of heaven
Catalpa speciosa       Catalpa
Coniferales ord.       Evergreens of any type
Elaeagnus spp.         Russian olive
Ginkgo biloba (female) Female ginkgo
Maclura pomifera       Osage orange
Malus pumila           Apple
Morus spp.             Mulberry
P. alban nives         Silver white poplar
Populus spp.           Cottonwood, poplar, aspen
Prunus spp.            Cherry, plum
Salix spp.             Willow
 
(Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995; amd. Ord. 08-06, 2-19-2008)
8-3-8: OBSTRUCTIONS AND HAZARDOUS TREES:
   A.   Pruning Obstructions Required: It shall be the duty of any person(s)
owning or occupying real property bordering on any street or other public
access easement to prune any trees and other vegetation located on said
property in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the streetlights,
obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic
signs or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum
clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet (10') over
sidewalks and twelve feet (12') over all street pavements, except in the case
of truck thoroughfares, which shall have a clearance of sixteen feet (16').
   B.   Removal Of Hazardous Trees: It shall be the duty of any person(s)
owning or occupying real property bordering on any street or other public
access easement to remove any trees (or portions thereof) located on said
property which, due to storm damage, disease or any other causes, have died or
become diseased, loose, broken, cracked, leaning or otherwise hazardous because
of the increased risk that said trees (or portions thereof) may fall onto the
street or other public access easement.
   C.   Notice To Prune Or Remove: Should any person(s) owning real property
bordering on any street or other public access easement fail to properly prune
trees and other vegetation as hereinabove provided or to properly remove
hazardous trees (or portions thereof) as hereinabove provided, the village
administrator shall order such person(s), within ten (10) days after receipt of
written notice, to so prune or remove such trees (or portions thereof) and
other vegetation. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995)
   D.   Right To Appeal: Any person receiving a notice as hereinabove provided
shall have the right to appeal. The appeal shall be in the form of a letter to
the village administrator and shall outline the specific reasons and
justification for the appeal and shall request a hearing before the village
administrator. The appeal must be received within five (5) days of the receipt
of said notice. The decision of the village administrator, made after hearing
the appeal, shall be final. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995; amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   Failure To Comply; Pruning Or Removal By Village; Lien:
      1.   When a person to whom a notice to prune or remove is directed shall
fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the village to
cause such trees and other vegetation to be pruned or removed at reasonable
cost, which shall be reimbursed by the property owner within thirty (30) days.
      2.   All village costs for pruning or removal not reimbursed shall be a
lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all other liens and
encumbrances, except tax liens. Within ninety (90) days after said costs are
incurred, the village shall file notice of lien in the office of the county
recorder of deeds or in the office of the county registrar of taxes, whichever
is applicable. Said notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
         a.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof.
         b.   The amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred
or payable for the service.
         c.   The date or dates when said costs or expenses were incurred and
payment thereof became delinquent. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995)
      3.   The failure to record the lien or failure to record within said
ninety (90) day period shall not relieve the owner of the property (as
determined at the time the pruning or removal violation occurred) of the
obligation to reimburse the village in full, and such obligation will continue
in effect until paid.
   F.   Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the costs and expenses, including the
cost of recording said notice and, in addition, the payment of a release fee as
established in the annual fee schedule, by the owner of or persons interested
in said lot, piece or parcel of land, a release of said lien by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed shall be delivered to the person
so paying the costs and expenses. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995; amd. 2016 Code)
8-3-9: TREE AND PLANT DISEASES:
   A.   Inspection: The village, or the person performing tree and plant
inspections by authority of the village, is hereby authorized and directed to
enter on and upon private property whereon there is located any tree or plant
having the appearance of or suspected of having the Dutch elm disease, the elm
yellows disease (formerly called phloem necrosis), oak wilt, pine wilt or any
other infectious disease, or insect infestation, for the purpose of inspecting
said trees and, if required in order to verify the presence of disease,
removing therefrom samples or portions thereof to be tested. In addition, the
village, or said person making inspections, is hereby authorized and directed
to enter on and upon private property whereon there is located any pile of cut
wood suspected of or having the potential for harboring the diseases or
infestations hereinabove listed.
   B.   Nuisances Declared: In the event that it is determined that the tree is
in fact diseased or infected with the Dutch elm disease, elm yellows disease,
oak wilt, pine wilt or any other infectious disease, said tree shall forthwith
be and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Also, trees or parts thereof in
a dead or dying condition and woodpiles which serve as a breeding place for the
elm bark beetle or other disease spreading insect, bug or vector are hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
   C.   Removal By Owner Or Occupant:
      1.   The owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which said
diseased tree or plant or woodpile exists shall forthwith remove said tree or
plant or woodpile from the corporate limits within ten (10) days of
notification to such owner, occupant or agent by the village to do so. All
infected plant material must be disposed of in a manner which conforms with all
applicable laws. Any material that is chipped must not exceed one square inch
on any final chip surface.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the village to
permit any tree, plant or woodpile, or portion thereof, infected with an
infectious disease, to remain on such premises.
   D.   Removal By Village; Costs: In all cases where the owner, occupant or
agent of the parcel of land on which said diseased tree or plant is located
cannot be found, or if found and notified as aforesaid, neglects or refuses to
abate said nuisance within ten (10) days of said notification, it shall be
lawful for the village to abate the same by removal and disposal of said
diseased tree or plant. The owner, occupant and agent, or any of them, shall be
charged with those expenses incurred by the village in the removal or abatement
of the diseased tree, plant or breeding place. The person charged with such
removal and disposal may request that the same be done by the village or its
authorized agent, and all expenses incurred in connection therewith shall be
assessed against the property owner. All expenses incurred by the village which
are not paid by the owner or person interested in the affected real estate
shall become a lien upon said real estate upon the service and filing of a
notice of lien pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12. (Ord. 95-
03, 4-10-1995)
8-3-10: PROTECTION OF TREES:
   A.   Damage To, Removal, Attaching Objects: Unless specifically authorized,
no person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree from a public
street or parkway, or from any other municipally owned property. Further,
unless specifically authorized by the village superintendent of public works,
no person shall attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other
contrivance to any such tree, allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which
is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them or set fire or permit any
fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any
tree located on publicly owned land or dedicated right of way.
   B.   Fencing During Construction Or Excavation:
      1.   All trees on any street, parkway or other municipally owned property
near any excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work
shall be guarded by those doing any such excavation or construction work with a
substantial barrier, approved by the village, at a distance in feet from the
tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches dbh (as measured 4.5 feet
aboveground). All building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside
said barrier.
      2.   No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches or lay any
driveway or sidewalk within a distance in feet from any tree on any street,
parkway or other municipally owned property equal to the diameter of the trunk
in inches dbh (measured 4.5 feet aboveground) without first obtaining a written
permit from the superintendent of public works.
   C.   Materials Obstructing Growth: No person shall deposit, place, store or
maintain upon any public place of the village any stone, brick, sand, dirt,
sod, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water,
air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing thereon, except with prior
written permission of the superintendent of public works. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-
1995)
8-3-11: NEW DEVELOPMENTS:
The village subdivision regulations ordinance shall regulate the planting of
trees in new developments. (Ord. 95-03, 4-10-1995)
CHAPTER 4
PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Permit Required; Exemptions
8-4-3: Application For Permit
8-4-4: Permit Fees; Other Costs
8-4-5: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
8-4-6: Multiple Permits
8-4-7: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
8-4-8: Days And Hours
8-4-9: Traffic Limits
8-4-10: Distribution Of Literature
8-4-11: Revocation Of Permit
8-4-12: Appeals
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSEMBLY: Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally, gathering, or group
of ten (10) or more persons, animals, or vehicles, or combination thereof,
having a common purpose, design, or goal, upon any public street, sidewalk,
alley, parkway, or other public place, which assembly substantially inhibits
the usual flow of pedestrian or vehicular travel or which occupies any public
area, other than a "parade", as defined in this section.
PARADE: Any march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or promenade
consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having a
common purpose, design, destination, or goal, upon any public place, which
parade, march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or promenade does not
comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or control.
SIDEWALK: Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes
of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.
STREET: Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes
of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder, parkway, right of way, or
median strip thereof. (2016 Code)
8-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the activity of a parade or
assembly without a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. The
permit shall not authorize the use of sound amplifying equipment in conjunction
with a parade or assembly without a separate permit. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Funeral processions.
   B.   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
   C.   Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs first coming into
public knowledge within three (3) days of such parade or assembly; provided,
that the organizers thereof give written notice to the village at least twenty
four (24) hours prior to such parade or assembly. (2016 Code)
8-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Filing Application:
      1.   A person seeking a parade or public assembly permit shall file an
application with the chief of police or his designee on forms provided by such
officer, and the application shall be signed by the applicant and notarized.
      2.   For single, nonrecurring parades or public assemblies, an
application for a permit shall be filed with the chief of police at least ten
(10) and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the parade or
public assembly is proposed to commence. The chief of police may waive the
minimum ten (10) day filing period and accept an application filed within a
shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature
of the parade or public assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and
the village services required in connection with the event, the chief of police
determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety.
      3.   For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or recurring
basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering all such
parades or assemblies during that calendar year may be filed with the chief of
police at least sixty (60) and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days
before the date and time which the first such parade or public assembly is
proposed to commence. The chief of police may waive the minimum sixty (60) day
period after due consideration of the factors specified in subsection A2 of
this section.
   B.   Required Information: The application for a parade or public assembly
permit shall set forth the following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such a parade or assembly.
      2.   If the parade or assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization.
      3.   The name, address, and telephone number of the designated person who
will be responsible for the receipt and holding of the permit.
      4.   The date when the parade or assembly is to be conducted.
      5.   The amount of any admission or attendance charge expected to be
required from those participating.
      6.   The route to be traveled, the starting point, the termination point,
the location of speaker platforms and the total time and distance expected.
      7.   The appropriate number of persons who will, and animals and vehicles
which will, constitute such parade or assembly and the type of animals and
description of the vehicles.
      8.   The hours when such parade or assembly will start and terminate.
      9.   A statement as to whether the parade or assembly will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed or public
area to be assembled upon.
      10.   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or
assembly.
      11.   The time at which units of the parade or assembly will begin to
assemble at any such assembly areas. (2016 Code)
8-4-4: PERMIT FEES; OTHER COSTS:
   A.   A nonrefundable fee as established by the annual fee schedule to cover
administrative costs of processing the permit shall be paid to the village by
the applicant when the application is filed.
   B.   If the application is for the use of any village property or if any
village services shall be required for the parade or public assembly, the
applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, the charges for those
services in accordance with the annual fee schedule.
   C.   The applicant shall also be responsible for reimbursement of additional
village costs not reimbursed in subsection B of this section including, but not
limited to, personnel and equipment that shall be paid no later than thirty
(30) days following the event.
   D.   The village board may reduce or waive its costs when done so on a
nondiscriminatory basis and when in the best interest of the village, and there
shall be no costs reimbursed for police protection when the sole purpose of the
parade or public assembly is for the purpose of public issue speech protected
under the first amendment. (2016 Code)
8-4-5: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   The chief of police shall either, within forty eight (48) hours, issue
a written permit for the holding of a parade or assembly or deny the
application. Applications may be denied on the basis of incompleteness or as
not being in compliance with this chapter. The reasons for denial shall be made
known to applicant, in writing, at the time of denial. The applicant shall be
allowed to correct or complete the improper application and resubmit it to the
chief of police or immediately appeal pursuant to section
8-4-12 of this chapter. If a corrected application is resubmitted, the chief of
police shall issue the permit or deny the application within forty eight (48)
hours, in writing, as with an original application.
   B.   The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided herein unless,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
      1.   The information contained in the application is false or
intentionally misleading in some material or substantial regard.
      2.   The parade or assembly will endanger public health, welfare, or
safety for the reasons set forth herein and that reasonable adjustments to the
village traffic control, street and property maintenance, or police, fire, or
ambulance protection would not alleviate such danger.
      3.   The time, duration, route, and size of the parade or assembly will
substantially and unreasonably disrupt the movement of traffic.
      4.   The parade or assembly is of a size or nature that it would require
the diversion of such a great number of police officers of the village to
properly police the line of movement or assembly area and the areas contiguous
thereto as to impair reasonable police protection to the village.
      5.   The permittee has failed to provide for the services of sufficient
monitors to control the orderly conduct of the parade or assembly.
      6.   The permittee has failed to provide a reasonable means of informing
all the persons participating therein of the terms and conditions of the
permit.
      7.   The concentration or number of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a
combination thereof, is such as to prevent or substantially impair police,
fire, and ambulance vehicles and/or personnel from responding to emergency
calls within the village, including within the immediate area of the proposed
parade or assembly.
      8.   The parade will not progress from its assembly area to its
disbanding area as expeditiously as reasonably required for the safe and
orderly conduct of the parade.
      9.   The parade or assembly will interfere with another parade or
assembly for which a permit has previously been granted except as set forth in
section
8-4-6 of this chapter.
      10.   The parade or assembly is reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property.
      11.   The assembly on a public sidewalk in a business district will
interfere with the normal egress and ingress of pedestrians to and from a
business establishment.
   C.   The chief of police shall uniformly consider each application upon its
merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying the application and
shall not deny any permit based upon any lawfully protected class of
individuals. (2016 Code)
8-4-6: MULTIPLE PERMITS:
If the chief of police shall receive more than one application for a parade or
assembly at the same time and the same place, or on the same day, the
application filed first in time shall take precedence. An application shall be
considered to be at the same time if the event is scheduled to commence within
two (2) hours before or after the holding of another event at the same place.
An application shall be considered to be at the same place if the assembly is
to be conducted within one-half (1/2) mile of another assembly. If the chief of
police receives an application for more than one parade or assembly in a single
day, the chief of police may set a time for the duration of each parade or
assembly, which time shall not, without the consent of the group seeking the
permit, be less than three (3) hours. The chief of police shall issue permits
for more than a single parade during one day in accordance with the
requirements of this section and subsection 8-4-5A of this chapter; provided,
however, that the chief of police may not issue multiple permits beyond the
point at which the issuance of an additional permit would require the
continuing diversion of so great a number of police officers or other village
personnel so as to prevent normal police protection or other services to the
village. A single permit may cover more than one group or person if their
identities are properly reported on the application. (2016 Code)
8-4-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any
parade or public assembly without first having obtained a permit as herein
provided.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or
public assembly for which the person knows a permit has not been granted.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or responsible for the
conduct of a duly licensed parade or public assembly to knowingly fail to
comply with any condition of the permit.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or public
assembly activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public
safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or
rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property.
   E.   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere
with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or other object
lawfully participating or lawfully used in a parade or public assembly.
   F.   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade or public assembly when such vehicles or persons are in
motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly. (2016
Code)
8-4-8: DAYS AND HOURS:
All parades shall be held during daylight hours at times other than peak
traffic periods (7:30 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. to 6:00 P.M., Monday
through Saturday) and not before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays. All
assemblies shall conclude by ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (2016 Code)
8-4-9: TRAFFIC LIMITS:
Parades and assemblies shall be limited to such numbers as will not obstruct
traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, in an unreasonable manner. The chief
of police may impose, as a condition of the permit, reasonable regulations as
to spacing of paraders, length of parade, duration of the parade or assembly so
police manpower will not be diverted for too long a period of time from its
other duties, giving consideration to the day of the week, the expected amount
of vehicle and pedestrian traffic, weather conditions and the holiday
conditions, if any. The time requested may be reset or diminished if necessary
to avoid relocating or rerouting overly large amounts of vehicles or pedestrian
traffic covered by peak periods of traffic. The chief of police may then issue
a permit with those conditions. (2016 Code)
8-4-10: DISTRIBUTION OF LITERATURE:
Literature may be passed from person to person but may not be put upon or
affixed to any public or private property without the permission of the owner
of the property. The materials cannot be passed out to moving cars or cars on
public or private roadways. Material can be handed out to passersby on
sidewalks if such distribution does not unreasonably interfere with the flow of
the pedestrian traffic. If the permittee chooses to hand out any such material,
then the permittee shall be responsible for removing any discarded materials
from the area of the parade or assembly. (2016 Code)
8-4-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public
assembly permit instantly upon violation of the conditions or standards for
issuance as set forth in this chapter or when a public emergency arises where
the police resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment
of police services for the parade or public assembly would have an immediate
and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. (2016
Code)
8-4-12: APPEALS:
   A.   Any final decision of the chief of police may be appealed to the
corporate authorities by the applicant, permittee, or any person affected by
the decision. Any appeal shall be filed with the village president within two
(2) business days after notice of the decision. The corporate authorities shall
act upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled village board meeting held
more than two (2) days and less than fourteen (14) days after the filing of the
appeal. If no such meeting is scheduled or if a regularly scheduled meeting is
not held within such time, the mayor shall call a special board meeting to
consider and act upon the appeal within fourteen (14) days after the filing of
such appeal.
   B.   In the event that the village board rejects an applicant's appeal, the
applicant may file an immediate request for review with a court of competent
jurisdiction; provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall be construed,
nor is intended, to prevent or prohibit an applicant from seeking immediate
judicial review from a denial of a permit request or from any action or
inaction on the part of the village, its officers or agents. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
USE OF VILLAGE HALL
SECTION:
8-5-1: Permitted Use
8-5-1: PERMITTED USE:
The facilities of the village hall shall be primarily used for such corporate
purposes and business of the village as the village president and board of
trustees shall from time to time determine. (1976 Code § 1.40.010)
TITLE 9
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES; SERVICE PIPES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Connection Fees
9-1-2: Service Pipes
9-1-1: CONNECTION FEES:
   A.   Fee Schedule: There is hereby established by the village board of
trustees a schedule of fees for water connections, water meter connections,
sanitary sewer connections, and storm sewer connections within the village.
(1976 Code § 13.32.010; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Payment Of Fees; Inspection: All such fees shall be paid to the village
prior to the issuance of an occupancy and use permit, and installations shall
be inspected by the village plumbing inspector or his designated agent. (1976
Code § 13.32.020; amd. 2016 Code)
9-1-2: SERVICE PIPES:
   A.   Installation:
      1.   Responsibility For Installation; Supervision: All service pipes from
the mains to the premises to be served shall be installed by and at the cost of
the owner of the property involved or the applicant for the service.
Installation shall be under the supervision of the plumbing inspector. (1976
Code § 13.20.010)
      2.   Compliance With Specifications: No service pipe shall be installed
unless it conforms to specifications contained in subsections B through E3 of
this section. (1976 Code § 13.20.020)
   B.   Repairs; Liability:
      1.   All repairs on service pipes and the plumbing systems of buildings
shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served;
except, that meters shall be repaired only by the village.
      2.   The village may, in case of emergency, repair any service pipe, and
if this is done, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the village by
the owner of the premises served.
      3.   The superintendent of public works shall shut off the water to allow
repairs to be made whenever notice is given that such repairs are contemplated.
(1976 Code § 13.20.030)
      4.   The village shall not be liable for any damage caused by a leak or
break in any service pipe or for damage caused by a failure to repair the same
promptly; nor shall the village be liable for any damage caused by the repair
or installation of such pipes or resulting damage therefrom when such work is
not done by the village. (1976 Code § 13.20.060; amd. 2016 Code)
      5.   Any repairs to the water service system, including the water main
and lateral service to the buffalo box water shutoff mechanism, shall be at the
sole cost and expense and the responsibility of the village. All repairs
necessitated by damage from the buffalo box to and including the private
property of the owner shall be at the sole cost and expense and responsibility
of the property owner. (1976 Code §§ 13.20.060, 13.32.030)
      6.   Any repairs necessitated by damage to the sanitary sewer pipe
between the main and the private property of the property owner shall be at the
sole cost and expense and responsibility of the property owner. Any repairs
necessitated by damage to the sanitary sewer pipe main shall be at the sole
cost and expense and responsibility of the village. (1976 Code § 13.20.060)
   C.   Excavations: Excavations made for installing service pipes or repairing
the same shall be made in compliance with the provisions relating to making
excavations in streets contained in title 8, chapter 1 of this code. (1976 Code
§ 13.20.040)
   D.   Shutoff Boxes: Shutoff or service boxes shall be placed on every
service pipe and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line
where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily
accessible and shall be protected from frost. (1976 Code § 13.20.050)
   E.   Connection, Installation And Pipe Specifications:
      1.   Service Cocks And Ferrules: No person except those authorized by
this title shall be permitted, under any circumstances, to tap any street main
or insert stopcocks or ferrules therein. All service cocks or ferrules must be
inserted at or near the top of the street main, and not in any case nearer than
twelve inches (12") from the bell of the pipe. The size of the cock to be
inserted shall be that specified in the permit. (1976 Code § 13.20.070)
      2.   Pipe Specifications:
         a.   Pipe specifications shall be as provided in this code or as
contained in the 2014 edition of the "Standard Specifications For Water-Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois", prepared by the Illinois Society Of
Professional Engineers and approved by the superintendent of public works.
(1976 Code § 13.20.080; amd. Ord. 08-06, 2-19-2008; 2016 Code)
         b.   No pipe shall be used for the purpose of street service of a
different material or size than that specified in this section except by
special permit issued by the superintendent of public works. (1976 Code §
13.20.080; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   Laying Pipe: All service pipes leading from street mains to the
building line shall, as far as practicable, be laid in the ground to a depth of
not less than five feet (5'), and every such pipe shall be laid in such manner
and be of such surplus length as to prevent breakage or rupture by settlement.
All joints in such pipes shall be of the kind termed "plumber" or "wiped
joints". The connections of pipe by the so called "cup joint" is prohibited.
(1976 Code § 13.20.090)
      4.   Roundway Cocks:
         a.   Every service pipe shall be provided with a roundway cock for
each consumer, easily accessible, placed beyond damage by frost, and so
situated that the water can be conveniently shut off.
         b.   Such roundway cocks, unless otherwise specially permitted, shall
be connected to service pipes within the sidewalks at or near the curb line of
the same, and be enclosed in and protected by a cast iron box with a cover
having the letter "W" of suitable size cast thereon. Such iron box shall be of
proper size to admit a stop key for operating the service cock.
         c.   Whenever two (2) or more distinct buildings or premises are to be
supplied by means of branch or subbranch pipes supplied by a single tap in the
street main, each branch shall be independently arranged with service cock and
box on the curb line in the manner described above. All cocks used at the
sidewalks by plumbers shall be of the kind known as "round waterway". (1976
Code § 13.20.100)
CHAPTER 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Water Supply
9-2-2: Authority To Turn On Water
9-2-3: Application For Water Service; Deposit Required
9-2-4: Permit For Water Use
9-2-5: Plumbing Standards
9-2-6: Connection To System
9-2-7: Meters
9-2-8: Rates And Charges
9-2-9: Temporary Connections
9-2-10: Resale Of Water Prohibited
9-2-11: Damage To, Tampering With System
9-2-1: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Joint Use Of Hillside Water:
      1.   Purpose: It is necessary and in the best interests of the village
that it acquire and operate jointly with the village of Hillside a common
source of supply of water in order that sufficient water for the use of the
village and its inhabitants for public and domestic purposes be available at
all times, and that it acquire and operate jointly with the village of Hillside
a common source of supply, said method being that most economical method of
acquiring a complete and sufficient supply of water. (1976 Code § 13.12.010)
      2.   Joint Operation: Pursuant to the terms of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-135-1 et seq., the village president and board do hereby elect
and determine to acquire and operate jointly with the village of Hillside a
common source of supply of water. (1976 Code § 13.12.020; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   Berkeley-Hillside Water Commission: As soon after August 2, 1948, as
may be, and pursuant to the terms of the act referred to in subsection A2 of
this section, the village president is authorized and directed, with the
approval of the board, to appoint a commissioner to act as a member of the
commission to be hereafter organized and known as the Berkeley-Hillside water
commission, with the powers and duties as prescribed in the act referred to in
subsection A2 of this section. (1976 Code § 13.12.030)
   B.   Groundwater As Potable Water Supply:
      1.   Definitions:
         PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
         POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.
      2.   Use Prohibited: The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply
groundwater from within the corporate limits of the village by the installing
or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 03-44,
7-15-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
9-2-2: AUTHORITY TO TURN ON WATER:
No water from the municipal water supply shall be turned on for service into
any premises by any person but the superintendent of public works or some other
person authorized by him to perform this service. (1976 Code § 13.04.010)
9-2-3: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE; DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Application to have water turned on shall be made in writing to the
village administrator and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide
by and accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing his
use of the village water supply.
   B.   All such applications, when properly made, shall be filed by the
village administrator. (1976 Code § 13.04.020; amd. 2016 Code)
9-2-4: PERMIT FOR WATER USE:
All applications for permits for the introduction or use of water supplied by
the village shall be made in writing upon printed forms furnished by the
village clerk, the blanks to be specifically and properly filled in and signed
by the owner or duly authorized agent of the owner, and no work whatever shall
be done in the street or outside of a building by any plumber or other person
for the purpose of making any connection to or with any village water main or
pipe until after the issuance of such permit. This restriction shall not
prevent any person from rendering assistance in case of accident to water pipes
occurring at night, or at any time requiring immediate action. In case of any
such accident, prompt report thereof shall be made to the village clerk by the
person rendering such assistance. (1976 Code § 13.04.030)
9-2-5: PLUMBING STANDARDS:
No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does
not comply with the statutes of the state and ordinances of the village;
provided, that water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished
buildings subject to the provisions of this chapter. (1976 Code § 13.04.040;
amd. 2016 Code)
9-2-6: CONNECTION TO SYSTEM:
No connection with a water main shall be made without a permit being issued and
twenty four (24) hours' notice given to the superintendent of public works. All
connections shall be made under the supervision of the plumbing inspector, and
no connection shall be covered until the work has been inspected thereby.
Application for permits to make connections must be made to the village clerk,
and a fee as established by the village board of trustees shall be paid for
each connection. (1976 Code § 13.04.050; amd. 2016 Code)
9-2-7: METERS:
   A.   Metered Water Required: No water will be supplied by the village to any
person or corporation, or upon any premises in the village, except through a
standard water meter of a type approved by the superintendent of public works.
(1976 Code § 13.16.010; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Installation: Meters shall be installed by the superintendent of public
works. They shall be installed in a place of easy access, and the location must
be approved by the superintendent of public works. (1976 Code § 13.16.020)
   C.   Reading Meters: The superintendent of public works shall read or cause
to be read every water meter used in the village at such times as are necessary
so that the bills may be sent out at the proper times. (1976 Code § 13.16.030)
   D.   Access To Meters:
      1.   As a condition precedent to the village supplying water to any
individual, person or corporation, the village reserves the right to
periodically enter upon the premises wherein the water meter is located for
purposes of reading the water meter to determine usage and/or to inspect the
condition of the meter and appurtenant equipment.
      2.   Any individual, person or corporation who is supplied water by the
village does, as a condition precedent to receiving water from the village,
agree to allow the village periodic access to the facility housing said meter,
at reasonable times, for purposes of the village reading the water meter to
determine usage and/or to inspect the condition of the meter and appurtenant
equipment. (1976 Code § 13.16.080)
      3.   Failure or refusal of any individual, person or corporation who is
supplied water by the village to allow the village access to the premises
wherein the meter is located for purposes of either reading the water meter to
determine water usage or to inspect the meter and its appurtenant equipment
shall be, at the sole discretion of the village, subject to having his or its
water supply terminated after notice or, in the alternative, in the event the
meter was unable to be read because of said failure or refusal, to be billed
for water usage in an amount equal to the average of the last twelve (12)
months' billing period. (1976 Code § 13.16.080; amd. 2016 Code)
      4.   Prior to the village either terminating the supply of water to said
individual, person or corporation or, in the alternative, billing for water
usage as set forth herein, the village must give to said individual, person or
corporation written notice by certified mail, return receipt, of the village's
inability to gain access to the premises and notice, after ten (10) days of the
receipt of the village's notice to said individual, person or corporation, of
the village's intention to either terminate the water supply or to bill for
water usage as hereinbefore set forth if said access is not made available to
the village. (1976 Code § 13.16.080)
   E.   Testing Meters:
      1.   Request For Test: Any water consumer may request a test of the water
meter registering the amount of water used by the consumer for his own
consumption. (1976 Code § 13.16.060)
      2.   Costs: Any person making a request of a test of his water meter
shall be liable for the expense of the test if, after the test is made by the
village, the test shows the meter to be registering within two percent (2%)
accuracy; provided, that if the meter shows that it is registering over and
above the two percent (2%) accuracy, the expense of the test shall be borne by
the village. (1976 Code § 13.16.070)
9-2-8: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Determination Of Rates And Charges: The rates for the use of the
municipal water service shall be such as may be prescribed by the village
board.
   B.   Vehicle Tax Part Of Bill: The vehicle tax imposed by title 3, chapter 5
of this code shall be placed on the regular billing of village utility bills in
the amount as provided in title 3, chapter 5 of this code.
   C.   Payment Due: Bills for water used shall be due and payable every month
at the department of finance.
   D.   Delinquent Bills; Disconnection Of Service: Any account for water usage
in the village that is delinquent shall be disconnected five (5) days after
billing close. Such disconnection shall require a fee as established in the
annual fee schedule to be paid by the person responsible for such delinquent
account.
(1976 Code §§ 13.16.040, 13.16.050, 13.28.010; amd. Ord. 14-23, 8-19-2014, eff.
5-1-2015; 2016 Code; Ord. 20-24, 5-5-2020; Ord. 21-34, 5-18-2021; Ord. 22-16,
4-5-2022; Ord. 24-27, 5-7-2024)
9-2-9: TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS:
In those instances in which connections are intended for the purposes of
supplying water for use in construction or other similar use on a temporary
basis, the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   Such connections may be made to three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter (or
smaller) lines only and only after filing an application for hydrant meter
rental.
   B.   In addition to all other fees provided herein, and in addition to all
charges for the consumption of water, the user shall pay to the village a fee
as established by the village board of trustees to be used to defray the costs
of handling the hydrant meter rental application and a fee as established by
the village board of trustees for each day such temporary connection is in
place. As a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit for such
temporary connection, the applicant for the permit shall deposit with the
village the sum as prescribed by the village board.
   C.   No such temporary connection may be in place for a period in excess of
thirty (30) days. A temporary meter shall be installed in such connection, and
a permanent meter shall be installed as soon thereafter as is reasonably
possible.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to water connections
made where the use of the water is primarily intended for purposes of
performing services of direct benefit to the village and pursuant to a contract
with the village for such services.
   E.   The user of any temporary meter is responsible for the replacement cost
of the meter in the event the meter is lost, stolen or damaged. (2016 Code)
9-2-10: RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
municipal supply to any premises other than that for which application has been
made and the meter installed, except in the case of emergency. (1976 Code §
13.04.060)
9-2-11: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the superintendent of public
works to tamper with, alter, or injure any part of the village waterworks or
supply system, or with any meter. (1976 Code § 13.04.070; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Sprinkling Restrictions
9-3-2: Water Saving Devices
9-3-3: Emergencies
9-3-1: SPRINKLING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Sprinkling During Permitted Days Only: It is unlawful for any person to
sprinkle lawns, shrubs, flowers, plants, fields, or any ground whatsoever in
any manner by water obtained from the village water main except during
permitted hours. (1976 Code § 13.24.010)
   B.   Schedule: Homes with addresses ending in even numbers may sprinkle only
on even numbered days, and homes with odd numbered addresses may sprinkle only
on odd numbered days. During periods of water shortage and/or low pressure,
there will be absolutely no sprinkling allowed. (1976 Code § 13.24.020)
9-3-2: WATER SAVING DEVICES:
   A.   Flow Rates: In all new construction and in all repair and/or
replacement of fixtures or trim, only fixtures and trim not exceeding the
following flow rates and/or water usage shall be installed. These ratings are
based on a pressure at the fixture of forty (40) to fifty (50) psi:
Equipment Gallons
Equipment              Gallons
Water closets:
   Tank type           3.5 per flush
   Flushometer type    3.0 per flush
Urinals:
   Tank type           3.0 per flush
   Flushometer type    3.0 per flush
Showerheads               3.0 per minute
Lavatory, sink faucets    3.0 per minute
 
(1976 Code § 13.40.010)
   B.   Lavatories For Public Use: In addition to the requirements in
subsection A of this section, in all new construction and in all repair and/or
requirement of fixtures, faucets of lavatories located in restrooms intended
for public use shall be of metering or self-closing type. (1976 Code §
13.40.020)
   C.   Car Washes: In all new construction and replacement of fixtures, car
wash installation shall be equipped with a water recycling system. (1976 Code §
13.40.030)
9-3-3: EMERGENCIES:
   A.   Declaration Of Emergency: The village president shall declare the
existence of a water emergency with respect to the unregulated use of public
water within the village by means of a written declaration. (1976 Code §
13.36.010)
   B.   Notice Of Declaration: Upon issuing the declaration authorized in this
section, the president shall notify the news media situated within the general
area of the village and shall cause three (3) copies of the declaration
declaring the existence of the water emergency to be posted at the following
places within the village: the village hall, the police station, and the post
office. (1976 Code § 13.36.030)
   C.   Rationing Water: After the declaration of a water emergency, the
president may order that water be rationed within the village and applicable
during such hours of the day or night that he deems necessary in the interest
of public safety and welfare. (1976 Code § 13.36.020)
CHAPTER 4
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
9-4-1: Cross Connections Restricted
9-4-2: Surveys And Investigations
9-4-3: Backflow Prevention Devices
9-4-4: Inspections
9-4-5: Violations; Disconnection Of Water Service; Reconnect Fee
9-4-6: Responsibility For Cleanup Costs
9-4-1: CROSS CONNECTIONS RESTRICTED:
No person, firm or corporation shall establish, or permit to be established or
permit to be, any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply, other than the regular public water supply of the village, enters the
supply or distribution system of the village, unless such private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply, and method of connection and use of such supply, shall
have been approved by the superintendent of public works or authorized agents
and the Illinois environmental protection agency. (2016 Code)
9-4-2: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of the industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or
as often as the superintendent of public works shall deem necessary. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for a period of at least five
(5) years. (2016 Code)
9-4-3: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
If, in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the
superintendent of public works or authorized agents, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the superintendent of public works will give notice to the water
customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer
shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in
a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code and all applicable local
regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
as required by the Illinois plumbing code and local regulations. (2016 Code)
9-4-4: INSPECTIONS:
The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to
enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and the superintendent
of public works or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection control
inspection. On demand, the owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the superintendent of public works any information which he
may request regarding the piping system or systems, or water use on such
property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, in the
discretion of the superintendent of public works, be deemed evidence of the
presence of improper connections as provided in this chapter. (2016 Code)
9-4-5: VIOLATIONS; DISCONNECTION OF WATER SERVICE; RECONNECT FEE:
The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
chapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he
may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and until a reconnection fee as prescribed by the
village board of trustees is paid to the village. Immediate disconnection with
verbal notice can be effected when the superintendent of public works is
assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of
the cause of disconnection. (2016 Code)
9-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall bear the costs of cleanup of
the potable water supply system. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
9-5-3: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
9-5-4: Building Sewers And Connections
9-5-5: Use Of The Sanitary Sewer System
9-5-5-1: Discharges Into System
9-5-5-2: Excess Strength Surcharge
9-5-5-3: Interceptors
9-5-5-4: Preliminary Treatment Or Flow Equalization
9-5-5-5: Control Manhole
9-5-5-6: Spill Prevention, Containment And Countermeasures (SPCC) Plan
9-5-5-7: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
9-5-5-8: Special Agreements
9-5-6: Damage To, Tampering With System
9-5-7: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
9-5-8: Violations; Penalties
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
AMMONIA-NITROGEN (NH3-N): Nitrogen present in the form of ammonia determined by
standard laboratory procedures and expressed in milligrams per liter.
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand, which is defined as the quantity of oxygen used
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5) days at twenty
degrees Celsius (20°C), determined by standard laboratory test procedures and
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater
and stormwater, surface water, and groundwater drainage; construction of
"combined sewers" is prohibited.
COMMERCIAL USER: Places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services,
including transit lodging and retail and wholesale establishments.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure specifically designed and constructed for sampling
and metering industrial wastes discharged to a public sewer.
COUNTY: Cook County, Illinois, its departments and divisions.
DIRECTOR: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: See definition of NPDES Permit.
FEDERAL ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as
amended by the federal water pollution control act of amendments of 1972
(Public Laws 92-500 and 93-243).
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of "floatable oil" if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL USERS: Establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving
the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance into
products.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The wastewater discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or
process, or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural
resource as distinct from employee wastes or wastewater from sanitary
conveniences.
INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER: Schools, churches, penal institutions, and
users associated with federal, state, and local governments.
INTERFERENCE: An inhibition or disruption of the sewerage works, treatment
processes or operations, or sludge processes use or disposal which is a cause
of or significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the
village NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation), or to the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the
treatment plant in accordance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): section 405 of the clean water act, the solid waste disposal act
(SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the resource
conservation and recovery act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained
in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the
SWDA), the clean air act, and the toxic substances control act. A user
significantly contributes to such a violation or prevention of sludge use or
disposal in accordance with above cited authorities whenever such user:
   A.   Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by
federal, state, or local law.
   B.   Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or
constituents from the user's average discharge.
   C.   Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would result in the village sewage
treatment plant permit violation or prevent sewage sludge use or disposal in
accordance with the above cited authorities as they apply to the village's
selected method of sludge management.
mg/l: Milligrams per liter, a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent used in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis. One
milligram per liter (1 mg/l) is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand
milliliters (1,000 ml) of water.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that:
   A.   Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average
workday; or
   B.   Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or
   C.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or
   D.   Is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the
federal clean water act, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the federal act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body
of surface water.
NONRESIDENTIAL USERS: All users excluding those in the residential class.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
PASS-THROUGH: The discharge of pollutants through the village sewage treatment
plant into navigable waters in quantities or concentrations which are a cause
of or significantly contribute to a violation of any requirements of the
village NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation). A user significantly contributes to such permit violation whenever
such user:
   A.   Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by
federal, state, or local law.
   B.   Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature and
constituents from the user's average discharge.
   C.   Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would result in a permit violation.
   D.   Knows or has reason to know that the sewage treatment plant is, for any
reason, violating its final effluent limitations in its permit and that such
user's discharge, either alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, increases the magnitude or duration of the sewage treatment plant's
violations.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, public or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in gram molecular weight (moles) per liter.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: The term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of wastewater per day, containing 0.17 pound of BOD and
0.20 pound of suspended solids.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before discharge into
the public sewer.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in the public sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/
2") (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights of connection and use, and is operated, maintained and controlled by the
village.
RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL OR NONINDUSTRIAL USER: Any user of the sewerage works
not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user. Each
dwelling unit of a residential building having two (2) or more dwelling units
shall be considered a separate and individual single-family residential user.
Each commercial establishment in a commercial building having two (2) or more
commercial establishments shall be considered a separate and individual
commercial user.
RESIDENTIAL USER: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments,
and permanent multi-family dwellings.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage and polluted industrial wastes, and
to which stormwater, surface drainage, groundwater or unpolluted wastewater is
not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the wastewater from residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional buildings, together with such groundwater
infiltration and surface water inflow that may be in the sewers.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: An arrangement of devices, structures and processes for
treating sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other wastewater,
including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
SEWERAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage and industrial wastes.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" means mandatory; "may" means permissive.
SLUG: Any discharge of sewage, industrial waste or other wastewater which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STATE ACT: The Illinois environmental protection act 1  effective July 1, 1970.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN: A sewer that conveys stormwater runoff and surface
water drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of precipitation which is not absorbed into the
ground and which is drained from the ground surface to a natural outlet or
watercourse.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village official, or his duly authorized
representative(s), responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastewaters, the
quantity of which is determined by standard laboratory filtering test
procedures and referred to as nonfilterable residue expressed in milligrams per
liter.
TTO: Total toxic organics, which means the summation of all quantified values
greater than 0.01 milligram per liter for the toxic organic chemicals commonly
called USEPA priority pollutants listed under section 307 of the clean water
act, as amended.
UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER: Wastewater that would not cause any violation of water
quality standards of the water pollution regulations of Illinois when
discharged to a natural outlet or watercourse.
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley, Cook County, Illinois.
WASTEWATER: The wastewater from any domestic, commercial, industrial and
institutional uses.
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WATERCOURSE: Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, slough, gulch, ditch, reservoir, lake, pond, or other natural or
manmade drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and surface water
drainage flow either continuously or intermittently. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
9-5-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any
person or place to deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner
on public or private property within any area under the jurisdiction of the
village any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Treatment Required: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet or watercourse within any area under the jurisdiction of the village any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: The owners of all houses,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley,
or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located
any public sanitary sewer of the village is hereby required, at their expense,
to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so;
provided, that said sewer is within one hundred feet (100') (30.5 m) of the
property line. (2016 Code)
9-5-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provisions of subsection 9-5-2D of this chapter, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying
with the provisions of this section.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by
the county health department.
      2.   Application For Permit: The application for such permit shall be
made on a form furnished by the county which the applicant shall supplement
with any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by
the county health department. Copies of health department permits shall be
presented to the village building and code enforcement division prior to
issuance of building permits.
      3.   Inspections: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
county health department. The county and village shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the county health department when the work is ready for
final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. A certificate
of final approval from the county health department shall be required prior to
issuance of occupancy permits by the village.
   C.   Specifications: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private
sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state of
Illinois private sewage disposal licensing act and code, the county health
department, and the state of Illinois environmental protection agency. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet
or watercourse.
   D.   Maintenance: The owner shall cooperate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in an operational manner at all times and at his own
expense.
   E.   Availability Of Public Sewer; Connection Required: At such time as a
public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection 9-5-2D of this chapter, the
building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within ninety (90) days, and
the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
sand or gravel.
   F.   Additional Regulations: No statement contained in this section shall be
construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
the building official. (2016 Code)
9-5-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
superintendent of public works.
      2.   Classes Of Permits; Applications: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits: a) for residential and commercial service; and b) for
service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the
owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the superintendent of public works.
      3.   Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee as set out in
the annual fee ordinance for a residential or commercial building sewer permit
shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed, in addition
to connection or tap-on fees or recapture fees, as applicable. The industry, as
a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.
      4.   Conditions Of Permit: A building sewer permit will be issued and a
sewer connection shall be allowed only if it can be demonstrated by the
applicant that the downstream sewerage works, including sewers, pump stations
and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to
adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   B.   Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   C.   Use Of Existing Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the superintendent of public works, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
   D.   Installation And Connection Requirements:
      1.   The building sewer shall be extra strength vitrified clay pipe and
fittings conforming to ASTM specification C700 with compression type joints
conforming to ASTM specification C425, or polyvinyl chloride pipe and fittings
conforming to ASTM specifications D-3034 with an SDR of 26 and compression type
joints conforming to ASTM specification D-3212, or other suitable materials as
approved by the superintendent of public works.
      2.   The building sewer from the main to a distance not less than five
feet (5') from the building shall not be less than six inch (6") diameter size
pipe, installed at a minimum invert slope of 0.125 (1/8) inch per foot. A sewer
not less than four inch (4") diameter size installed at a minimum invert slope
of 0.25 (1/4) inch per foot shall be constructed from a distance five feet (5')
outside of building through the foundation wall using cast or ductile iron pipe
per building and zoning requirements. Building sewers shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the superintendent of public works as to
trench excavation and backfilling, installation of pipe and fittings and
testing.
      3.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the branch, if such branch is available, at a suitable location. If the
public sewer is twelve inches (12") in diameter or less, and no properly
located Y branch is available, the owner shall, at his expense, install a
branch in the public sewer at the location specified and installation approved
by the superintendent of public works. Where the public sewer is greater than
twelve inches (12") in diameter, and no properly located branch is available, a
bored hole may be tapped into the public sewer to receive the building sewer in
such a manner that the invert of the building sewer at the point of connection,
with the spigot end being cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the
public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall
be at the same or a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A
smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight
by encasement in concrete. Special fittings shall be used for the connection as
approved by the superintendent of public works.
      4.   The building sewer pipe shall be bedded on a layer of gravel or
crushed stone conforming to IDOT specifications for CA-6, and shall have a
minimum thickness of four inches (4") under the pipe barrel and two inches (2")
under bells. It shall be carefully placed and compacted around the pipe to
provide uniform support to the bottom quadrant. Initial backfill material shall
be placed to twelve inches (12") above the top of the pipe and shall comply
with "Illinois Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Construction".
      5.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation above the basement floor, as approved by the
superintendent of public works. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or
within three feet (3') of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The
depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sewage carried by such drains shall be lifted by approved mechanical pumping
devices and discharged to the building sewer. No water driven pumps will be
approved.
      6.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. Prior to any
excavation, the plumber or sewer contractor shall notify all public and private
utility companies.
   E.   Prohibited Discharges:
      1.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater to any public sanitary
sewer except those wastewaters in compliance with standards promulgated
pursuant to the federal act, or the state act, or any rules, regulations,
ordinances or standards of the village.
   F.   Control Manhole: Pursuant to section
9-5-5-5 of this chapter, the superintendent of public works may require
installation of a control manhole on the building sewer to observe, sample and
measure nondomestic wastewater discharged to the public sewer system.
   G.   Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the superintendent of public works when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be
inspected by the superintendent of public works or his representative.
   H.   Liability For Costs And Expenses; Bond And Insurance Required:
      1.   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
      2.   The person installing the building sewer for said owner shall be a
licensed plumber or licensed sewer contractor, and he shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by said installation.
      3.   Before a building sewer permit is issued, the plumber or sewer
contractor shall file with the building and code enforcement division a
performance indemnity bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
in the form of cash, certified check, or letter of credit, payable to or in
favor of the village. (2016 Code)
9-5-5: USE OF THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
9-5-5-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater, Surface Waters And Medical Wastes:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, unpolluted industrial process waters, or medical wastes to any
public sanitary sewer.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent of public
works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged
to a storm sewer or natural outlet approved by the superintendent of public
works, subject to the discharger obtaining an NPDES permit.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public storm
or sanitary sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewerage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewerage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders, yard wastes, and medical wastes.
   C.   Restricted Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public
sanitary sewer the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes
if it appears likely, in the opinion of the superintendent of public works,
that such waters or wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment
process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; cause
interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works or pass-through;
or otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property, or constitute a nuisance.
In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
superintendent of public works will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of such waters or wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials or construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by
regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (0 and 65°C).
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor greater than one
horsepower shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent of
public works or his designee.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the village as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies having jurisdiction over such discharge to the receiving waters.
         f.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
         g.   Materials which exert or cause:
            (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
            (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
            (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
            (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined in section
9-5-1 of this chapter.
         h.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
         i.   Waters or wastes containing substances exceeding the following
maximum concentrations of pollutants:
Pollutant Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
Pollutant                                   Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
5-day BOD                                   500
Total suspended solids                      500
Total dissolved solids                      1,000
Chemical oxygen demand                      750
Ammonia-nitrogen                            50
Arsenic                                     0.1
Boron                                       1.0
Cadmium                                     1.0
Chromium (hexavalent)                       0.25
Chromium (total)                            3.0
Copper                                      4.5
Cyanide                                     1.0
Fats, oil and grease (FOG) (hexane soluble) 100
Fluoride                                    15.0
Iron                                        10.0
Lead                                        0.7
Manganese                                   5.0
Mercury                                     0.0005
Nickel                                      4.1
Phenols                                     0.5
Selenium                                    5.0
Silver                                      1.0
Total toxic organics                        5.0
Zinc                                        5.0
 
      2.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sanitary sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection C1 of this section,
and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in
chapter 1, EPA rules and regulations, subchapter D, water programs, part 128 -
pretreatment standards, federal register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November
8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the village,
may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the superintendent of public works may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sanitary sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of section
9-5-5-7 of this chapter.
      3.   If the superintendent of public works permits the pretreatment or
equalization of wastewater flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent of
public works and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws. (2016 Code)
9-5-5-2: EXCESS STRENGTH SURCHARGE:
Users with discharge concentrations of BOD, suspended solids, and/or ammonia-
nitrogen in excess of domestic strength up to the maximum limits listed in
subsection 9-5-5-1C1i of this chapter are subject to an excess strength
surcharge in addition to the basic charges of the current rate ordinance. The
surcharge rates will be calculated by the village. Except for special
contractual arrangements pursuant to section
9-5-5-8 of this chapter, discharge concentrations in excess of the maximum
limits listed in subsection 9-5-5-1C1i of this chapter are expressly
prohibited. (2016 Code)
9-5-5-3: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the superintendent of public works, they are necessary to the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, and sand, or other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent of
public works and shall be located outside the building as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The village shall require each
owner of an interceptor device to maintain records of cleaning and maintenance.
Said interceptor device and records shall be available for village inspection
upon request. (2016 Code)
9-5-5-4: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
his expense. (2016 Code)
9-5-5-5: CONTROL MANHOLE:
At the discretion of the superintendent of public works, each nonresidential
wastewater discharger shall be required to install a control manhole, and when
required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying nondomestic wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be at least forty eight inches (48") in diameter,
accessibly and safely located, and constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the village. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times. (2016 Code)
9-5-5-6: SPILL PREVENTION, CONTAINMENT AND COUNTERMEASURES (SPCC) PLAN:
Any nonresidential user who is determined to have the potential for accidental
discharge of toxic materials or other prohibited discharges shall, within sixty
(60) days of written notification by the superintendent of public works, submit
to the village a spill prevention, containment and countermeasures (SPCC) plan.
Such plan shall detail operating procedures and physical facilities necessary
to provide protection to the village from accidental discharges. The SPCC plan
shall include a facility floor plan identifying all connections to the sanitary
sewer, including floor drains, and all relevant storage and process areas. In
cases where solvents are used or stored on site, a solvent management plan
detailing solvents used, storage, handling, containment, and disposal must also
be included. (2016 Code)
9-5-5-7: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   B.   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such
manner as prescribed by the village.
   C.   The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and
reporting required by the village. At such times as deemed necessary, the
village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis.
   D.   If the owner's property is being used by another individual or entity
whose facilities are discharging industrial waste into the building sewer, that
individual or entity, likewise, is responsible for ensuring that the testing
and reporting required by this chapter is carried out and shall cooperate with
the owner in so doing.
   E.   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analysis
involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite sample or whether a grab
sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended
solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composite samples, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.) (2016 Code)
9-5-5-8: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this section
9-5-5 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided such payments
are in accordance with village ordinances for the user charge system. (2016
Code)
9-5-6: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct and damaging
public property. (2016 Code)
9-5-7: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Entry Powers; Limitation On Requested Information:
      1.   The superintendent of public works and other duly authorized
employees of the village, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the
U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The superintendent of public works or his
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries,
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
      2.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in subsection A1 of this section, the superintendent of public works or duly
authorized employees of the village and the Illinois environmental protection
agency and the U.S. environmental protection agency shall have the right, but
not the obligation, to observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company.
   B.   Safety Precautions: The superintendent of public works and other duly
authorized employees of the village, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within said easement.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved. (2016 Code)
9-5-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of
this chapter, except section
9-5-6 of this chapter, shall be served by the village with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: The village may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter.
   C.   Penalty: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided in subsection A of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation.
   D.   Liability For Violations: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 6
STORM SEWER SYSTEM; PROTECTION OF WATERWAYS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose And Objectives
9-6-2: Scope And Responsibility
9-6-3: Definitions
9-6-4: Prohibited Discharges And Connections
9-6-5: Suspension Of MS4 Access
9-6-6: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
9-6-7: Monitoring Discharges
9-6-8: Use Of Best Management Practices
9-6-9: Watercourse Protection
9-6-10: Notification Of Spills
9-6-11: Administration And Enforcement
9-6-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the village through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the stormwater drainage system to the maximum extent practicable,
as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the village's municipal
separate storm sewer system ("MS4") in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system ("NPDES") permit program. The
objectives of this chapter are:
   A.   To regulate the discharge of pollutants into the municipal separate
storm sewer system;
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
   C.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
9-6-2: SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Scope: This chapter shall apply to all water entering the stormwater
drainage system and generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by the authorized enforcement agency.
   B.   Responsibility: The standards set forth in this chapter and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does
not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will
be no contamination or pollution of stormwater or unauthorized discharge of
pollutants to the stormwater drainage system or to waters of the United States.
(Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
9-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the village designated
to enforce this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, stormwater pollution prevention
and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or
indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, and stormwater drainage systems.
BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage, leaks, sludge and wastewater disposal, and
drainage from raw materials storage areas.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to an NPDES construction site
activities permit. Currently, these activities include construction projects
resulting in a land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include,
but are not limited to, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, and
demolishing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the
stormwater drainage system, except as exempted in this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Either of the following:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the stormwater drainage system, including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharges
such as sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the stormwater
drainage system and any connections to the stormwater drainage system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the stormwater drainage system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to an NPDES industrial activities
permit as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of stormwater drainage
facilities including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, village streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels and storm drains owned
and operated by the village and used for collecting and/or conveying
stormwater. The municipal separate storm sewer system is not used for
collecting and/or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group or general area wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the stormwater drainage system that
is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation, or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, solvents, oil and other
automotive fluids, nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes, yard wastes, refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations that may cause or contribute to pollution, floatables,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, hazardous substances and wastes, sewage,
fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals, animal wastes,
wastes and residues that result from construction activity, and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water
resulting from any form of natural precipitation.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The facilities by which stormwater is collected
and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and manmade or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, receiving waters, and
stormwater drainage systems to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from any premises. (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
9-6-4: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the stormwater drainage system or waters of the United States any materials,
pollutants, or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards. The commencement, conduct, or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the stormwater drainage system is
prohibited except as follows: (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
      1.   Water line flushing, fire hydrant flushing, discharges from potable
water sources, landscape irrigation, lawn watering, rising groundwater,
groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, diverted stream
flows, natural riparian habitat and wetland flows, springs, storm sewer
cleaning water, street wash water from streets where spills or leaks of
pollutants or toxic or hazardous materials has not occurred (unless the
pollutants or toxic or hazardous materials have been removed), foundation
drains, footing drains, crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
noncommercial vehicle washing, routing external building washing that does not
use detergents, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges (discharges must contain
less than 1 part per million chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other
water source not containing pollutants or toxic or hazardous materials.
      2.   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency
as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
      3.   Dye testing, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized
enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
      4.   Any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver,
or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the United States environmental protection agency; provided, that
the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and all other applicable laws and regulations; and provided,
that written approval has been granted by the authorized enforcement agency for
its discharge to the stormwater drainage system. (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015; amd.
2016 Code)
   B.   Connections: The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence
of illicit connections to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in
the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or
practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is
considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line
conveying sewage or any other nonstormwater discharge to the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue. (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
9-6-5: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   A.   The village may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to
a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, to the MS4, or to waters of
the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States and to minimize danger to persons.
   B.   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have
the person's MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator, in
writing, of the proposed termination of the violator's MS4 access. The violator
may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and
hearing.
   C.   A person violates this chapter if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior written approval
of the authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
9-6-6: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an NPDES construction site activities permit or NPDES
industrial activities permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Said person shall submit to the village a copy of the notice of intent (NOI)
that was provided to the Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA).
Additional proof of compliance with an NPDES construction site activities
permit or NPDES industrial activities permit may be required, in a form
acceptable to the village, prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
9-6-7: MONITORING DISCHARGES:
   A.   The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and
inspect premises subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.
   B.   Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination, copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit, and the performance of any additional duties as required by state
and federal law.
   C.   The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any
premises such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized
enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the premises'
stormwater discharge.
   D.   The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
   E.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
premises to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
   F.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency
access to a premises is a violation of this chapter. A person who is the
operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated
with industrial activity commits a violation of this chapter if the person
denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this chapter.
   G.   If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and it is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may either
terminate water service or seek issuance of an administrative search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
9-6-8: USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause
or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the stormwater
drainage system, or waters of the United States. The owner, or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at his/her own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the municipal stormwater drainage system or waters of the
United States through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises which is or may be
the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with any terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan ("SWPPP") as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 15-40, 6-
2-2015)
9-6-9: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
9-6-10: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or any person responsible for emergency response
for a facility or operation, has information regarding any known or suspected
release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
in pollutants entering stormwater, the stormwater drainage system, or waters of
the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
recovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the
event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the
authorized enforcement agency in person, by phone, or by facsimile no later
than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the village within three
(3) business days of the phone call or personal notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord.
15-40, 6-2-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
9-6-11: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Administrative And Enforcement Body: The village shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in
writing by the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in
the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the village.
   B.   Notice Of Violation:
      1.   Whenever the village finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized enforcement
agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
         a.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
         b.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
         c.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
         d.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
         e.   The payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs; and
         f.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
      2.   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work may be performed by the authorized enforcement agency, and
the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
   C.   Appeal Of Notice Of Violation: Any person receiving a notice of
violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency.
The notice of appeal must be received within fifteen (15) days from the date of
the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal shall be before the village
president and shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt
of the notice of appeal. The decision of the village president shall be final.
   D.   Abatement By Village; Costs:
      1.   Village Abatement: If the violation has not been corrected pursuant
to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an
appeal, within thirty (30) days of the decision of the designated hearing
officer, then the authorized enforcement agency reserves the right to enter
upon the subject private property and to take any and all measures necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow
the authorized enforcement agency or designee to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth herein. The authorized enforcement agency may extend the
period for corrective action upon a showing of good cause for extension of the
corrective action period. (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015)
      2.   Abatement Costs:
         a.   Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation by the
authorized enforcement agency, the owner of the property will be notified of
the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may
file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within fifteen
(15) days. If the amount due is not paid in a timely manner as determined by
the decision of the designated enforcement agency or by the expiration of the
time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment. (Ord. 15-40, 6-2-2015; amd. 2016
Code)
         b.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection D2
shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation. The liability
shall be paid in not more than twelve (12) equal monthly payments. Interest at
the rate of prime plus two percent (2%) per annum shall be assessed on the
balance beginning on the fist day following discovery of the violation.
   E.   Injunctive Relief: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a
person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
   F.   Compensatory Action: In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and
remedies authorized by this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may
impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions including, but not
limited to, storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops and
cleanup activities.
   G.   Violations A Public Nuisance: In addition to the enforcement processes
and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety,
and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated
or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin,
or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
   H.   Remedies Not Exclusive: The remedies listed in this section are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state
or local law, and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement
agency to seek cumulative remedies. The authorized enforcement agency may
recover all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord.
15-40, 6-2-2015)
CHAPTER 7
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
SECTION:
9-7-1: Basis For Wastewater Service Charges
9-7-2: Measurement Of Flow
9-7-3: Rates Established
9-7-4: Computation Of Charges
9-7-5: Annual Review Of Charges
9-7-6: Monthly Payments; Liability For Charges
9-7-7: Bills Rendered; Due Date; Late Payment Penalty
9-7-8: Delinquent Payments; Shut Off Of Service
9-7-9: Lien Provisions
9-7-10: Revenues
9-7-11: Accounting
9-7-12: Access To Records
9-7-13: Appeals
9-7-1: BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance plus replacement, applicable surcharges and local
capital cost charge composed of a debt service charge and a capital improvement
charge. (1976 Code § 13.48.010)
9-7-2: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
   A.   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges
shall be the metered consumption read to the lowest even increments of one
thousand (1,000) gallons.
   B.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part or all of his water from sources other than the public waterworks system,
all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall
install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the
village water department for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
   C.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by
the village building department if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined
from the metered water consumption records.
   D.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the water department. (1976 Code § 13.48.050)
9-7-3: RATES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Metered Rates: All premises of users are required to be metered.
   B.   Basic User Rate: There shall be and there is established by the village
board of trustees from time to time a basic user rate for the use of and for
service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village. (1976 Code §
13.48.070; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Local Capital Cost Charge:
      1.   Debt Service Charge: A debt service charge shall be billed monthly
to each user of the wastewater facility of the village.
      2.   Capital Improvement Charge: A capital improvement charge will be
levied on all users as a charge to provide funds for extension, improvement or
reconstruction of the sewage treatment works. (1976 Code § 13.48.060; amd. 2016
Code)
9-7-4: COMPUTATION OF CHARGES:
   A.   Basic User Charge: The basic user charge shall be based upon water
usage as recorded by water meters. It shall consist of operation and
maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be computed as follows:
      1.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories.
      2.   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and replacement
costs to each user by volume of water used.
   B.   Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge is computed by
apportioning the annual debt service on a cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons
basis.
   C.   Capital Improvement Charge: The capital improvement charge is levied on
all users to provide for capital improvements, extensions or reconstruction of
the sewage treatment works. The capital improvement is computed by apportioning
the annual amount to be accrued as a cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
(1976 Code § 13.48.020)
   D.   Formula: The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the
following formula:
   CW = (CC + CD + CU) VU
 
Where:
CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per monthly billing period
CD = Debt service charge (subsection 9-7-3C1 of this chapter)
CC = Capital improvement charge (subsection 9-7-3C2 of this chapter)
VU = Water volume for the billing period
CU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection 9-
     7-3B of this chapter)
 
(1976 Code § 13.48.080; amd. 2016 Code)
9-7-5: ANNUAL REVIEW OF CHARGES:
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not less often
than annually, by certified public accountants for the village in their annual
audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local capital costs or a change in operation and
maintenance costs including replacement costs. (1976 Code § 13.48.030)
9-7-6: MONTHLY PAYMENTS; LIABILITY FOR CHARGES:
The rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is
furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner
of the premises and the occupant and user of the service are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the village. (1976 Code § 13.48.090; amd. 2016
Code)
9-7-7: BILLS RENDERED; DUE DATE; LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
Bills for sewer service shall be included with the monthly water bill and will
be sent out by the village finance director on the first day of the month
succeeding the monthly period for which the service is billed. All sewer bills
are due and payable twenty one (21) days after being sent out. A penalty as
established in the annual fee schedule shall be added to all bills not paid by
the twenty first day after they have been rendered. (1976 Code § 13.48.090;
amd. 2016 Code)
9-7-8: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS; SHUT OFF OF SERVICE:
If the charges for such services are not paid within sixty (60) days after the
rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be discontinued
and shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled. (1976 Code §
13.48.100; amd. 2016 Code)
9-7-9: LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lien Claim And Notice: Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid
for sixty (60) days for monthly services after it has been rendered, the
village finance director shall file with the county recorder of deeds a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the
village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to
the period covered by the bill. If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the
owner of the premises and the village finance director has notice of this,
notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address be known to
the finance director, whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of sixty
(60) days for the monthly bill after it has been rendered. The failure of the
village finance director to record such lien or to mail such notice or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned herein. (1976 Code §
13.48.110; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in
the name of the village. The village attorney is authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid sixty (60) days in case of a monthly bill. (1976 Code §
13.48.120; amd. 2016 Code)
9-7-10: REVENUES:
   A.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the sewerage fund. All
such revenues and monies shall be held by the village finance director separate
and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of
the village, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the village finance director not more than ten (10) days after
receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to
time be directed by the village board.
   B.   The village finance director shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the
account of the fund designated as the "sewerage fund of the village of
Berkeley". The finance director shall administer such fund in every respect in
the manner provided by statute of the revised cities and villages act,
effective January 1942. (1976 Code § 13.48.130; amd. 2016 Code)
9-7-11: ACCOUNTING:
   A.   System Of Accounts: The village finance director shall establish a
proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in
which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative
to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system. (1976 Code § 13.48.140; amd.
2016 Code)
   B.   Annual Audit Report: In addition to the customary operating statements,
the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses
of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that
sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts
required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact
meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown
in the audit report shall include the following:
      1.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
      2.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      3.   Number of users connected to the system.
      4.   Number of nonmetered users. (1976 Code § 13.48.140)
9-7-12: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The federal EPA and state EPA, or its authorized representative, shall have
access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village which are
applicable to the village system of user charges or industrial cost recovery
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions
thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any state grant or federal regulations and conditions of the
federal grant. (1976 Code § 13.48.160; amd. 2016 Code)
9-7-13: APPEALS:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in this chapter shall be made available to a user within ten (10) days
of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used
or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the village board within
thirty (30) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies. (1976 Code § 13.48.170)
TITLE 10
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-1-1: Classifications Of Fees For Plan Reviews, Permits And Inspections
10-1-2: Permit Regulations, Special Conditions And Additional Fees
10-1-3: Engineering Fees And Regulations
10-1-4: Document Sales And Reproduction Costs
10-1-5: Violations; Penalties
10-1-6: Conflicting Provisions
10-1-7: Waiver Of Building And Development Fees
10-1-1: CLASSIFICATIONS OF FEES FOR PLAN REVIEWS, PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Plan Review Fees:
      1.   A fee for the review of all plans shall be charged as indicated in
the annual fee schedule. Said plan review fees shall be paid at the time of
submission of plans for review. Said fees shall be nonrefundable and are
separate from permit, inspection and engineering provision fees.
      2.   The plan review fees for residential construction, new or remodel,
for assembly, business, mercantile, educational, institutional, storage,
industrial, miscellaneous and mixed use occupancy construction shall be charged
as indicated in the annual fee schedule. The plan review fee for all
construction, in addition to other applicable fees, shall be based on the
estimated cost of construction for the proposed project. The estimated cost of
construction shall, at a minimum, be based on the estimated cost per square
foot for the type of construction and the use contemplated. The latest edition
of "RS Means Cost Data Guide" and/or actual project cost contracts provided by
the applicant shall be used by the Building Commissioner in determining the
estimated project cost of construction.
      3.   There shall be charged for an expedited permit plan review, if
requested by the permit applicant, one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
costs of such services as indicated in the annual fee schedule. Plan review
fees shall be paid at the time of submission of plans for review, and said fees
shall be nonrefundable and are separate from permit, inspection and engineering
provision fees.
   B.   Building Permit Fees:
      1.   The building permit fee shall be charged as indicated in the annual
fee schedule and shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
      2.   The building permit fee shall be based on the estimated cost of
construction of the proposed structure or improvement. The estimated cost of
construction shall, at a minimum, be based on the estimated cost per square
foot for the type of construction and the use contemplated. The latest edition
of "RS Means Cost Data Guide" and/or actual project cost contracts provided by
the applicant shall be used by the Building Commissioner in determining the
estimated project cost of construction.
   C.   Electrical Permit Fee: The electrical permit fee shall be charged as
indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be paid at the time of permit
issuance.
   D.   Plumbing Permit Fee: The plumbing permit fee shall be charged as
indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be paid at the time of permit
issuance.
   E.   Mechanical Permit Fee: The mechanical permit fee shall be charged as
indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be paid at the time of permit
issuance.
   F.   Fire Protection System Permit Fee: The fire protection system permit
fee shall be charged as indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be paid
at the time of permit issuance.
   G.   Final Inspection/Occupancy Inspection Fee:
      1.   The permit fee for a final inspection, occupancy inspection,
business license occupancy inspection, and temporary occupancy inspection
(additional occupancy inspection fee paid at the time of temporary occupancy
inspection request) shall be charged as indicated in the annual fee schedule.
Any final inspection/occupancy inspection fee shall be paid at the time of
inspection permit issuance prior to the scheduling of the inspection.
      2.   If occupancy is requested without all requirements of the permit and
applicable village codes and ordinances being complete, a letter of credit or
cash performance bond in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
cost of the incomplete permit and/or village code and ordinance requirements
shall be posted. This type of occupancy request may result in the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy with an expiration date. Only incomplete
permit, code and/or ordinance requirements exterior to the building
construction are eligible for this temporary certificate of occupancy
consideration at the discretion of the building commissioner.
   H.   Elevator, Escalator, Dumbwaiter, Man Lift, Wheelchair Lift, Moving Walk
Permit And Semiannual/Annual Inspection Fees:
      1.   The permit fee for an elevator, escalator, dumbwaiter, man lift,
wheelchair lift and moving walk installation shall be charged as indicated in
the annual fee schedule and shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
      2.   The semiannual fee for inspection of elevators, escalators, man
lifts and moving walks shall be charged as indicated in the annual fee schedule
and shall be paid upon receipt of an invoice for said services.
      3.   The annual fee for inspection of wheelchair lifts shall be charged
as indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be paid upon receipt of an
invoice for said services.
   I.   Flammable Liquids Storage Tanks And Flammable Liquids Dispensing Device
Permit Fees:
      1.   The flammable liquids storage tank permit fee (installation and
removal) shall be charged as indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be
paid at the time of permit issuance.
      2.   The flammable liquids dispensing device permit fee shall be charged
as indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be paid at the time of permit
issuance.
   J.   Miscellaneous Permit Fees: Miscellaneous permit fees shall be charged
as indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be paid at the time of permit
issuance. (2016 Code)
10-1-2: PERMIT REGULATIONS, SPECIAL CONDITIONS AND ADDITIONAL FEES:
   A.   Expiration Of Permit And Extensions: If, after a permit required by
this chapter has been granted and the operations called for by such permit have
not begun within six (6) months after issuance, such permit shall be void, and
no operations shall begin until an extended permit, executed by the owner or
the owner's agent, is issued by the village. A fee of twenty five percent (25%)
of the original cost of the permit shall be charged for a permit extension. An
extended permit shall be valid for six (6) months following the date of
expiration of the original permit and must be applied for within ten (10) days
after the expiration of the original permit. Only one extension shall be
granted. If work has not begun within twelve (12) months after the date of
issuance of the original permit, all rights under the permit shall terminate by
limitation.
   B.   Completion Of Permitted Work: If, after a permit required by this
chapter has been granted and the operations called for by such permit have not
been completed within twelve (12) months after issuance, such permit shall be
void, and no operations shall continue until an extended permit, executed by
the owner or the owner's agent, is issued by the village. A fee of one hundred
percent (100%) of the original cost of the permit shall be charged for this
permit extension. All rights under the initial permit shall terminate by
limitation. At the discretion of the building commissioner, updated village
codes and ordinances, if more stringent than those existing at the time of
initial permit issuance, may be applied to the extended permit request.
   C.   Transfer Of Permit: Transfer of a permit issued to someone other than
the original applicant shall require fifteen percent (15%) of the original
permit fee to be paid at the time of the transfer permit issuance.
   D.   Work Commenced Without Required Permit: A penalty of one hundred
percent (100%) of the normal permit fee shall be payable by the permit
applicant where work for which a permit is required has commenced before the
permit is issued.
   E.   Not Ready Fee And Reinspection Callback Fee:
      1.   If an inspection is scheduled and the work to be inspected is not
ready for inspection or the inspector is unable to access the premises for
inspection, a fee as established in the annual fee schedule shall be required
to be paid prior to any further inspections.
      2.   Where more than two (2) inspections of the same work for the same
code violation(s) is required, a fee as established in the annual fee schedule
will be required to be paid prior to the third or each subsequent inspection
(s).
   F.   Reimbursement For Use Of Professional Or Technical Consultant Services:
If the purchase and/or use of professional or technical services is required by
the village to perform, complete or resolve permit processing, inspections or
plan review activity, the permit applicant shall reimburse the village for one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the costs of such services. The village will
notify the permit applicant, in writing, prior to engaging professional or
technical assistance. Payment shall be due upon invoice issuance by the
village. (2016 Code)
10-1-3: ENGINEERING FEES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Site Plan Review:
      1.   Residential: The plan review fee for new residential construction
shall be charged as indicated in the annual fee schedule. No fee is required
for remodeling or expansion. The residential site plan review fee shall be paid
at the time of permit issuance.
      2.   Commercial: The plan review fee for commercial construction,
including remodeling or expansion, shall be charged as indicated in the annual
fee schedule. The commercial site plan review fee shall be paid at the time of
permit issuance.
   B.   Stormwater Management Certification Fee: The stormwater management
certification fee shall be charged as indicated in the annual fee schedule and
shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
   C.   Underground Utility Service Permit Fee: The underground utility service
permit fee shall be charged as indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall
be paid at the time of permit issuance.
   D.   Plan And Specifications Review Fee: The plan and specifications review
fee shall be charged as indicated in the annual fee schedule and shall be paid
at the time of execution of the subdivision plat by the village president or
upon approval of the plan by the superintendent of public works, whichever
comes first.
   E.   Public And Quasi-Public Improvement Inspection Fee:
      1.   The public and quasi-public improvement (see definitions in
subsection E2 of this section) inspection fee shall be charged as indicated in
the annual fee schedule and shall be paid at one of the following times, at the
discretion of the village:
         a.   Upon the execution of the subdivision plat by the village
president and village clerk.
         b.   Upon approval of a site development plan or permit by the
superintendent of public works.
         c.   Upon approval of a building permit by the building commissioner,
with the concurrence of the superintendent of public works.
      2.   For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection E2:
    PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water
main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, street lighting, planting
strip, off street parking area or other facility for which the village may
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
   QUASI-PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch,
water drain, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, nonstandard street
lighting, planting strip, landscaping, off street parking area or other
facility for which a private entity such as, but not limited to, a homeowners'
association, may ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and
operation. (2016 Code)
10-1-4: DOCUMENT SALES AND REPRODUCTION COSTS:
Document sales and reproduction costs shall be charged in an amount comparable
to the village's actual cost of reproduction, as established by the village
from time to time. (2016 Code)
10-1-5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations: It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct,
alter, occupy, maintain, or conduct business in any building or structure in
the Village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter or without
payment of the fees established herein.
   B.   Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one
hundred percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each day of violation. (2016 Code)
10-1-6: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All ordinances in conflict with either this chapter or the Building Code
adopted in section
10-2-1 of this title shall apply only if they are more restrictive in nature
than the provisions of this chapter and the Building Code adopted in section
10-2-1 of this title. (1976 Code § 15.04.100; amd. 2016 Code)
10-1-7: WAIVER OF BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT FEES:
Village building and development fees as required by this title shall be waived
for units of government and nonprofit organizations recognized by the Internal
Revenue Service, up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) not including any
expense or charge paid by the Village to an outside entity or consultant. The
building official shall keep a record of all fees waived under this section.
(Ord. 18-06, 2-6-2018)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Building Code
10-2-1-1: Adoption Of Code
10-2-1-2: Amendments To Code
10-2-2: Footing Drains
10-2-3: Reinforcement Of Concrete Slabs
10-2-4: Variations
10-2-1: BUILDING CODE:
10-2-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
   The regulations of the 2024 edition of the international building code, IBC,
with appendices E, F, G, H, I, J and K, as recommended and published by the
International Code Council, Inc., published in pamphlet form, are adopted as
the regulations governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance,
removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances
connected or attached to such buildings or structures and accessory structures,
with such amendments as are set forth in section
10-2-1-2 of this chapter.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-2-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The building code adopted in section
10-2-1-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Chapter 1 Amendments:
   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      These regulations shall be known as the building code of the village of
Berkeley, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
   105.2 is amended to read as follows:
   Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit is amended to read as follows:
      IRC R105.2 Building (1) Work exempt from permit: One-story detached
accessory structures which are accessory to residential buildings and
constructed under the provisions of the IRC used as tool and storage sheds,
tree supported play structures, playhouse and similar uses, provided the floor
area does not exceed 200 square feet and the structure is in accordance with
the village of Berkeley zoning regulations12-9-3 requirements and restrictions.
Two hundred square feet in congruent with the zoning code.
   Section R105.2 (2) is amended by adding:
      IRC R105.2 (2) Work exempt from permit: Fences 45 inches or less in
height and in accordance with the Village of Berkeley zoning code regulations
Chapter 10 fences sections 12-10-1 thru12-10-12.
   Section 105.2 (5) is deleted.
   Section R105.2 (7) is amended by adding:
      R105.2 Building (7): Swimming pools entirely above or below ground
accessory to a one- and two-family dwelling or Group R-3 occupancy as
referenced in the Village of Berkeley code 10-14-2, which are less than:
         (1)   A round pool has a depth not greater than one foot and a
diameter greater than six feet.
         (2)     An oblong or square pool which has a depth not greater than
one foot and a perimeter greater than 20 feet.
   Section R105.2 (10) is amended by adding:
   Section 105.2 (11) is deleted.
      R105.2 Building (10) Decks and associated platforms and steps accessory
to buildings, which are 12 inches (762 mm) or less above adjacent grade and
which are not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an
accessible route.
   Section 105.5.1 is added to read as follows:
      Unless a sooner expiration date is provided on the permit by the building
official, the permit shall expire one (1) year after its date of issuance. The
building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of
time, for periods not more than 90 days each. The extension shall be requested
in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   Section 105.5.2 is added to read as follows:
      Permit Term For Demolition. A permit issued for the demolition of any
building or structure shall be for a term not to exceed 30 days, and all
permitted demolition shall be completed within the time limit of the permit.
The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than 30 days each. The extension shall
be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   Section 107.2.6 is amended to read as follows:
      A current plat of survey prepared by an Illinois-registered land
surveyor, showing the property and all existing improvements, shall accompany
permit applications. The applicant shall indicate all proposed improvements on
the plat of survey or site plan.
   Section 107.2.6.2 is added to read as follows:
      Traffic Study: Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the building
official or a site development permit by the village engineer, for which a
traffic engineering study is required to meet the requirements of the Berkeley
village code, a traffic engineering study shall be obtained by the village and
paid for by the permittee; and (2) The permittee shall pay to the village prior
to the village's request for the traffic engineering study the estimated cost
from the proposal of the traffic engineer selected by the village. If the final
cost of the traffic engineering study is less than the estimate, then the
village shall refund the difference, but if the cost is more than the estimate,
the permittee shall pay such difference not later than prior to the issuance of
the permit.
   Section 109.2 is amended by adding:
      The fees are established by the village in the annual fee schedule.
   Section 109.7 is added to read as follows:
      Use of consultants. Whenever review of a building permit application
requires retention by the Village for professional consulting services, the
applicant shall reimburse the Village the full cost of such professional
consulting services. This fee shall be in addition to the normal plan review
and building permit fees. The Village may require the applicant to deposit an
amount with the Village estimated in the discretion of the building official to
be sufficient to cover anticipated costs for retaining professional consultant
services and to ensure reimbursement of such costs.
   Section 110.3.1.1 is added to read as follows:
      Survey Requirements. After construction of the foundation, an as- built
plat of survey, prepared by a registered Illinois land surveyor, shall be
submitted to show the dimensions from the foundation to the lot lines and the
elevation of the top of the foundation and center of the adjoining roadway. The
survey shall show that the foundation is not encroaching upon any public or
utility easements, required setback or adjoining property.
   Section 110.4 is amended to read as follows:
      Inspection Agencies. A written request to use a third-party inspection
agency must be submitted to and be approved by the building official prior to
the commencement of the inspection.
   Section 111.3 is amended to read as follows:
      Temporary Occupancy Permit. Pending the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and/or certificate of compliance and upon the written request of the
holder of a building permit, or of the owner, a temporary occupancy permit to
authorize temporary occupancy may be issued by the building official upon the
following conditions:
      1.   Occupancy shall be authorized only in those portions of the building
or structure as indicated on the permit.
      2.   Conditions of the occupancy may be required as deemed necessary.
      3.   In no instance shall the building official utilize the above
procedure where the premises for which a temporary certificate of occupancy has
been requested are not safe for occupancy.
      4.   Temporary occupancy, when allowed, shall not extend for a period of
more than 60 days. This period may be extended for up to 120 more days by the
village building official upon proof by the building permit holder or the owner
of undue hardship that prevents them from achieving compliance.
      5.   The fees for a temporary occupancy permit shall be paid in
accordance with the annual fee schedule or as follows.
      6.   Temporary certificates of occupancy shall only be issued for single-
family detached structures between October 15 and April 15 with the posting of
a cash bond in the following amounts for each incomplete requirement:
         Landscaping: $2,000.00.
         Driveway on the property: $1,000.00.
         Driveway approach in right of way: $1,000.00.
         Service walks: $400.00.
         Stoops/decks: $600.00.
      7.   Temporary certificates of occupancy shall only be issued for multi-
family structures between October 15 and April 15 with the posting of a
$2,000.00 cash bond per dwelling unit.
      8.   For all other nonresidential structures, a temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be issued at any time upon the posting of a cash bond in the
amount of 110 percent of the cost of the incomplete requirements as determined
by the building official.
   Section 113.1 is amended by deleting "The board of appeals shall be
appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure," and
inserting "The village board shall be the board of appeals."
   Section 113.3 is deleted.
   Section 114.4 is amended to read as follows:
      Violation Penalties.
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this code or
fail to comply with any requirements thereof or erect, construct, alter, or
repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of
the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
      2.   Any person that performs work without obtaining a permit as required
by this code shall pay a permit fee double the amount of fee calculated for the
work in accordance with the annual fee schedule.
      3.   A second violation of the offense within a 12-calendar- month period
shall require payment of a fee quadruple the amount of the standard fee as
established in the annual fee schedule.
   Section 115.3 is amended to read as follows:
      Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about
the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform or to remove a violation of unsafe
conditions, or who removes a stop work order posted on any structure by the
building official, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   Section 116.6 is added to read as follows:
      Vacant Or Fire-Damaged Structures. Every person owning or having charge
or control of any vacant or fire-damaged building shall remove all combustible
waste and refuse therefrom and lock and barricade or otherwise secure all
windows, doors, and other openings in the building to prohibit entry by
unauthorized persons.
Chapter 2 Amendments:
   Section 202, definition of "high rise", is amended to read as follows:
      High Rise: Any building having more than four (4) stories or that is over
40 feet to the highest floor, or that is over 50 feet in height.
Chapter 4 Amendments:
   403.4.8.1 is amended to read as follows:
      Section 403.4.8.1, Equipment Room, to read as follows: 403.4.8.1
Equipment room. If the standby system is a generator set inside a building, the
system shall be located in a separate room enclosed with 2-hour fire barriers
constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed
in accordance with Section 711, or both, and shall be in a separate room from
the normal power source including transformers and distribution equipment.
Power distribution from the emergency source to the emergency transfer switch
shall be by an independent route from the normal power source. System
supervision with manual start and transfer features shall be provided at the
fire command center. Fuel-fired standby power generator sets and associated
fuel storage, including optional landlord- or tenant-owned generator sets,
located more than four (4) stories or that is over 40 feet to the highest
floor, or that is over 50 feet in height Fire department vehicle access,
require the approval of the fire code official.
   Section 403.4.8.1.1 is added to read as follows:
      Section 403.4.8.1.1, Penetrations, to read as follows: 403.4.8.1.1
Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through a room containing a
standby power system are prohibited except for required exit doors, equipment
and ductwork necessary for heating, cooling or ventilation, sprinkler branch
line piping, or electrical raceway serving the standby power system or being
served by the standby power system. Such penetrations shall be protected in
accordance with Section 714. Exception: Metallic piping with no joints or
openings where it passes through the standby power system room.
      Note: Penetrations for equipment rooms with standby power are not
specifically identified for penetrations protection.
   403.4.8.3 is amended to read as follows:
      Section 403.4.8.3, Standby power loads, to read as follows: 403.4.8.3
Standby power loads. The following are classified as standby power loads: 1.
Power and lighting for the fire command center required by Section 403.4.6; 2.
Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment for smoke proof enclosures;
3. Elevators. 4. Where elevators are provided in a high-rise building for
accessible means of egress, fire service access or occupant self-evacuation,
the standby power system shall also comply with IBC Section 1009.4, 3007 or
3008 as applicable
Chapter 5 Amendments:
   Section 502.1 is added and shall read as follows:
      Tenant Identification. All buildings with multiple tenants or units shall
have signs in the main entry corridor or in the corridor across from the
elevator door for a building with elevators. This directional signage shall
indicate the number of each tenant space. All tenant spaces shall have a sign
which indicates the tenant space number. The signs shall be constructed of
durable materials, be permanently installed, and be readily visible. Letters
and numbers shall contrast with the background and shall be a minimum of two
inches (2") in height unless otherwise approved by the building official.
   Section 507.14 is added and shall read as follows:
      Subdivision Of Existing Unlimited Area Buildings. Lawfully existing
unlimited area buildings divided by new lot lines are not required to comply
with the fire separation distance regulation of table 507.2, provided all of
the following requirements are met:
      1. The subdivision is only made for tax assessment purposes, and the
individual lots created by the subdivision of an unlimited area building shall
not be individually sold or mortgaged.
      2. The building prior to subdivision complied with all requirements for
unlimited area buildings.
      3. Any addition or alteration of any portion of the building must comply
with all requirements for an unlimited area building.
   Table 508.4 is amended to read as follows:
      Amend IBC Table 508.4, Required Separation of Occupancies (Hours), as
follows: Add footnote reference superscript "f" to R Occupancy Classification
row and column headings. Add footnote "f" to read: See Section 419 for Live/
Work Unit separations.
Chapter 7 Amendments:
   Section 706.12 is added to read as follows:
      Tenant Separation. Each tenant shall be separated from other tenant
spaces by fire barriers (walls and floor ceiling assemblies) having at least a
two-hour fire rating. Fully sprinkled buildings shall be required to have a
tenant separation of not less than one hour unless otherwise required by this
code.
   Section 708.1.1 is added to read as follows:
      Multiple Single-Family Dwellings. Single-family dwelling units (use group
R-3) shall be considered as one building classified as use group R-3 for the
purpose of determining the applicable provisions of this code; provided, that
each dwelling unit is completely separated from the adjacent dwelling unit(s)
by fire separation wall(s) and floor/ceiling assemblies of not less than two-
hour fire- resistant-rated construction, and each unit has an independent means
of egress.
   Section 708.1.2 is added to read as follows:
      Use Group R-2 Structures.
      1.   The provisions of this section shall apply to all multifamily
structures containing five or more sleeping and/or dwelling units; or one or
more living/work units in a structure containing another type of use such as
business or industrial. The fire resistance rating of structural elements
(including walls, floors, and roof) and tenant separation or party walls shall
be a minimum of two hours and be constructed of masonry or concrete. Exterior
and load-bearing wall construction shall be of masonry. All floors shall be of
the precast-concrete type, or poured-concrete type having at least a two-hour
fire resistance rating.
      2.   A building nonconforming as to the requirements of this section
which is damaged by fire or other casualty may be restored without compliance
with this requirement if the cost of reconstruction to its condition prior to
the casualty does not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of the entire
building and compliance with this code.
   Section 711.1.1 is added to read as follows:
      Use Group R-2 Structures. Floor, roof, and ceiling assemblies of type R-
2 construction shall comply with the requirements of section 708.1.2.
Chapter 9 Amendments:
   Section 903.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
      All buildings of all use groups, other than one- and two-family
dwellings, greater than 2,500 square feet shall be protected with an approved
automatic fire sprinkler system installed and maintained in accordance with
NFPA 13. All spec warehouse buildings (use group S or F) with a ceiling height
of 25 feet or greater shall be protected with an ESFR fire sprinkler system or
hydraulically calculated system for class IV commodities with rack storage
calculated to the greatest storage height. All automatic fire sprinkler systems
shall be electronically supervised by a fire alarm system. For the purposes of
this section, a "building" is defined as the aggregate floor area bounded by
the exterior walls regardless of fire walls, fire barriers, or fire resistance-
rated horizontal assemblies.
   Sections 903.2.1.1 through 903.2.11.6 are deleted.
   Section 903.3.5 is amended by adding the following:
      Hydrant flow data used for the design of any automatic fire sprinkler
system shall be no more than one-year old.
   Section 903.3.5.3 is added to read as follows:
      System Demand. A minimum safety factor of 10% or 5 psi shall be provided
in any automatic fire sprinkler system hydraulic calculation. The system demand
shall be a minimum of 5 psi below the seasonal low water flow test supply.
   Section 903.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
      Alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and
automatically transmitted to a remote supervising station as defined in NFPA
72.
   Section 903.4.1.1 is added to read as follows:
      Fire Department Supervision. All required fire alarm systems shall
terminate at the fire department communications center.
   Section 903.4.2.1 is added to read as follows:
      FDC Indicating Devices. An approved audio and visual alarm device shall
be located on the exterior of the building over the fire department connection
(FDC).
   Section 903.4.2.2 is added to read as follows:
      Alarm Indicating Devices. Audio and visual alarm indicating devices shall
be provided, seen, and heard in all areas of the building. All alarm-indicating
devices shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72. All
buildings with an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided with alarm
indicating devices.
   Section 903.4.2.3 is added to read as follows:
      Automatic fire sprinkler system inspector test valves shall be accessible
at all times and shall be located no more than six feet above finished floor.
On multiple    riser systems, the test valve shall be marked to indicate which
riser and area it tests.
   Section 903.4.3 is amended to read as follows:
      Approved supervised-indicating control valves shall be provided at the
point of connection to the riser on each floor in multiple-story buildings.
   Section 903.4.4 is added to read as follows:
      Zoned Areas. When a single zone of an automatic fire sprinkler system
protects more than a single room or area, the fire code official may require
additional smoke detectors in order to more rapidly identify the location of
the smoke or fire.
   Section 907.1.2 is amended by adding the following:
      All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type and shall be
installed in accordance with NFPA 72.
   Section 907.1.4 is added to read as follows:
      Protection Of Control Units. In areas that are not continuously occupied,
automatic fire detection shall be provided at the location of each new fire
alarm control unit, fire alarm notification circuit power extender, and
supervising station transmitting equipment to provide notification of a fire at
that location.
      Exception: Additional detection is not required in buildings that are
sprinklered in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
   Section 907.1.5 is added to read as follows:
      Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the
international fire code shall be monitored by a remote supervising station in
accordance with NFPA 72 and shall terminate at the fire department
communications center. All new required fire alarm systems shall transmit
trouble, supervisory, and fire signals directly to the fire department
communications center remote receiving station via a wireless transmitter in
accordance with NFPA 72. Only equipment certified and approved by the remote
receiving station and/or its designated proprietor may be installed. The
designated proprietary agent shall be the only authorized installer of the
approved radio transmitters. Exiting systems shall be changed to wireless upon
the alarm owner's request, when the existing equipment is updated or where a
disconnection of the telephone lines has occurred for a time period of more
than 30 days.
   Section 907.2 is amended to read as follows:
      Where Required. An approved manual, automatic, or manual and automatic
fire alarm system shall be provided in all use groups. For the purpose of this
section, a "building" is defined as the aggregate floor area bounded by the
exterior walls regardless of fire walls, fire barriers, or fire resistance-
rated horizontal assemblies.
      Exceptions:
      1.   Section 907.2.6 of the international fire code use group I shall
remain without amendments.
      2.   An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 72 in all use groups not provided with an automatic fire
sprinkler system. Devices, combinations of devices, appliances, and equipment
shall comply with section 907.1.2. The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke
detectors; except, that an approved alternative-type of detector shall be
installed in spaces such as boiler rooms where, during normal operation,
products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to actuate a smoke
detector.
      All fire alarm control panels shall be installed within ten feet of the
building main entrance, or in a location approved by the building official.
   Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.5 and 907.2.7 through 907.2.10 are deleted
and "where the total area exceeds 50,000 square feet" in 902.2.20 is amended to
read "all areas".
Chapter 16 Amendments:
   Section 1612.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      The village shall establish flood hazard areas based on the village
floodplain regulations in title 14, chapter 3 of the village code.
   Section 1608.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 1608.1, General, to read as follows: 1608.1 General. Design snow
loads shall be not less than 25 PSF uniform roof snow load, nor less than that
determined by IBC Section 1607.
   Section 1607.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Table 1607.1 Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads and Minimum
Concentrated Live Loads g : Row %, column concentrated (pounds).
      Balconies and decks: Uniform (psf) = 100, and in no case less than the
occupancy served.
Chapter 27 Amendments:
   Section 2702.1.1.1 is added to read as follows:
      Section 2702.1.1.1, Location, to read as follows: 2702.1.6 Location.
Location of stationary generators, fuel piping, and storage tanks are subject
to the approval of the building official and/or fire code official.
Chapter 30 Amendments:
   Section 3001 is amended to read as follows:
      The design, construction, installation, alteration, repair and
maintenance of elevators and conveying systems and their components shall
conform to the current state mandated Illinois Elevator Safety Rules, 41 ILL.
Adm. Code 1000.60, as amended from time to time.
   Section 3001.2 is amended by adding thereto the current standards of the
following:
      A18.1, A17.1, A17.7/CSAB44, A18.1.
   Section 3002.4 is amended to read as follows:
      Elevator Car To Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher. In all buildings with an
elevator, at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency
access to all floors. Such elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement
to accommodate a 24-inch by 84-inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open
position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency
medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than three inches
(76 mm) high and wide and shall be placed inside on both sides of the main
lobby hoist way door frame.
   Section 3003.2 is amended to read as follows:
      Firefighters' Emergency Operation. Elevators shall be provided with phase
I emergency recall operation and phase II emergency in-car operation in
accordance with ASME A17.1 and NFPA 72.
   Section 3006.1 is amended to read as follows:
      Access. An approved means of access shall be provided to elevator machine
rooms and overhead machinery spaces. This means of access is not to be used as
a passageway through the machine room to other areas of the building.
   Section 3008.11 is added to read as follows:
      Responsibility, Maintenance, And Unsafe Conditions.
      1.   Owner Responsibility: The owner or the owner's legal agent for the
building in which the equipment is located shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, and safe operation of all equipment covered by this article after
the installation thereof and acceptance by such owner or agent. The owner or
legal agent shall make or cause to be made all periodic tests and inspections,
and shall maintain all equipment in a safe operating condition, as required by
this article.
      2.   Contractor Responsibility: The person installing any device covered
by this article shall make all acceptance tests and shall be responsible for
the care and safe operation of such equipment during its construction and unit
temporarily or finally accepted by the building official's elevator inspector.
      3.   Maintenance Items: All operating and electrical parts and accessory
equipment or devices subject to this article shall be maintained in a safe
operating condition. The maintenance of elevators, dumbwaiters, and escalators
shall conform to ASME A17.1 listed in appendix A.
      4.   Unsafe Conditions: If, upon inspection, any equipment covered in
this article is found to be in an unsafe condition, or not in acceptance with
the provisions of this code, the building official shall thereupon serve a
written notice of such finding upon the building owner or lessee, stating the
time when recommended repairs or changes shall be completed. After the service
of such notice, it shall be the duty of the owner to proceed within the time
allowed to make such repairs or changes as are necessary to place the equipment
in a safe condition. It shall be unlawful to operate such equipment after the
date stated in the notice unless such recommended repairs or changes have been
made and the equipment has been approved, or unless an extension of time has
been secured from the building official in writing; time duration to be 24
hours, seven days, 15 days, or maximum 30 days.
         a.   Power To Seal Equipment: In cases of emergency, the building
official, in addition to any other penalties herein provided, shall have the
power to seal out of service any device or equipment covered by this article
when, in the opinion of the building official, the condition of the device is
such that the device is rendered unsafe for operation; or for willful failure
to comply with recommendations and orders of the building official.
         b.   Notice Of Sealing Out Of Service: Before sealing any equipment
out of service, the building official, except in case of emergency, shall serve
written notice upon the building owner or lessee stating the intention to seal
the equipment out of service and the reasons therefor.
         c.   Unlawful To Remove Seal: Any device sealed out of service by the
building official shall be plainly marked with a sign or tag indicating the
reason for such sealing. Any tampering with, defacing, or removal of the sign,
tag, or seal without approval shall constitute a violation of this article.
      5.   Accidents Reported And Recorded: The owner of the building shall
immediately notify the building official of every accident involving personal
injury or damage to the apparatus on, about, or in connection with any
equipment covered by this article, and shall afford the building official every
facility for investigating such accident. When an accident involves the
failure, breakage, damage, or destruction of any part of the apparatus or
mechanism, it shall be unlawful to use such devices until after an examination
by the building official is made and approval of the equipment for continued
use is granted. It shall be the duty of the building official to make a prompt
examination into the cause of the accident and to enter a full and complete
report thereof in the records of the building department. Such records shall be
open for public inspection at all reasonable hours.
      6.   Removal Of Damaged Parts: It shall be unlawful to remove from the
premises any part of the damaged construction or operating mechanism of
elevators, or other equipment subject to provisions of this article, until
permission to do so has been granted by the building official.
   Section 3008.12 is added to read as follows:
      Certificate Of Compliance.
      1. Certificate Of Compliance: The operation of all equipment governed by
the provisions of this chapter and hereafter installed, relocated, or altered
shall be unlawful by persons other than the installer until such equipment has
been inspected and tested as herein required and a final certificate of
compliance has been issued by the building official.
      2. Posting Certificate Of Compliance: The owner or lessee shall post the
current-issued certificate of compliance in a conspicuous place inside the
elevator.
   Section 3008.13 is added to read as follows:
      Construction Documents And Permits.
      1.   Application: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by
construction documents in sufficient detail and indicating the location of the
machinery room and equipment to be installed, relocated, or altered; and all
supporting structural members, including foundations. The construction
documents shall indicate all materials to be used and all loads to be supported
or conveyed. Documents are to be reviewed and approved before permit is issued.
      2.   Permits: Equipment or devices subject to the provisions of this code
shall not be constructed, installed, relocated, or altered unless a permit has
been received from the building official before the work is commenced. A copy
of such permit shall be kept at the construction site at all times while work
is in process.
   Section 3008.15 is added to read as follows:
      Test And Inspections.
      1.   General: All equipment and devices covered by the provisions of this
code shall be subject to acceptance and maintenance tests and periodic
inspections as required herein.
      2.   Acceptance Tests: Acceptance tests and inspections shall be required
on all new, relocated, and altered equipment subject to the provisions of this
chapter. Tests and inspections shall be of such a nature as to determine
whether the entire installation is designed, constructed, and installed in
compliance with this code, and shall include all parts of the equipment and
machinery. In addition, full load tests shall be done on all equipment. All
such tests shall be made in compliance with the requirements of section 3004.5
and in the presence of the building official, or by an approved agency for the
building official, and by the person installing such equipment.
      3.   Periodic Tests And Periodic Inspections: Periodic tests shall be
required on all new and existing power elevators, and periodic inspections
shall be made of all new and existing equipment subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
         a.   Periodic Tests: Periodic tests shall be made by the building
official, or by an approved agency, and shall be made at the expense and
responsibility of the owner. Where such tests are not made by the building
official, the approved agency shall submit a detailed report of the tests to
the building official on approved forms not more than 30 days after the
completion of the tests.
         b.   Periodic Inspections: Periodic inspections shall be made by the
building official or by an approved agency. Where such inspections are not made
by the building official, the approved agency shall submit a detailed report of
the inspection to the building official on approved forms not more than 30 days
after completion of the inspection.
         c.   The Frequency Of Tests And Inspections: Tests and inspections
shall be conducted at intervals of not more than those set forth in ASME A17.1
listed in chapter 35 for elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters, and moving walks.
      Note: Re-numbered section due to section consolidated in current edition
since 2012 edition.
   Section 3008.14 is added to read as follows:
      Miscellaneous Hoisting and Elevating Equipment.
      1.   All miscellaneous hoisting on elevating equipment shall be subject
to tests and inspections as required by the building official to ensure safe
operations.
      2.   Conveyors and related equipment shall be inspected and tested in
accordance with ASME B20.1 listed in chapter 35.
Chapter 33 Amendments: 
   Section 3303.4, Vacant Lot, is amended to read as follows:
      The following vacant lot requirements shall apply to all property within
the village of Berkeley following the demolition or removal of a building. It
is the intention of the village board that, to the fullest extent possible, the
following provisions, or as many as may be fully applicable, shall, in addition
to being applied prospectively, also be applied retroactively to all vacant
lots following demolition that has occurred within the village within a period
commencing 24 months prior to the adoption of this amendment.
      Prior to the issuance of any permit for the wrecking, demolishing, or
razing of any building or other structure in excess of 1,000 square feet, the
owner of said building or structure shall deposit, in escrow, funds in an
amount deemed sufficient by the building official or his designee to secure the
owner's obligations to grade, place topsoil, seed, sod, and/or fence any
unimproved surface. Should the owner and/or owner's successor(s) in interest
fail to perform said duties, the village may draw on said funds to complete all
required tasks. For the demolition of a building or structure, or part thereof,
greater than 1,000 square feet in area, the vacant lot resulting thereafter
shall be filled and maintained, and the owner or successive owner shall be
required to provide the following supporting documents and is subject to the
following requirements and submittals:
      1.   A site management plan shall be submitted for review and approval if
new construction is to commence within 90 days from the issuance of the
building permit for the demolition work, and indicate the following items:
         a.   The property drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20
feet (1" = 20') unless otherwise approved by the building official.
         b.   Existing buildings to be removed or retained.
         c.   All easements, existing utility lines, well and septic systems on
the subject property and all adjacent parkways and property within 20 feet.
         d.   Silt fencing, protective tree fencing, and perimeter safety
fencing in required locations.
         e.   Means of primary ingress/egress from the public ways to the site
and points for emergency access, traffic control devices and measures, and on-
site and off-site parking areas.
         f.   Temporary areas for the storage or staging of debris, soil,
construction materials and construction equipment.
      2.   A site restoration plan shall be submitted for review and approval
if new construction will not commence within 90 days from the issuance of the
building permit for the demolition work, and indicate the following items:
         a.   The property drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20
feet (1" = 20') unless otherwise approved by the building official.
         b.   Measures to restore the site in accordance with the applicable
stormwater and floodplain regulations to the natural grade, establish soil
stabilization or groundcover, and an itemized cost estimate to complete the
work.
         c.   A statement indicating that the site restoration work will be
completed with a required 90-day period after substantial completion of the
demolition work. An extension of time may be granted by the fire chief or his
designee if unforeseen circumstances are determined to impede the completion of
the restoration.
      3.   Upon completion of demolition, all debris, equipment and temporary
protections shall be removed from the site. In no case shall demolition debris
be allowed to remain on the site longer than seven days after the structure has
been demolished.
      4.   Upon completion of demolition, the owner and/or the owner's
successor(s) shall immediately restore the public right-of-way to its original
condition upon completion of the work, including restoration of openings, broom
sweeping walks and streets, mow grassy areas and, if required, by raking of
grassy areas.
      5.   On completion of demolition, the property owner and/or the owner's
successor(s) in interest shall fill the property with clean inorganic material
with the upper eight inches filled in friable topsoil and graded to the level
of sidewalks, alleys, or adjoining property with allowance for settlement.
      6.   On completion of demolition, the property owner and/or owner's
successor(s) in interest shall schedule and permit an inspection by the
building official to determine compliance with the village code.
      7.   Unless construction of a new building on the site commences within
90 days of completion of demolition, the property owner and/or owner's
successor(s) shall seed the property with grass or place sod thereon no later
than 15 days after completion of demolition. The temporary construction fence
shall be removed no later than 15 days after such seeding or sodding.
      It is unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this section or
fail to comply with any requirement hereof, or demolish a building or structure
in violation hereof, or fail to comply with the requirements of this section
concerning a vacant lot following the demolition of a building or structure,
and any such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00
nor more than $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 35 Amendments:
   The following changes are made to ASME A17.1 by adding the following unless
otherwise stated:
      2.7.3.1 Access To Machine Rooms And Spaces - General Requirements.
         A permanent safe, convenient means of access into the elevator machine
room and overhead machinery spaces shall be provided for elevator maintenance
personnel only. The elevator machine room shall not be used for a through
passage to and from other spaces, roofs, electric maintenance, etc.
      2.7.3.4(B) All machine room doors to be one and one-half-hour B label
self-closing and locking.
      2.8.2.3.1 Shut-Off Valves In Sprinkler Branch Lines.
         Shut-off values with a tamper-proof electrical switch back to the fire
alarm panel shall be provided for each branch line for machine room and shaft
in an accessible location outside these spaces.
      2.10.1 Guarding Of Equipment In Machine Rooms And Secondary Machine
Spaces. The following shall be guarded to protect against accidental contact:
         a.   Driving machine sheaves and ropes whose vertical projection upon
a horizontal plane extends beyond the base of the machine;
         b.   Sheaves;
         c.   Exposed gears, sprockets, tape or rope sheaves or drums of
selectors, floor controllers or signal and driving machine guards, and their
driving ropes, chains, or tapes; and
         d.   Keys, keyways, and screws in projecting shafts.
         Hand-winding wheels and flywheels that are not guarded shall have
yellow markings.
      2.14.7.1.3 Change the first sentence to read as follows:
         Passenger and freight elevators shall be provided with a standby
emergency lighting power source on each elevator conforming to the following.
      3.7 Change the requirements of section 3.7.1 to read:
         The requirements of section 2.7.1.1.1.
      3.19.4.1 After supply line shut-off valve, add with a permanent handle to
be attached to valve for shut-off purposes.
      5.2.1.27 Emergency Operating And Signaling Service. A telephone to a
twenty four (24) hour source with voice message, emergency light, and alarm
shall be installed on the elevator.
      5.2.1.27 Phase I And II Fire Service. Phase I and II fire service with
smoke sensor recall shall be provided on the elevator. When the machine room on
the shaft is sprinklered, a shunt trip device controlled by a heat sensor shall
be installed.
      Section 5.3 Private Residence.
         5.3.1.1.4.5 Machine Room. Electric elevators rooms to be:
            a.   A minimum of one hour fire resistance.
            b.   A minimum 60 inches wide by 24 inches deep.
            c.   A maximum 60 inches wide by 60 inches inches deep.
            d.   Have head room a minimum 84 inches.
            e.   Have a door to be minimum 36 inches wide by 80 inches self-
closing and locking.
            f.   A main line disconnect switch to be fused, heavy duty on the
lock side of the door.
            g.   A car light disconnect switch to be fused, heavy duty on the
lock side of the door.
            h.   A room light switch on the lock side of the door. Minimum
illumination five-foot candles.
            i.   A room to have a 110-volt GFI duplex outlet below the light
switch.
            j.   A minimum five-pound ABC fire extinguisher in the machine room
on the lock side of the door.
      5.3.1.8.3 Emergency lighting is to be provided in the car per section
2.14.7.1.3.
      5.3.1.19 Emergency Signal. Emergency signaling device to comply with
section 2.14.7.1.3.
      5.3.2.3.1 Emergency lighting is to be provided in the hydraulic elevator
- machine room per 5.3.1.1.4.5.
      8.10.3.2.2.M Hydraulic working pressure shall be checked by running the
elevator with a full load in the car and the pressure verified as per the data
plate.
   Delete the ICC electrical code and ICC zoning code.
   NFPA standards shall reference the latest printed edition of any standard.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-15-2025)
10-2-2: FOOTING DRAINS:
Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps, discharge shall be made into
storm sewers, and swales provided in the drainage easements along the lot lines
or into drywells located not closer than five feet (5') to a side yard lot line
or ten feet (10') from a front or rear lot line. No footing drains or drainage
tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. Footing drain discharge
methods are subject to review and approval by the building official. (2016
Code)
10-2-3: REINFORCEMENT OF CONCRETE SLABS:
All concrete slabs shall be reinforced with a minimum of a six inch by six inch
(6" x 6") 1.4/1.4 (10-gauge) welded wire mesh supported at mid depth of the
slab on three foot (3') centers or an approved equal, with the following
exceptions:
   A.   Reinforcement is not required in public and private sidewalks.
   B.   Reinforcement is not permitted in parkway driveway aprons. (2016 Code)
10-2-4: VARIATIONS:
Any person who desires to contest a decision of the building official on any
interpretation of this code as to the manner of construction or materials to be
used in the erection, alteration or repair of a building or structure may seek
a variation from the village president and board of trustees. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
10-3-1: Adoption Of Code
10-3-2: Amendments To Code
10-3-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
   The regulations of the 2024 edition of the international residential code,
with appendices CE, CF, CA, CB, CC, BE, BF,BO, as recommended and published by
the International Code Council, Inc., published in pamphlet form, are adopted
as the residential code of the village governing the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal, and
demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and attached single-family
dwellings and accessory structures, with such amendments as are set forth in
section
10-3-2 of this chapter.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The residential code adopted in section
10-3-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   These provisions shall be known as the residential code for one- and two-
family dwellings of the village of Berkeley, and shall be cited as such and
will be referred to herein as "this code".
Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit is amended to read as follows:
   IRC R105.2 Building (1) Work exempt from permit: One-story detached
accessory structures which are accessory to residential buildings and
constructed under the provisions of the IRC used as tool and storage sheds,
tree supported play structures, playhouse and similar uses, provided the floor
area does not exceed 200 square feet and the structure is in accordance with
the village of Berkeley zoning regulations12-9-3 requirements and restrictions.
Two hundred square feet in congruent with the zoning code.
Section R105.2 (2) is amended by adding:
   IRC R105.2 (2) Work exempt from permit: Fences 45 inches or less in height
and in accordance with the Village of Berkeley zoning code regulations Chapter
10 fences sections 12-10-1 thru12-10-12.
Section R105.2 (5) is deleted.
Section R105.2 (7) is amended by adding:
   R105.2 Building (7): Swimming pools entirely above or below ground accessory
to a one- and two-family dwelling or Group R-3 occupancy as referenced in the
Village of Berkeley code 10-14-2, which are less than:
      (1)   A round pool having a depth not greater than one foot and a
diameter greater than six feet.
      (2)   An oblong or square pool which has a depth not greater than one
foot and a perimeter greater than 20 feet.
Section R105.2 (10) is amended by adding:
   R105.2 Building (10) Decks and associated platforms and steps accessory to
buildings, which are 12 inches (762 mm) or less above adjacent grade and which
are not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an
accessible route.
Section R105.2 (11) is deleted.
Section R106.1 is amended by adding:
   Plans for new construction, alterations, or modifications in excess of
$10,000 in value to a building or structure are required to be signed, sealed,
and dated by an Illinois licensed design professional. Construction documents,
special inspections, and structural observation programs and other data shall
be submitted in three sets with each application for permits.
Section R106.6 is added to read as follows:
   A copy of approved plans shall be kept on the site of the building or work
at the time of inspection.
Section R112.1 is amended by deleting:
   "The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall
hold office at its pleasure", and inserting "The village board shall be the
board of appeals.".
Section R112.3 is deleted.
Section R202 is amended by adding to the list of definitions the following:
   Owner-occupant is a person who has owned and occupied a dwelling for a
period of 6 (six) months prior to permit issuance.
Table R301.2(1) is amended to reads as follows:
Ground snow load          25
Wind speed                3 second 105 normal 47
Seismic design category   A
Weathering                Severe
Frost line depth          42 inches
Termite                   Moderate to heavy
Decay                     Slight to moderate
Winter design temperature -4 degrees
Ice shield underlayment   Yes
Flood hazard              Not applicable
Air freezing index        2,000
Mean annual temperature   50 degrees
 
Section R302.6 is amended by adding:
   Garage Separation: The garage shall be separated from the residence and its
attic by not less than 5/8-inch type X gypsum board applied to the garage side.
Garages under habitable rooms shall be separated by one-hour fire-rated
construction. This rating includes the ceiling walls, beams, and columns.
Section R302.7 is amended to read:
   5/8 inch type X gypsum board instead of 1/2 inch.
Section R325.2 is amended by adding:
   Bathrooms must have mechanical ventilation exhausted to the exterior using
wall louvers or roof caps. Separate compartments in a bathroom or similar room
must be vented separately.
Section R318.7.9 is amended to read:
   Outside Entrance: An outside entrance cannot be the entrance to a basement
or story above the grade level story without an interior stairway.
Section R310 is amended to add at its beginning:
   Compliance with this section of the code shall be required for existing
structures whenever a permit is issued for interior remodeling, interior
electrical work or whenever a dwelling unit has been vacant for over 120 days.
Section R311, Carbon Monoxide Alarms: Compliance with this section of the code
shall be required for existing structures whenever a permit is issued for
interior remodeling, interior electrical work or whenever a dwelling unit has
been vacant for over 120 days.
Section R402.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Wood foundations or footings are not allowed in the village of Berkeley.
This also eliminates all other sections, subsections, tables, or charts which
reference the use of wood footings or foundations.
Sections R402.1.1 and R402.1.2 are deleted.
Section R602.3.2, "Exception" is amended by adding at the beginning:
   "Except as to bearing walls,".
Section R3302.1.2 is added to read as follows:
   Discharge Pipe: Where roof drainage is installed, the discharge pipe or
elbow shall not be directed unreasonably towards adjoining private property.
Chapter 11 is deleted.
   Refer to the international energy conservation code adopted in title 10,
chapter 10 of the village code.
Section M1414.1 is added to the beginning of the sentence to read as follows:
   Fuel-burning vent-less fireplaces and heating equipment are prohibited.
Section M1503.2 is amended by deleting the exception and adding:
   Range hoods are required for all kitchens and are required to be located
above the range.
Section M1601.1.1 is amended by adding to 7 the following:
   7.7 No other system including but not limited to communication, electric,
gas, or plumbing may be located in the mechanical ducts.
Section M1602.1.1 is added to read as follows:
   Separate return air ducts shall be provided for all habitable spaces and
each room excluding bathrooms and kitchens.
Section M1701.3 is added to read as follows:
   Combustion air shall be provided by means of a mechanical opening to the
exterior or a structural opening(s) if supplied from air inside the building.
Openings must be located within 12" (twelve) inches of the ceiling and floor of
the enclosure. Louvered doors are prohibited for the purpose of providing
combustion air.
Chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 32 are deleted.
Section E3605.5 is amended as follows:
   Protection Of All Other Service Cables: No EMT or PVC for any aboveground
service entrance is allowed. No service entrance cable is allowed. Overhead
service shall be in rigid metallic conduit or intermediate metal conduit.
Section E3607.7 is added as follows:
   Grounding Bushing: Grounding bushings are required on all concentric and
eccentric knockouts used in the meter socket and breaker panel, with a bonding
jumper sized appropriately.
   Service Entrance Connectors: The use of no-thread connectors on the line
side of the service or main breaker is not allowed.
Section E3703.8 is added to read as follows:
   Dedicated Circuits: All dedicated circuits shall be wired to a single duplex
receptacle outlet for appliances and single receptacle outlets for sump pump or
ejector pump unless protected by a GFI outlet or breaker.
Section E3705.1 is amended by adding:
   The use of aluminum wire or copper clad aluminum wire for a conductor is not
allowed except by Commonwealth Edison.
Section E3803.12 is added to read as follows:
   Prohibited Materials: The use of plastic pipe and electric boxes is not
allowed above grade. Plastic pipe, which is listed for below grade, can be
used. It shall have a ground conductor installed, and it shall transition to a
rigid metal pipe before the elbow, which turns up. The use of PVC pipe shall
only be used in corrosive environments when approved by the building official.
Section E3904.5.1 is added to read as follows:
   All wiring shall be installed in conduit (EMT, IMC conduit or rigid pipe).
The use of plastic pipe or other nonmetallic wiring systems is not allowed
except when buried 18 inches or greater or as otherwise approved by the
building official.
Section E3905.6.2 is amended by adding to include:
   All ceiling boxes to be fan rated except hallways and closets or when
otherwise approved by the building official. See section E3905.8.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
10-4-1: Adoption Of Code
10-4-2: Amendments To Code
10-4-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
   The regulations of the 2020 edition of the national electrical code, 2020
NEC, as recommended and published by the National Fire Protection Association,
published in pamphlet form, are adopted as the regulations also known as the
Village Berkeley Electrical Code governing the installation, alteration, and
use of electrical conductors, equipment, raceways, and systems in the village,
with such amendments as are set forth in section
10-4-2 of this chapter.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-4-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The electrical code adopted in section
10-4-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section 90.4 is amended by adding:
   Upon notice from the building official that electrical work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person
doing the work. The notice shall state the condition under which work is
authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall
not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work. Any person who
shall continue any electrical work after having been served a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred
($100.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
ARTICLE 110 - REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
   Section 110.5.1 of the Village of Berkeley Electrical Code is added to read
as follows:
      110.5.1 Aluminum and Copper-clad Conductors. The use of aluminum
conductors and copper-clad conductors in all sizes smaller than #4 for all
installations shall be prohibited. All references to aluminum conductors or
copper-clad conductors smaller than #4 shall be deleted.
   Section 110.14(B)(1) of the Village of Berkeley Electrical Code is added to
read as follows:
      110.14(B)(1) Taps. Insulation piercing taps or "vampire" taps are
prohibited.
   NEC Article 210 section 210.5 (C) is amended by adding to read as follows:
      Section 210.5 (C) All single phase 120 volt or 240-volt circuits shall
have phases marked Black (A) Red (B) and White for neutral grounded conductor.
All three Phase 208V or 240V systems shall have phases marked black for A
Phase, red for B Phase, and blue for C Phase.
      All three Phase 277V or 480V systems shall have the phases marked brown
for A Phase, orange for B Phase, and yellow for C Phase. All three Phase 277V
or 480V systems shall have the phases marked brown for A Phase, orange for B
Phase, and yellow for C Phase.
Section 210.11(A) is amended by adding:
   Electrical service in the form of at least one duplex outlet and one
overhead light must be provided to each garage at the time of construction.
There shall be two circuits provided to each garage, one for lighting and one
for power.
Section 220.14 is amended by adding the following:
   (N)   Dedicated Circuits: All dedicated circuits shall be wired to a single
receptacle outlet, i.e., microwave, sump, or ejector pump.
Section 230.11 is added to read as follows:
   Service Entrance Conductor and Cable: No EMT for any service entrance is
allowed. No service entrance cable is allowed.
Section 230.12 is added to read as follows:
   The minimum size conduit for 100-amp services is one and one-fourth inch.
Section 230.13 is added to read as follows:
   Service Entrance Connectors: The use of no-thread connectors on the line
side of the service or main breaker is not allowed.
Section 230.62 (D) is added to read as follows:
   Grounding Bushings: Grounding bushings are required on all concentric and
eccentric knockouts used in the meter socket and breaker panel, with a bonding
jumper sized appropriately.
Article 230 Section 230.70(A)(1) of the Village of Berkeley Electrical Code is
amended by adding the following:
   Section 230.70(A)(1) Readily Accessible Location. The service disconnecting
means shall be installed in a readily accessible location which is not located
more than five feet (5') from the point of entrance of the service conductors.
The 2020 NEC requires an emergency outside disconnect for one- and two-family
dwelling units.
ARTICLE 250 section 250.64 - Grounding electrode Conductor Installation is
amended by adding the following:
   Section 250.64 Grounding electrode Conductor Installation
      a.   Only copper grounding and bonding conductors shall be permitted.
      b.   Securing and protection from physical damage. A grounding electrode
conductor or its enclosure shall be securely fastened to the surface on which
it is carried. All grounding electrode conductors shall be in an approved
raceway. The following raceways shall be approved: rigid metal conduit (RMC),
and Intermediate Metal Conduit (IMC)
ARTICLE 250 section 250.87 - Conduit installed underground or under concrete
slabs or asphalt surfaces is added to read as follows:
   Section 250.87 All underground conduit systems, such as rigid heavy wall
galvanized steel conduit RMC, intermediate metal conduit (IMC) or PVC shall
have insulated grounding conductor installed in each conduit system.
ARTICLE 300 section 300.4 Protection Against Physical Damage
   Section 300.4 (I) of the Village of Berkeley Electrical Code is added to
read as follows:
      Section 300.4 (I) Cables and Raceways Installed on Utility Poles or
Surfaces of Structures. Cables and raceways installed on Utility Poles or
Surfaces of Structures including those emerging from grade, shall be protected
by PVC schedule 80, IMC or Rigid Conduit from the minimum cover distance below
grade required by 300.5(A) to a point at least 8 feet above finished grade.
Seals and bushings shall be used as required by this Code.
      Exception No. 1: Residential installations only where vehicular impact is
unlikely may use Schedule 40 PVC or other approved conduit.
Article 300 section 300-13B is amended by adding the following:
   NEC Article 300 section 300-13B:
      1.   In branch circuits the continuity of a conductor shall not be
dependent upon device connections, such as lamp holders, receptacles, etc.,
where removal of the device would not interrupt continuity.
      2.   All motor of ½ horsepower or larger, or any heating system, sump
pumps and or ejector pumps shall be on its own circuit.
      Each tenant space shall have direct access to the breakers or fuses that
protect all electrical devices in that tenant unit. (Direct access means a
common area that has no locks or the tenant can get to the panel or switchboard
without going through another tenant space.)
Section 310.2 is added to read as follows:
   Conductors in this article shall be copper and not aluminum or copper-clad
aluminum except when supplied by the utility company and when located on the
utility side of the meter.
Section 314.20 is amended by adding the following:
   All ceiling boxes to be fan rated except hallways and closets.
The following Articles are deleted:
   Articles 320 (AC), 324 (FCC), 330 (type MC), 332 (type MI), 334 (NM and
NMC),356 (liquid flexible non-metallic conduit), 378 (nonmetallic wireways),
380 (multi-outlet assembly non-metal only), 382 (nonmetallic extensions), 388
(surface nonmetallic raceways), 390 (underfloor raceways), 394 (concealed knob
and tube wiring), 398 (open wiring on insulators) (type NM, NMC, NMS) are
deleted.
   Exceptions:
      1.   NM, NMC and NMS can be used for temporary wiring in accordance with
Article 590.
      2.   Schedule 80 PVC is permitted above grade for wet corrosive prone
installations; pools, pool equipment pads, patio receptacles etc.
   All wiring systems shall be installed in a metal raceway or conduit.
Section 352.12 is amended by adding the following:
   (F) The use of plastic pipe and electric boxes is not allowed above grade.
Plastic pipe which is listed for below grade can be used. It shall have a
ground conductor installed, and it shall transition to a metal pipe before the
elbow turns up.
Article 502 section 502.10 - Wiring methods is amended by adding the following:
   Section 502.10 Only electrical equipment, appliances and devices, which are
listed and approved for use by an approved, independent testing agency (e.g.,
Underwriters Laboratories) shall be installed in the Village of Berkeley.
   All electrical wiring shall be copper. No aluminum or copper clad aluminum
wire shall be installed in any electrical installation without written
permission from the chief electrical inspector prior to installation.
Exception: Service feeders owned and maintained by Commonwealth Edison.
      1.   All commercial/industrial branch circuit wiring shall be a minimum
of #12 AWG.
      2.   Where rework or rewiring of any building or structure is 50% or
more, then all wiring in the entire building shall be as per code. All
conductors shall be installed in an approved metal raceway.
      3.   Electrical metallic tubing shall not be installed outside,
underground, or in concrete that is in contact with earth.
      4.   All services shall be rigid metal conduit, intermediate conduit or
aluminum rigid.
      5.   All multiple electric services to a single address must have a
single disconnect.
      6.   Rigid non-metallic conduit may be used only underground or in
concrete.
    Exception: Schedule 80 is required when installed under any vehicular
traffic.
Section 680.40 is amended by adding the following:
   Spas And Tubs General: The equipment shall connect to the electric system
with a single receptacle outlet with a GFCI-protected circuit breaker. The
connection shall be accessible.
ARTICLE 720 - CIRCUITS AND EQUIPMENT OPERATING AT LESS THAN 50 VOLTS
Section 720.11 of the Village of Berkeley Electrical Code is amended by adding
the following:
   Section 720.11 Mechanical Execution of Work. Circuits operating at less than
50 volts shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike manner. Cables shall be
supported by the building structure in such a manner that the cable will not be
damaged by normal building use.
      Industrial and Commercial. Installation of low voltage wiring shall
conform to the following additional requirements:
      a.   All low voltage wires shall be supported by the building structure
only. This excludes all other piping systems such as electrical, plumbing,
sheet metal ducts and fire suppression pipes.
      b.   All low voltage conductors shall be secured with the wraps, bridle
rings or approved hangers in a manner which prevents loose or sagging wires.
      c.   All low voltage conductors shall be secured approximately every five
feet (5').
      d.   All low voltage conductors shall be installed in electrical metallic
tubing in concealed spaces in a manner so that wire may be replaced. This
includes walls and inaccessible ceilings.
      e.   All low voltage conductors shall be installed parallel or
perpendicular to framing members and furring strips and also comply with 300.4
(D).
      f.   All low voltage conductors in plenums shall be rated for use in
plenum areas and secured with plenum rated straps.
      g.   Permits shall be required for all wired low voltage installations
such as telephone, computer cable, fire alarm
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
10-5-1: Adoption Of Code
10-5-2: Amendments To Code
10-5-3: Penalty
10-5-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The Illinois plumbing code 2014, as published by the state department of public
health, is adopted and incorporated by reference as the rules and regulations
for the installation, repair, and alteration of plumbing, private water supply
systems, private storm drainage systems, and private sewage disposal systems,
except as hereinafter amended. (2016 Code)
10-5-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   All new connections to existing storm or sanitary sewers shall be made
by means of a wye connection. No saddles, direct taps, or break-in connections
shall be allowed in the village's sewer.
   B.   All lawn sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a reduced pressure
principal backflow preventer (RPZ) on the discharge side of the main control
valve.
   C.   All copper water piping above grade shall be type "K" or type "L"
copper tubing. Underground copper pipe (K-soft), no sweat joints below ground.
   D.   House sewers may also be constructed out of the following materials:
      6" - SDR 26 PVC sewer pipe and fittings
      8" - SDR 35 PVC sewer pipe and fittings
   E.   Sump, ejector, and receiving basins may be constructed out of
reinforced fiberglass.
   F.   Downspouts can not connect to the sanitary sewer per MSD and the
village.
   G.   Sub-soil draintile can be 4" perforated PVC drain tile and should be
wrapped in a drainage fabric and surrounded by #6 inch washed stone.
   H.   All solder, for the purpose of joining copper pipe and fittings, shall
be lead free.
   I.   All businesses in the village that are required to use grease traps or
an equivalent designed system shall show an annual disposal contract or another
contractual form representing the proper disposal of grease waste.
   J.   All sewer and house drains shall be laid in a minimum of 5" bedding of
grade #7 or 3/4 inch washed stone.
   K.   Waste and vent:
      1.   Underground: Cast iron or approved heavy duty plastic piping (SDR -
26, exterior of building only).
      2.   Aboveground: No PVC piping allowed in commercial, industrial, or
manufacturing buildings. PVC allowed in residential buildings, up to three
stories high.
   L.   Storm: Tile, cast iron, plastic pipe (SDR - 26, SDR - 35, exterior of
building only).
   M.   Adoption of fire hydrant installation, reference: "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois, Fourth
Edition, May 1986", or latest edition. ("Grade" shall be defined as the average
in elevation of a six foot radius from the hydrant.)
   N.   All backfill restoration (mounding of dirt) from underground sewer and
water repairs/installation located in the parkway or private property shall be
limited to a height of 4" inches from adjacent existing grade.
   (Ord. 97-24, 6-17-1997)
   O.   Village material requirements:
 Residential Commercial
                                                    Residential Commercial
Underground W & V
   Cast iron soil                                X           X
   PVC (per code)                                X           X
   PVC cellular core
Aboveground W & V
   Cast iron lead jets                           X           X
   Cast iron gaskets                             X           X
   Cast iron hub                                 X           X
   Galvanized pipe
   PVC                                           X           X
   PVC cellular core
   Copper DWV                                    X           X
   Copper M                                      X           X
Aboveground Storm
   Cast iron lead jets                           X           X
   Cast iron gaskets
   Cast iron no hub
   Galvanized pipe                               X           X
   PVC                                           X           X
   PVC cellular core
   Copper DWV                                    X           X
   Copper M                                      X           X
   Ductile iron
Underground Water
   Ductile iron class "52"                                   X
   Copper K (soft)                               X           X
Aboveground Water
   Galvanized pipe                               X           X
   Copper M
   Copper L                                      X           X
   Copper K (hard)                               X           X
Minimum Size
   Underground Waste:
      Inside building to 5 feet outside of bui4 inches    Per code
      5 feet outside of building to main      6 inches    Per code
   Service                                       3/4 inch    3/4 inch
   Sanitary ejector basin:
      Fiberglass                              X           X
      Cast iron                               X           X
   Triple garage basins:
      Fiberglass                              X           X
      Cast iron                               X           X
 
(Ord. 97-24, 6-17-1997; amd. 2016 Code)
   P.   For new buildings and new bathrooms to be located below grade, the
village of Berkeley prohibits gravity drainage of any fixture below grade,
including floor drains directly into the sanitary system. All fixtures shall
discharge into a proper ejector pit and be pumped into the elevated sanitary
main or stack. Said pump discharge piping shall be metal or solid core PVC and
have a full port valve and a solid check valve installed. (Ord. 11-09, 3-15-
2011; amd. 2016 Code)
10-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the regulations hereby adopted shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 6
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
10-6-1: Adoption Of Code
10-6-2: Amendments To Code
10-6-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The international mechanical code, 2012 edition, with appendix A, as published
by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of
the village, regulating the design, construction, alteration, movement,
renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said mechanical
code on file are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
10-6-2 of this chapter. (2016 Code)
10-6-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The mechanical code adopted in section
10-6-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of Berkeley,
hereinafter referred to as "this code".
Section 101.1.1. is added to read as follows:
   1)   The additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set out in this
section are hereby made to the ICC International Mechanical Code/2024 adopted
in section 10-6-1.
   2)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "code official"
shall mean the Building Commissioner or Village Manager of building and code
enforcement of the Village.
   3)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "name of
jurisdiction" shall mean the Village.
   4)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "chief appointing
authority" shall mean the Building Commissioner or the Village Manager, as
prescribed by ordinance.
   5)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "department of
inspection" shall mean the department of building and code enforcement of the
Village.
   6)   Any reference in the existing building code to the date or time at
which the provisions of such code became applicable shall mean the adopted date
of the Ordinance # 25-52.
Section 105.4.3 is amended to read as follows:
   Expiration. Unless a sooner expiration date is provided on the permit by the
building official, the permit shall expire one (1) year after its date of
issuance. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each. The extension shall
be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
Section 108.2 is amended to read as follows:
   The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated in the village annual fee
schedule.
Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Work Commencing before permit issuance. Persons who shall violate any
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
hereof or who shall erect, install, alter, or repair mechanical work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building
official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, shall be subject to fines of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars
nor more one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars, and each day a violation continues
shall be considered a separate violation.
Section 108.6 is amended to read as follows:
   The building official may authorize the refunding of fees as allowed by
ordinance.
Section 113.1 is amended to read as follows:
   The village board shall serve as the board of appeals.
Section 114.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Violation Penalties.
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this code or
fail to comply with any requirements thereof or erect, construct, alter, or
repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of
the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
      2.   Any person that performs work without obtaining a permit as required
by this code shall pay a permit fee double the amount of fee calculated for the
work in accordance with the annual fee schedule.
      3.   A second violation of the offense within a 12- calendar-month period
shall require payment of a fee to quadruple the amount of the standard fee as
established in the annual fee schedule.
Section 115.4 is added to read as follows:
   Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform or to remove a violation of unsafe
conditions, or who removes a stop work order posted on any structure by the
building official, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 7
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
10-7-1: Adoption Of Code
10-7-2: Amendments To Code
10-7-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The international fuel gas code, 2012 edition, with appendices A, B, C and D,
as published by the International Code Council, published in pamphlet form, is
hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the village, providing for fuel gas
systems and gas fired appliances. Conditions and terms of said fuel gas code on
file are hereby referred to, with such amendments as are set forth in section
10-7-2 of this chapter. (2016 Code)
10-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The fuel gas code adopted in section
10-7-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   These regulations shall be known as the fuel gas code of the Village of
Berkeley, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
Section 101.1.1 is added to read as follows:
   1)   The additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set out in this
section are hereby made to the ICC International Fuel Gas Code/2024 adopted in
section 10-7-1.
   2)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "code official"
shall mean the Building Commissioner or Village Manager of building and code
enforcement of the Village.
   3)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "name of
jurisdiction" shall mean the Village.
   4)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "chief appointing
authority" shall mean the Building Commissioner or the Village Manager, as
prescribed by ordinance.
   5)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "department of
inspection" shall mean the department of building and code enforcement of the
Village.
   6)   Any reference in the existing building code to the date or time at
which the provisions of such code became applicable shall mean the adopted date
of the Ordinance # 25-52.
Section 105.1.1 is deleted.
Section 105.5.3 is amended to read as follows:
   Expiration. Unless a sooner expiration date is provided on the permit by the
building official, the permit shall expire one (1) year after its date of
issuance. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each. The extension shall
be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
Section 108.2 is amended to read as follows:
   The fees for work shall be as indicated in the village annual fee schedule.
Section 108.4 is amended to read:
   Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
hereof or who shall erect, install, alter, or repair mechanical work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building
official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code, shall be subject to fines of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars
nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars, and each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate violation.
Section 108.6 is amended to read as follows:
   The building official may authorize the refunding of fees as allowed by
ordinance.
Section 113.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Upon notice from the building official that mechanical work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person
doing the work. The notice shall state the condition under which work is
authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall
not be required to give written notice prior to stopping work. Any person who
shall continue any work on the system after having been served a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than one
hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
Section 113.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Violation Penalties.
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this code or
fail to comply with any requirements thereof or erect, construct, alter, or
repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of
the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
      2.   Any person that performs work without obtaining a permit as required
by this code shall pay a permit fee double the amount of fee calculated for the
work in accordance with the annual fee schedule.
      3.   A second violation of the offense within a 12- calendar-month period
shall require payment of a fee to quadruple the amount of the standard fee as
established in the annual fee schedule.
Section 114.4 is added to read as follows:
   Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform or to remove a violation of unsafe
conditions, or who removes a stop work order posted on any structure by the
building official, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 8
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
10-8-1: Adoption Of Code
10-8-2: Amendments To Code
10-8-3: Portable Toilets, Dumpsters And Storage Pods
10-8-4: Snow And Ice Removal
10-8-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, published in pamphlet form, is hereby adopted as
the Property Maintenance Code of the Village, with such amendments as are set
forth in section
10-8-2 of this chapter. (2016 Code)
10-8-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The Property Maintenance Code adopted in section
10-8-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Title. These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the
village of Berkeley, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
Section 103.5 is amended to read as follows:
Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in
carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as established in
the village annual fee schedule.
Section 106.4 is amended by adding the following:
Any person, firm, or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this code
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than one
hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
Section 107.2(5) is deleted.
Section 109.6 is amended to read as follows:
Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such
order forthwith.
Section 111 is repealed and deleted from this code.
Section 302.8.1 is added to read as follows:
Parking. It shall be unlawful for the owner of property to allow parking of a
motor vehicle upon any unimproved surface. As used in this section, the term
"unimproved surface" includes, but is not limited to, grass and dirt surfaces
or any other surface not in compliance with the pavement design standards in
the engineering standards and specifications in title 14 of the village code.
Section 302.8.2 is added to read as follows:
Vehicle Parts And Snowplows. It shall be unlawful for any person in a residence
district to allow vehicle parts or accessories, whether covered or uncovered,
to be located or stored on the front, side or corner side yard and that
buildable area between the dwelling and those yards or upon any off-street
parking facility. This prohibition shall not apply to detached snowplows
located on the driveway between November 1, and April 30 of the next year.
Section 302.9 is amended by adding the following:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to not remove or
paint over any prohibited sign painted directly on an exterior wall of a
building or on any structure upon that property. A prohibited sign includes,
but is not limited to, any permanent display of any letter, numeral, figure,
emblem, insignia, picture, outline, character, spectacle, delineation,
announcement or any combination thereof which is painted of a color different
from the color of the exterior of the structure on which it is painted and
which is visible beyond the boundaries of the property. A painted area on the
side of a structure used to cover a prohibited sign which is a different color
or surface material than the remaining exterior surface of that side of the
structure is unlawful.
   B.   When the owner of the property refuses or neglects to remove from the
exterior of structures upon the owner's property any permanent display of a
prohibited sign in compliance with the regulations of this code, the village
may take the following enforcement actions.
   C.   The village shall send notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the property if on file with the village clerk and
the person in whose name the general taxes for the last proceeding year were
paid or by regular mail to each business licensed by the village clerk on that
property of the violation of this section and for its abatement within seven
days from the postmark of said notice.
   D.   If the owner does not abate the violation during the notice period, the
village administrator or his/her designee may proceed to abate such violation,
keeping an accounting of the expenses of the abatement which shall include an
administrative fee as established in the village annual fee schedule. All
expenses, including interest at the rate of ten percent per year, shall be
charged to and paid by such owner.
   E.   The expenses for abatement shall become a lien upon the property
affected superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances except tax liens, if
the village files notice of lien in the office of the county recorder. The
notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real
estate, the amount of money representing the expenses incurred or payable for
the service and the date or dates when such costs and expenses were incurred by
the village. However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement and
prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such real
estate arose prior to the filing of such notice.
   F.   Upon payment of the expenses by the owner of or persons interested in
such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released
by the village, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing
notice of lien. The lien may be enforced at any time by a proceeding to
foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics liens.
Section 302.10 is added to read as follows:
Landscaping.
   A.   Duty To Prune. Trees, bushes or other shrubbery on private property
adjacent to a street right-of-way shall be pruned in such a manner that it will
not obstruct or shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks or vehicles in the street, obstruct the ability to see traffic signs,
obstruct the view of any intersection or create a public safety hazard.
   B.   Turf Maintenance. Areas where grass turf has been established shall be
maintained without bare areas of soil or ruts caused by pedestrian or vehicle
use.
Section 302.11 is added to read as follows:
Trees On Commercial Properties. Trees on commercial properties are the
responsibility of the property owner and shall be maintained in a healthy
condition. Trees on commercial properties are subject to all zoning regulations
and any applicable development agreements with the village of Berkeley. Trees
on commercial properties within the village of Berkeley shall also be subject
to the following:
302.11.1 Certain Dead Trees Declared A Nuisance. All species and varieties of
trees that are dead or substantially dead, and all deadwood to which the bark
is still attached are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
Disposition Of Trees.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any owner of any commercial lot or commercial
parcel of land in the village to permit or maintain on any such lot or parcel
of land, any dead or substantially dead tree or deadwood which, pursuant to
this subchapter, is a public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any such
owner to remove promptly and dispose of any such dead tree or deadwood under
the supervision and direction of the village arborist or his/her duly
authorized representative.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any owner of any commercial lot or commercial
parcel of land in the village to maintain on any such lot or parcel of land any
tree that manifests an infestation of a destructive pest.
302.11.3 Right To Enter Premises And Inspect Trees.
In order to carry out the purposes of this subchapter and to implement the
enforcement thereof, the village arborist, or his/her duly authorized
representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any lot or
parcel of land in the village at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting
any tree or deadwood situated thereon, and the village arborist, or his/her
duly authorized representative, may remove such specimens from such tree for
the purpose of laboratory or other analysis to determine whether such tree is
infested, dead or substantially dead. It shall be unlawful for any person to
take action to prevent the village arborist, or his/her duly authorized
representative, from entering on any lot or parcel of land in the village for
the purpose of such inspection, or to interfere with the village arborist, or
such representative, in the performance of any of his/her duties provided for
under the provisions of this subchapter.
302.11.4 Notice To Owner Of Dead, Or Substantially Dead, Tree To Comply With
Ordinance; Failure To Comply.
(A) If a laboratory or other analysis of specimens removed from any tree by the
village arborist, or his/her duly authorized representative, determines that
such tree is a public nuisance pursuant to this subchapter, or if the village
arborist determines that any dead or substantially dead tree, or deadwood, is a
public nuisance as provided in this subchapter, the village arborist shall
serve or cause to be served upon the person that is the owner of the lot or
parcel of land on which such tree or deadwood is located, a written notice
requiring such owner to comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(B) If the person upon whom such notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to
remove such tree or deadwood within thirty (30) calendar days or within any
additional reasonable time as permitted in writing by the village arborist, or
his/her duly authorized representative, after service of such notice, the
village arborist, or his/her duly authorized representative, may proceed to
remove and destroy such tree, or deadwood, and assess the cost thereof against
the owner of such parcel of land, and the amount of such cost shall be paid by
such owner to the village.
302.11.5 Service Of Notice. Service of the notice provided for in the preceding
section shall be by personal service, if the owner of the lot or parcel of land
on which dead or substantially dead tree, as aforesaid, is located is a
resident of the village. If such owner cannot be found in the village, or is a
nonresident of the village, written notice shall be served by certified mail,
addressed to the owner at his last known address, and by posting of the
violation on the premises.
Section 304.10.1 is added to read as follows:
Balconies. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, and/or occupant of any
premises to permit or use any exterior balcony for the placement or storage of
any items except furniture made specifically for outdoor use, and decorative
plants (whether real or artificial), provided any of the foregoing are not
otherwise prohibited elsewhere in the ordinances, codes, or regulations of the
village. Further, clothing, laundry, or textiles (except a textile designed for
outdoor use as an original part of the outdoor furniture) are prohibited on any
exterior balcony. Additionally, no items at any time are permitted to hang over
the floor or railing of the balcony or any appurtenant structure or attachment
to the balcony with the exception of holiday lights in compliance with the
existing village ordinance. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the
owner of the real estate shall be liable under this provision.
Section 304.14 is amended to read as follows:
Insect Screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or
any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied
with approved tightly-fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16
mesh per 25 mm), and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in
good working condition.
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such
as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
Section 507.2 is added as follows:
Sump Pump Discharge. The point of discharge of any new or existing sump pump
shall not be less than five feet from any lot line.
Section 602.3 is amended to read as follows:
Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets
one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms,
either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
      (1)   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required; provided, that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in appendix D of the plumbing code.
      (2)   Where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a
minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
Section 602.4 is amended to read as follows:
Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with
heat during the period from October 1 to April 1 to maintain a temperature of
not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
      (1)   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
      (2)   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
(2016 Code)
10-8-3: PORTABLE TOILETS, DUMPSTERS AND STORAGE PODS:
   A.   Portable Toilets:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection A is to preserve and protect
the health, safety and general welfare of persons and property within the
village by regulating the location and maintenance of portable toilets and
requiring a permit for their use and placement.
      2.   Regulations: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property in
any zoning district or any occupant of a dwelling on that property to allow or
permit a portable toilet on that property except:
         a.   If the property is owned by a unit of government; or
         b.   If the property has a private waste disposal system which has
failed but only for twenty one (21) days or until the dwelling is connected to
the village sanitary sewer system, whichever occurs first; or
         c.   If the portable toilet is otherwise required or allowed by
Illinois Compiled Statutes or this code; or
         d.   If the health officer allows a portable toilet during an
emergency, but not longer than ninety (90) days, when a dwelling does not have
sanitary sewer service. The portable toilet must be located no closer than ten
feet (10') from any lot line, and the door must face away from the nearest lot
line; or
         e.   For not more than two (2) portable toilets on residential
property for up to four (4) days, three (3) times in a calendar year. The
portable toilet must be located no closer than ten feet (10') from any lot
line, and the door must face away from the nearest lot line.
      3.   Maintenance: All portable toilets used in the village shall be
maintained by a private sewage disposal system pumping contractor in a sound
structural condition and in compliance with the Illinois department of public
health regulations and sanitized at a minimum of every seven (7) days. (Ord.
15-18, 3-3-2015)
      4.   Exemptions: All portable toilets associated with a valid and active
construction building permit are exempt from the above time limits.
Construction building permits are good for one hundred eighty (180) days and
are required to be in compliance with the above regulations, unless work
associated with the permit has ceased for a period of thirty (30) days.
   B.   Dumpsters On Properties Where Primary Structure Is Single- Family
Detached Or Two-Family Dwelling:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection B is to preserve and protect
the health, safety and general welfare of persons and property within the
village by regulating the location and maintenance of dumpsters on properties
where the primary structure is a single-family detached or two-family dwelling
and requiring a permit for their use and placement. (Ord. 15-18, 3-3-2015; amd.
2016 Code)
      2.   Regulations:
         a.   Dumpsters may be placed only upon a residential driveway or other
surface approved by the building official.
         b.   Dumpsters may not be placed in any street, alleyway, sidewalk,
publicly owned rights of way, or in such a way to cause an obstruction to
pedestrians and motor vehicles or other locations not specifically identified
as acceptable within the provisions of this subsection B by the building
official.
         c.   Only one dumpster may be located on a property at any time.
         d.   Dumpsters must contain all rubbish, garbage and materials so that
said rubbish, garbage and materials do not become windblown.
         e.   When the dumpster is full, the owner or contractor is responsible
for having it covered and removed within twenty four (24) hours.
         f.   A dumpster shall not be placed on a property for more than thirty
(30) consecutive days and is allowed only two (2) times within a calendar year.
(Ord. 15-18, 3-3-2015)
      3.   Dumpsters At Locations With Building Permits:
         a.   Dumpsters associated with a valid and active construction
building permit shall be valid for a period of six (6) months unless work
associated with the permit has ceased for a period of thirty (30) days.
         b.   Dumpsters associated with a valid permit shall comply with
subsections B2a through B2e of this section. (Ord. 15-18, 3-3-2015; amd. 2016
Code)
   C.   Storage Pods:
      1.   Definition: For purposes of this subsection C, "storage pod" means
any structure purchased or leased that is used for the temporary storage of
articles, goods or other personal property which is not affixed to real
property and does not contain wheels.
      2.   Regulations:
         a.   An owner or resident of residential property is permitted to have
a storage pod or any similar temporary storage structure for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days.
         b.   A storage pod or any similar temporary storage structure shall be
placed only upon a residential driveway or other surface approved by the
building official.
         c.   A storage pod or any similar temporary storage structure may not
be placed in any street, alleyway, sidewalk, or publicly owned right of way or
in such way to cause an obstruction to pedestrians and motor vehicles or other
locations not specifically identified as acceptable within the provisions of
this subsection C or by the building official.
         d.   A storage pod or any similar temporary storage structure shall
not exceed the maximum size of a sixteen foot (16') container (16' x 8' x 8'),
which typically holds three (3) to four (4) rooms. (Ord. 15-18, 3-3-2015)
10-8-4: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
The owner, occupant, lessee or person legally in possession and/or control of
any lot or parcel in the Village shall remove or cause to be removed all snow,
ice or freezing precipitation from the sidewalk in the public right-of-way
abutting the front or corner side yard of that lot or parcel within twenty four
(24) hours after cessation of the falling snow, ice or freezing precipitation.
If the precipitation on the sidewalk is frozen so hard that it cannot be
removed without damage to the sidewalk, the person responsible for its removal
shall within that twenty four (24) hour time period cause sand, salt or other
abrasive material to be place upon the entire sidewalk for the purpose of
mitigating slipping hazards and preventing its accumulation and as soon as
weather permits shall remove the snow, ice or frozen precipitation as provided
herein. (Ord. 17-63, 10-17-2017)
CHAPTER 9
FIRE CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Fire Code
10-9-1-1: Adoption Of Codes
10-9-1-2: Amendments To International Fire Code
10-9-2: Access Passageways
10-9-3: Key Box System
10-9-1: FIRE CODE:
10-9-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODES:
   The regulations of the 2024 edition of the international fire code,
referenced standards and appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and I, as published by
the International Code Council; and the 2024 edition of the National Fire
Protection Association 101 life safety code, both published in pamphlet form,
are adopted also known as the Village of Berkeley Fire Code regulating and
governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards
arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials
and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises, with such amendments as set forth in section
10-9-1-2 of this chapter.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-9-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The international fire code adopted in section
10-9-1-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the village of
Berkeley, hereafter referred to as "this code".
Section 105.4.2.1 is amended by adding the following:
   Fire Protection System Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection
system(s) shall be submitted to indicate compliance with this code and the
construction documents, and shall be approved prior to the start of
installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the
referenced installation standards in chapter 9. For each hydraulically
calculated automatic fire sprinkler system area identified on submitted shop
drawings, a copy of the hydraulic nameplate shall be provided.
Section 109.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof or who shall erect,
install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall deem a separate violation.
Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Failure To Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
Section 202, the first sentence of definition of fire area, is amended as
follows:
   Fire Area. The aggregate floor area bounded by the exterior walls of a
building, regardless of fire walls, fire barriers, or fire resistance-rated
horizontal assemblies.
Section 202, definition of "high rise", is amended to read as follows:
   High Rise: Any building having more than four (4) stories or that is over 40
feet to the highest floor, or that is over 50 feet in height.
   Cooking on Combustible Balconies is amended to read as follows:
   308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame
cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10
feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction in a multi-family occupancy.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic
sprinkler system or constructed of non-combustible materials.
      Liquefied petroleum (LP) gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with
a water capacity not greater than 2-1/2 pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-
gas capacity.
      2.   One- and two-family dwellings.
      3.   When an open-flame cooking device is attended by an adult and a
minimum 10 lb. dry chemical (class B or class ABC) fire extinguisher is located
within ten (10) feet of the cooking device.
      4.   When an LP gas fueled cooking device is attended by an adult and a
minimum 10 lb. dry chemical (class B or class ABC) fire extinguisher is located
within ten (10) feet of the cooking device.
      5.   Movable devices serving detached single-family homes. Built in
grills and other open flame devices shall maintain a minimum of ten feet (3048
mm) to the nearest edge of the open flame area of the device.
308.1.7 Sky Lanterns - Prohibited is amended to read as follows:
   Section 308.1.7 Sky Lanterns: The use of sky lanterns are prohibited within
the corporate limits of the Village of Berkeley. Sky lanterns are defined as
"fireworks" under the Fireworks Regulation Act of Illinois, (425 ILCS 30/2 (a))
which states in part that "fireworks mean and include the type of balloon which
requires fire underneath to propel
Section 311.2.2 Fire Protection is amended deleting exceptions:
   Section 311.2.2: Fire protection systems shall be maintained in an operable
condition at all times.
   Delete exceptions nos. 1, 2, and 3.
Section 505.1 Address Numbers is amended to read:
   Buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The
address identification shall be legible and placed in a position on the
building that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address
identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers
shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled
out. Each character shall be a minimum of 4" high with a minimum stroke width
of 0.5 inch (12.7mm). Where required by the fire code official, address
identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate
emergency response. All multi-tenant commercial buildings and multi-family
residential dwelling units shall have additional address numbering placed on
the rear door, if appropriate, with the same requirements noted above.
   Exception: detached residential garages. Address identification shall be
maintained.
Section 507.5.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Where Required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter
constructed or moved into or within the village is more than 300 feet from a
hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route
around the exterior of the facility or building, on site fire hydrants and
mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official.
   Exceptions:
      1. For group R-3 and group U occupancies, the distance shall be 600 feet.
      2. For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic fire
sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2,
the distance shall be 600 feet.
Section 507.5.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Hydrant For Sprinkler Or Standpipe Systems. Buildings equipped with a
sprinkler or standpipe system installed in accordance with section 905 shall
have a fire hydrant within 100 feet of the fire department connection.
Section 604.1.1 is added to read as follows:
   Section 604.1.1 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher. Where
elevators are provided in buildings, at least one elevator shall be provided
for Fire Department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be
of such a size and arrangement to accommodate a twenty-four-inch by eighty-
four-inch (610-mm by 1,930-mm) ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open
position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency
medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than three inches
(76 mm) high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoistway
doorframe.
Section 901.4.1.1 is added as follows:
   Fire Sprinklers and Fire Detectors - Ceilings. In buildings protected by
automatic fire sprinklers or automatic fire detectors, suspended or removable
ceiling tiles shall be maintained in place to prevent the delay in fire
sprinkler or fire detector activation.
   Exception: When additional fire sprinklers or fire detectors are installed
in the space above the suspended ceiling.
903.3.1.1.1 of the Village of Berkeley Fire Code is hereby added to read as
follows:
Section 903.3.1.1. Exempt locations is added to read as follows:
   903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be required in
the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an
approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that
will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall
not be omitted from a room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated
construction, or contain electrical equipment.
      1.   A room where the application of water, or flame and water,
constitutes a serious life or fire hazard.
      2.   A room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because
of the nature of the contents, where approved by the fire code official.
      3.   Generator and transformer rooms separated from the remainder of the
building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-
resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
      4.   Rooms or areas that are of noncombustible construction with wholly
noncombustible contents.
      5.   Fire service access elevator machine rooms and machinery spaces.
      6.   Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces
associated with occupant evacuation elevators designed in accordance with
Section 3008 of the International Building Code.
   All exemptions must have prior written approval from the Fire Code Official.
Section 903.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
   All buildings of all use groups, other than one- and-two-family dwellings,
greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall be protected
with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed and maintained in
accordance with NFPA 13. All spec warehouse buildings (use groups S and F) with
a ceiling height 25 feet or greater shall be protected with an ESFR fire
sprinkler system or hydraulically-calculated system for class IV commodities
with rack storage calculated to the greatest storage height. All automatic fire
sprinkler systems shall be electronically supervised by an approved fire alarm
system.
   For one and two-family dwellings, refer to the residential code.
Section 903.2.1 through 903.2.11.6 is deleted.
Section 903.3.5 is amended by adding the following:
   Water Supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply
with title 10 of the village code and the standards referenced in section
903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in
accordance with the requirements of title 10 of the village code and the state
plumbing code adopted in title 10, chapter 5 of the village code. Hydrant flow
data used for the design of any automatic fire sprinkler system shall be no
more than one year old.
Section 903.3.8.6 is added to read as follows:
   A minimum safety factor of 10% or 5 psi shall be provided in any automatic
fire sprinkler system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be a
minimum of 5 psi below the seasonal low water flow test supply.
Section 903.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Sprinkler System Supervision And Alarms. All valves controlling the water
supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and
temperatures, critical air pressures, and water-flow switches on all sprinkler
systems shall be electrically supervised by a fire alarm system.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and-two- family
dwellings;
      2.   Limited area systems serving fewer than 20 sprinklers;
      3.   Automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R
where common supply main is used to supply both domestic water and the
automatic sprinkler system, and a separate shutoff valve for the automatic
sprinkler system is not provided;
      4.   Jockey pump control valves that are sealed or locked in the open
position;
      5.   Control valves to commercial kitchen hoods, paint spray booths or
dip tanks that are sealed or locked in the open position;
      6.   Valves controlling the fuel supply to fire pump engines that are
sealed or locked in the open position;
      7.   Trim valves to pressure switches in dry, pre-action and deluge
sprinkler systems that are sealed or locked in the open position.
Section 903.4.2 is amended to read as follows:
   Alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and
automatically transmitted to the fire department's communication center. All
new required alarm systems shall transmit trouble, supervisory, and fire
signals directly to the fire department's communication center via a wireless
transmitter in accordance with NFPA 72. Only equipment certified and approved
by the remote receiving station, and/or its designated proprietor, may be
installed. The designated proprietary agent shall be the only authorized
installer of the approved radio transmitter. Existing systems shall be changed
to wireless upon the alarm owner's request, when the existing equipment is
updated or where a disconnection of the telephone lines has occurred for a
period of more than thirty days.
   Exception: Supervisory service is not required for:
      1.   Single-and-multiple-station smoke alarms required by section
907.2.10;
      2.   Smoke detectors in group I-3 occupancies;
      3.   Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and-two-family dwellings.
Section 903.4.3 is amended to read as follows:
   Approved audible and visual appliances shall be connected to each automatic
fire sprinkler system in accordance with sections 903.4.2.1 and 903.4.2.2.
Sprinkler system water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow
equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size
installed in the system.
Section 903.4.2.1 is added to read as follows:
   Exterior Appliances. A clear 75 cd, weather-proof strobe light shall be
provided above the fire department connection. The strobe light shall be
supervised by the fire alarm system and shall only operate upon the water flow
activation.
Section 903.4.2.2 is added to read as follows:
   Audible Appliances. A 10-inch 120v DC alarm bell shall be provided above the
fire department connection.
Section 903.4.2.3 is added to read as follows:
   Interior Appliances. Interior audible and visible alarms supervised by a
fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with sections 907.5.1 through
907.5.2.3.4. Audible and visible alarm indicating devices shall be seen and
heard in all areas of the building.
Section 903.4.2.4 is added to read as follows:
   Automatic fire sprinkler system inspector test valves shall be accessible at
all times and located no more than six feet above the finished floor. On
multiple riser systems, the test valves shall be marked to indicate which riser
and area it tests.
Section 903.4.3 is amended to read as follows:
   Floor Control Valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be
provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in high-rise
buildings. Indicating control valves and water flow switches shall be provided
at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in multiple story
occupancies.
Section 903.4.4 is added to read as follows:
   Zoned Areas. When single zone of an automatic fire sprinkler system protects
more than a single room or area, the fire code official may require additional
smoke detectors in order to more rapidly identify the location of the smoke or
fire.
Section 903.7 is added to read as follows:
   Hydraulic Design. A copy of the hydraulic nameplate shall be provided on
each drawing for all hydraulically-calculated areas.
Section 903.8 is added to read as follows:
   Fire Pump Room. All automatic fire sprinkler system pump rooms shall be
provided a one-hour separation. An outside access door shall be provided for
all automatic fire sprinkler system pump rooms. The door shall be labeled "Fire
Sprinkler Pump Room" in minimum 4 inch contrasting letters.
Section 905.3.8 is added to read as follows:
   In all warehouse storage areas exceeding 30,000 square feet, and where
storage exceeds 12 feet high, provide inside 21/2-inch fire hose valves with
11/2-inch reducer to a 11/2-inch connection. Locate the valves at each door
entrance to the warehouse and/or storage area. Provide additional 21/2-inch
fire hose valves so that no portion of the warehouse and/or storage area is
more than 120 feet maximum travel distance to a fire hose valve. Show the
location of all obstructions and/or racks on the drawing.
   The fire hose valves system piping shall be:
      a.   A separate riser piping system.
      b.   The 21/2-inch valves shall be supplied by a minimum of 4 inch piping
with 21/2-inch drops to each valve.
      c.   Where system pressures exceed 100 psi provide Potter reducing
pressure field adjustable type valves.
Section 907.1.4 is added to read as follows:
   All fire alarms shall be of the addressable type and shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 72. Sections 907.1.4 and 907.1.5, as amended, shall also
be adhered to and made part of this fire code.
Section 907.2.2.3 is added to read as follows:
   Where Required - New Buildings And Structures. A fire alarm system utilizing
automatic fire detectors and manual fire alarm devices shall be provided
throughout all buildings not provided with an automatic sprinkler system
complying with NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R.
   The exceptions in the following sections are deleted: 907.2.1, 907.2.2,
907.2.3(3), 907.2.4, 907.2.7(1), 907.2.8.1(2), 907.2.9.1(2).
Section 907.4.2.5 is amended to read as follows:
   Protective Covers. Listed manual fire alarm box protective covers shall be
provided for all installed manual fire alarm boxes to prevent malicious false
alarms or to provide the manual fire alarm box with protection from physical
damage.
Section 907.5 is amended to read as follows:
   Occupant Notification Systems. A fire alarm system shall annunciate at the
fire alarm control unit and shall initiate occupant notification upon
activation, in accordance with sections 907.5.1 through 907.5.2.3.4. The
activation of any of the following devices shall result in occupant
notification:
      1.   Automatic fire detectors.
      2.   Automatic fire sprinkler system water-flow devices.
      3.   Manual fire alarm boxes.
      4.   Automatic fire extinguishing systems when installed in buildings or
structures that are provided with occupant notification.
Section 907.5.2.3.3.2 is added to read as follows:
   Multi-Tenant Group M. Single story, multi-tenant group M buildings shall be
"ring by tenant" when activated by the automatic fire detection system and
shall include a weatherproof, clear outside strobe over the entrance to each
tenant space as directed by the fire code official. All outside strobes shall
be 75 cd.
Section 912.1.1 is added to read as follows:
   All fire department connections shall be a 4 inch Storz connection with a 30
degree down turn.
Section 913.4.2 is added to read as follows:
   Fire Sprinkler System - Fire Pump Test Header.
      a.   Provide OS&Y control valve on all fire pump test headers.
      b.   Provide an outside test header on fire pump installations.
Section 1006.3 is amended to read as follows:
   Emergency Power For Illumination. The power supply for means of egress
illumination shall normally be provided by the premises' electrical supply. In
the event of power supply failure, an emergency electrical system shall
automatically illuminate the following areas:
      1.   Aisles and unenclosed egress stairways in rooms and spaces that
require two or more means of egress.
      2.   Corridors, interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways in
buildings required to have two or more exits.
      3.   Exterior egress components at other than their levels of exit
discharge until exit discharge is accomplished for buildings required to have
two or more exits.
      4.   Interior exit discharge elements, as permitted in section 1027.1, in
buildings required to have two or more exits.
      5.   Exterior landings, as required by section 1008.1.6, for exit
discharge doorways in buildings required to have two or more exits.
      6.   All rooms containing the building fire sprinkler riser(s), fire pump
(s) and fire alarm control panel(s).
   The emergency power system shall provide power for a duration of not less
than 90 minutes and shall consist of storage batteries, unit equipment or an
on-site generator. The installation of the emergency power system shall be in
accordance with section 604.
SECTION 3103 - TEMPORARY TENTS AND MEMBRANE STRUCTURES
3103.7.6 of the Village of Berkeley Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
   3103.7.6 Fire break. An unobstructed fire break passageway or fire road not
less than 18 feet wide and free from guy ropes or other obstructions shall be
maintained on all sides of all tents and membrane structures unless otherwise
approved by the fire code official.
Section 5504.3.1.1.3 is amended to read as follows:
   Location. Containers of cryogenic fluids shall not be located within diked
areas containing other hazardous materials. Storage of flammable cryogenic
fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within all
zoning classifications except by permit.
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Locations Where Above Ground Tanks Are Prohibited. Storage of class I and
class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited
within all zoning classifications except by permit.
Section 6104.2 is amended to read as follows:
   Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits. Within the limits established by
law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of
heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one
installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7,570 l). Such
storage is prohibited within all zoning classifications except by operational
permit.
   Exception: In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be
determined by the fire code official after consideration of special features
such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, proximity to buildings,
capacity of proposed containers, degree of fire protection to be provided and
capabilities of the fire department.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-9-2: ACCESS PASSAGEWAYS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to enclose any exit from a building with any
turnstile, fence, gate, rails or similar devices or combination of devices and
openings.
   B.   All existing turnstiles, fences, gates, rails or other similar devices
shall be removed prior to January 1, 2015. (2016 Code)
10-9-3: KEY BOX SYSTEM:
   A.   System Required; Type: It shall be required that a key box system
("knox box") of a type approved by the bureau of fire prevention of the village
fire department be installed and made available for emergency and nonemergency
access and use on properties within the village which are installed with an
automatic alarm system and/or an automatic fire sprinkler system. (Ord. 99-10,
4-20-1999, eff. 4-20-1999; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Keys Required: The required key box shall contain a working key for all
exterior doors, for all interior lobby or corridor doors, for all locked
mechanical equipment rooms, for all locked electrical equipment rooms, for all
elevator control panels and for such other areas as may be directed by the
bureau of fire prevention.
   C.   Maintenance: The key box system shall be maintained at all times in a
condition of good working order and repair and shall at all times be made
accessible for emergency and nonemergency situations requiring access to the
properties. (Ord. 99-10, 4-20-1999, eff. 4-20-1999)
ARTICLE A. CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-9A-1: Short Title
10-9A-2: Definitions
10-9A-3: Detector Requirements
10-9A-4: Responsibilities Of Owners And Tenants
10-9A-5: Violations
10-9A-6: Exemptions From Provisions
10-9A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This article may be cited as the VILLAGE OF BERKELEY CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM
REQUIREMENTS. (2016 Code)
10-9A-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPROVED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM OR ALARM: A carbon monoxide alarm that complies
with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Illinois state
fire marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory,
and complies with the most recent standards of the Underwriters Association.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or suite of rooms used for human habitation, and includes
a single-family residence as well as each living unit of a multiple-family
residence and each living unit in a mixed use building. (2016 Code)
10-9A-3: DETECTOR REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved carbon
monoxide alarm in an operating condition within fifteen feet (15') of every
room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be combined with
smoke detecting devices; provided, that the combined unit complies with the
respective provisions of the administrative code, reference standards, and
departmental rules relating to both smoke detecting devices and carbon monoxide
alarms; and provided, that the combined unit emits an alarm in a manner that
clearly differentiates the hazard.
   B.   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall contain
at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition within
fifteen feet (15') of every room used for sleeping purposes.
   C.   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this article may be either
battery powered, plug in with battery backup, or wired into the structure's AC
power line with secondary battery backup. (2016 Code)
10-9A-4: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND TENANTS:
   A.   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply and
install all required alarms. It is the responsibility of a tenant to test and
to provide general maintenance for the alarms within the tenant's dwelling unit
or rooming unit, and to notify the owner, or the authorized agent of the owner,
in writing of any deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The owner is
responsible for providing one tenant per dwelling unit with written information
regarding alarm testing and maintenance.
   B.   The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries in
the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling unit; except, that the
owner shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time
the tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner, or the authorized agent of the owner, with access to the dwelling unit
to correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarms that have been
reported in writing to the owner, or the authorized agent of the owner. (2016
Code)
10-9A-5: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful:
   A.   To wilfully fail to install or maintain in operating condition any
carbon monoxide alarm.
   B.   To tamper with, destroy, disconnect, or remove the batteries from any
installed carbon monoxide alarm, except in the course of inspection,
maintenance, or replacement of the alarm. (2016 Code)
10-9A-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The following residential units shall not require carbon monoxide detectors:
   A.   A residential unit in a building that: 1) does not rely on combustion
of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; 2) is not connected in any
way to a garage; and 3) is not sufficiently close to any ventilated source of
carbon monoxide, as determined by the building official, to receive carbon
monoxide from that source.
   B.   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide from that
source, as determined by the building official. (2016 Code)
ARTICLE B. AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-9B-1: Purpose
10-9B-2: Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems Required
10-9B-3: Required Locations; Existing Structures
10-9B-4: Installation Requirements
10-9B-5: Zoning Of Buildings
10-9B-6: Sprinkler Drainage
10-9B-7: Monitoring Of System; Key Box Required
10-9B-8: Acceptance Tests
10-9B-9: Time For Compliance
10-9B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to regulate the installation of automatic fire
sprinkler systems within the village. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003)
10-9B-2: AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS REQUIRED:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    GROSS FLOOR AREA: The floor area within the inside perimeter of the
exterior walls.
   REMODEL: Any space that is altered with plumbing, electrical, HVAC, new
walls, new floors, new ceilings or roofs.
   B.   Systems Required: Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall not be
required for single-family residences, two-family residences and use group U.
Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be required as follows, except that the
requirements shall not apply to single-family residence, two-family residences
and use group U:
      1.   For all use group occupancies.
      2.   For all use group occupancies when there is a change of occupancy
use or change of ownership.
      3.   For all existing use group occupancies when an addition is added
increasing the existing gross floor area fifty percent (50%) or more.
      4.   For all use groups when fifty percent (50%) or more of the gross
floor area is remodeled or the total remodeled area exceeds five thousand
(5,000) square feet.
      5.   For all use groups where more than fifty percent (50%) of the
existing structure must be replaced/repaired due to fire or other casualty.
(Ord. 08-15, 3-18-2008; amd. Ord. 22-53, 11-1-2022)
10-9B-3: REQUIRED LOCATIONS; EXISTING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Required Locations: Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed
and maintained in full operating condition in the following locations:
      1.   Assembly Use: Sprinklers are required throughout a building for
assembly use regardless of square footage.
      2.   Educational Use: Sprinklers are required throughout a building for
educational use regardless of square footage.
      3.   Healthcare Use: In all buildings or structures or portions thereof
of healthcare use.
      4.   Penal Use: In all buildings or structures or portions thereof of
penal use.
      5.   Residential Use: In all buildings or structures or portions thereof
of residential use, including new multi-family residences, except that the
requirements shall not apply to single-family residences and two-family
residences.
      6.   Mercantile Use: Sprinklers are required throughout a building for
mercantile use when the fire area exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet.
      7.   Business Use: Sprinklers are required throughout a building for
business use when the fire area exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet.
      8.   Industrial Use: Sprinklers required throughout a building for
industrial use when the fire area exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet.
      9.   Storage Use: In all buildings or structures or portions thereof of
storage use.
      10.   Parking Garage:
         a.   In all buildings or structures or portions thereof of parking
garage use, either public or private, when:
            (1)   Located in any story below grade;
            (2)   Located in any story that is enclosed; or
            (3)   Located in buildings where upper stories are designated for
other uses.
         b.   Any level of any parking garage, either public or private, that
is at or above grade and enclosed shall be provided with a standpipe system in
accordance with the current edition NFPA 13, "The Standard For The Installation
Of Standpipe And Hose Systems".
   B.   Existing Structures:
      1.   Except as provided in this section, when an existing building that
is not protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system and that is classified
in a use group that would, if newly constructed, be required to have an
automatic fire sprinkler system pursuant to this section, is added to or is
remodeled or altered in any manner that increases the fire areas of the
building, regardless of the cost, so that the fire areas of the entire
building, including the fire areas that were added, remodeled, or altered, are
more than fifty percent (50%) of the original square footage of the original
structure, then the fire areas of the entire building, including the fire areas
of the building that were added, remodeled, or altered, shall be protected by
an automatic fire sprinkler system.
      2.   The only exception to this article shall be that existing structures
may continue until a change in building property use, or as long as, in the
opinion of the fire code officer, they provide a reasonable degree of life
safety from fire. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 22-53, 11-1-
2022)
10-9B-4: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: An installation permit must be obtained from the
building department prior to any work being started on the installation of any
automatic fire sprinkler system.
      2.   Application For Permit: Application for a permit shall be made on
such form and in such manner as provided by the Berkeley fire department.
Approval of said plans will be made by the Berkeley fire department bureau of
fire prevention or its agent.
      3.   Plans And Specifications: Plans and specifications stamped by a
licensed engineer to ensure proper water service sizing must be on file with
the bureau of fire prevention and building department before any permit for
installation will be issued.
      4.   Permit Fee: A permit fee determined by the building department must
accompany the application for a permit.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   All installations of automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be done
in accordance with the current edition NFPA 13, NFPA 13R, or NFPA 13D, "The
Standard For The Installation Of Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems", as well as
all other requirements as contained herein. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003)
      2.   Only those companies or firms that are registered with the fire code
officer and employees with certification with NICET (National Institute For
Certification In Engineering Technology) and is a licensed fire protection
contractor shall install or service any automatic fire sprinkler systems or
standpipe systems. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   Shutoff valves shall be provided for each zone and at each floor
level of any automatic sprinkler system.
      4.   Approved tamper switches shall be provided at each shutoff valve.
Exceptions are residential buildings of one- and two- family dwellings, not
more than three (3) stories in height, that are not monitored by an automatic
fire detection system.
      5.   For multi-family residential and commercial installations, a
compound check valve with bypass meter will be required. For one- and two-
family residences, not more than three (3) stories in height, a standard double
detector check valve will be required. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003)
      6.   The fire code officer shall be consulted for the placement of the
fire department connection.
      7.   Where fire pumps are required to be installed, fire pump test
headers shall be provided, and the fire code officer shall determine the exact
location. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
      8.   In all combination systems, the requirements for sixty five (65) psi
at the top of the standpipe system shall be dropped. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003)
10-9B-5: ZONING OF BUILDINGS:
   A.   All required automatic fire sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be
zoned in accordance with the requirements of the fire code officer and shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following: Each floor of each
building or structure, including residential, shall constitute one zone. (Ord.
03-65, 11-18-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   In all multiple tenant occupancies except residential, provisions shall
be made for exterior indication to identify the tenant space affected by a
water flow. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003)
10-9B-6: SPRINKLER DRAINAGE:
A minimum of one 3-inch floor drain or other approved means shall be provided,
and drains shall be located a minimum distance of eight feet (8') from any
column or wall for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet on grade of subfloor
and for every five thousand (5,000) square feet on any floor area above floor
grade. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003)
10-9B-7: MONITORING OF SYSTEM; KEY BOX REQUIRED:
   A.   Monitoring Required; Exceptions: All automatic fire sprinkler systems
required by this article will be monitored by an automatic fire detection
system and shall be connected directly to the fire alarm panel of the Berkeley
fire department or UL approved central station monitoring system. Exceptions
are residential buildings of one- and two-family dwellings not more than three
(3) stories in height. An outside horn/strobe indicator approved by the fire
code officer shall be installed and maintained.
   B.   Key Box Required: All buildings with automatic fire sprinkler
protection will provide a knox box locking system on the given property with
the location of the knox box to be determined by the fire code officer. (Ord.
03-65, 11-18-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
10-9B-8: ACCEPTANCE TESTS:
   A.   Prior to putting any automatic fire sprinkler system into service, a
final acceptance test shall be run in the presence of a fire department
representative and/or separate fire sprinkler testing firm.
   B.   Upon completion of the acceptance test, the fire code officer shall be
provided with a copy of the "Contractor's Material And Test Certificate" and
the "Contractors Materials And Test Certificate For Underground Piping".
   C.   Following the completion of the acceptance test of any required fire
pump, the fire code officer shall be provided with a copy of the pump test
results.
   D.   Yearly inspections and test results shall be conducted by the owner or
his representative in such manner and recorded on such form as shall be
provided by the fire code officer.
   E.   Annual fire pump performance tests shall be conducted by the owner or
his representative in such manner and recorded on such form as provided by the
fire code officer. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
10-9B-9: TIME FOR COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Where, in the opinion of the fire code officer, an automatic fire
sprinkler system is required, a period of time not to exceed one year shall be
given for compliance. (Ord. 03-65, 11-18-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   When, in the case that the fire code officer has determined that an
automatic fire sprinkler system is required due to either: 1) a change of
occupancy use in which the occupancy use is changing to group B, F, M, or S; or
2) a change of ownership in which the occupancy use will remain group B, F, M,
or S, a one year extension may be granted as follows:
      1.   The property owner submits a written request for the extension to
the village president and board of trustees detailing the reason(s) for the
request. The request must be made no sooner than three (3) months nor later
than two (2) months prior to the one year anniversary of the change of
occupancy use, change of ownership, or expiration of a prior extension.
      2.   The request is considered for approval or rejection at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the village board.
      3.   With the written advice and the consent of the village president and
fire chief, the village board of trustees approves the request for the one year
extension.
      4.   The property owner enters into an agreement with the village
committing to install the automatic fire sprinkler system prior to the
extension expiration.
      5.   No more than two (2) extensions may be granted to any property.
(Ord. 11-19, 6-21-2011)
CHAPTER 10
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
10-10-1: Adoption Of Code
10-10-2: Amendments To Code
10-10-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
   The international energy conservation code, 2024 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, published in pamphlet form, is hereby adopted
as the energy conservation code of the village for regulating and governing
energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient
mechanical, lighting, and power systems as herein provided, with such
amendments as are set forth in section 10-10-2 of this chapter.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-10-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The energy conservation code adopted in section
10-10-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section C101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   These regulations shall be known as the international energy conservation
code the Village of Berkeley, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to
herein as "this code".
Section C110.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one
hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
Section C106.5 is amended by adding:
   The fees are established by the village in the annual fee schedule.
Section C109.3 is amended by deleting:
   "The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall
hold office at its pleasure," and inserting "The village board shall be the
board of appeals.".
Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   These regulations shall be known as the international energy conservation
code of the Village Berkeley, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to
herein as "this code".
Section R106.5 is amended by adding:
   The fees are established by the village in the annual fee schedule.
Section R109.3 is amended by deleting:
   "The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall
hold office at its pleasure," and inserting "The village board shall be the
board of appeals."10-10-3: Enforcement
   The Village of Berkeley is mandated to enforce the most recently adopted
Illinois Energy Conservation Code which follows the ICC International Energy
Conservation Code and the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air
Conditioning Engineers (2016 ASHRAE) Standard 90.1 Energy Standard for building
except low-rise residential buildings and amendments to the Capital Development
Board.
Section R110.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one
hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 11
ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Regulations Adopted
10-11-2: Initial Inspections; Violations
10-11-3: Annual Test And Inspection
10-11-4: Time For Compliance
10-11-5: Conflicting Provisions
10-11-1: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The current following regulations published in pamphlet form are hereby adopted
as the regulations governing the construction, alteration, replacement, repair,
maintenance, use, and inspections of elevators:
   A.   American Society Of Mechanical Engineers (ASME): Safety code for
elevators and escalators (ASME A17.1), A17.1(a), and A17.1(s).
   B.   Guide for inspection of elevators, escalators and moving walks (ASME
17.2).
   C.   Safety code for existing elevators and escalators (ASME 17.3).
   D.   Safety standard for platform lifts and stairway chairlifts (ASME
A18.1).
   E.   Standard for the qualification of elevator inspectors (ASME QEI-1).
   F.   American National Standards Institute (ANSI): Safety requirements for
personal hoists and employee elevators (ANSI A10.4).
   G.   American Society Of Civil Engineers (ASCE): Automated people mover
standards (ASCE 21). (2016 Code)
10-11-2: INITIAL INSPECTIONS; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the building official, or the elevator
inspector if the latter position is filled by appointment of the village
president, with the consent of the members of the board of trustees, to inspect
or cause to be inspected any elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator, or moving walk as
defined in the 2012 international building code, chapter 30, in and about any
building or structure within the village prior to the commencement of the use
thereof in conjunction with the building permit process. In addition, all such
mechanisms shall be inspected annually thereafter, except those located in
single- family homes, at the expense of the building owner.
   B.   If such elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or moving walk is found to be
in violation of the regulations referred to in section
10-11-1 of this chapter, the building official or elevator inspector shall
report this fact in writing to the owner or occupant of the building in or
about which such device is located and require that all repairs or alterations
deemed necessary by the inspector be made within a specified time.
   C.   After said time limit, such device shall not be used, and a sign so
advising the public shall be affixed thereto by the official or inspector until
the necessary repairs or alterations have been made and a reinspection has been
requested by the owner or occupant and made by the inspector who shall verify
such repairs or alterations. (Ord. 01-27, 8-21-2001; amd. 2016 Code)
10-11-3: ANNUAL TEST AND INSPECTION:
An annual test and inspection of elevators and conveying systems shall be on an
annual (yearly) rather than a biannual (6 months) basis is required. (Ord. 00-
04, 2-15-2000)
10-11-4: TIME FOR COMPLIANCE:
Upgrades required by ASME A17.3-2005, "Safety Code For Existing Elevators",
shall be completed no later than January 1, 2010; except, that upgrades to the
hydraulic cylinder system and firefighter control system shall be completed by
January 1, 2011. (Ord. 09-33, 9-15-2009)
10-11-5: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Where any provisions of this chapter are in conflict with any other provisions
of the village code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail and shall be
applied as the law of the village. (Ord. 09-33, 9-15-2009)
CHAPTER 12
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
10-12-1: Adoption Of Code
10-12-1-1: Amendments To Code
10-12-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
   The international existing building code, 2012 edition, with appendices A,
B, C, and E, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., published in
pamphlet form, is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the village
regulating the repair, alteration, change of occupancy and relocation of
existing buildings.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-12-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The existing building code adopted in section
10-12-1-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Chapter 1 Amendments:
   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      These regulations shall be known as the existing building code of the
Village of Berkeley, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
   Section 101.1.1 is added to read as follows:
      1)   The additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set out in this
section are hereby made to the ICC International Existing Building Code/2024
adopted in section 10-12-1-1.
      2)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "code official"
shall mean the Building Commissioner or Village Manager of building and code
enforcement of the Village.
      3)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "name of
jurisdiction" shall mean the Village.
      4)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "chief appointing
authority" shall mean the Building Commissioner or the Village Manager, as
prescribed by ordinance.
      5)   Any reference in the existing building code to the "department of
inspection" shall mean the department of building and code enforcement of the
Village.
      6)   Any reference in the existing building code to the date or time at
which the provisions of such code became applicable shall mean the adopted date
of the Ordinance # 25-52.
   Section 101.4 is amended to read as follows:
      Applicability. Structures existing prior to October 1, 1997, in which
there is work involving additions, alterations, or changes of occupancy, shall
be made to conform to the requirements of this section or the provisions of
section 101.4.1 through 101.6. The provisions in sections 101.4 through 101.6.
shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed
to be, in groups A, B, E, F, M, R, S, and U. These provisions shall not apply
to buildings with occupancies in group H or I.
      Note: Congruent with current building code.
   Section 101.4.1.2 is added to read as follows:
      Further compliance. Section 301.1, 501.1.1, 601.1, 701.2, 801.1, 901.1.,
1001.1., 1101.1. and 1301.1.1. Required installation of smoke alarms and
sprinkler systems. When the cost of proposed construction is at least 25
percent of the value of the building, smoke alarms shall be installed in
accordance with Section 1103.7.7. However, if the cost of proposed construction
exceeds 50 percent of the value of the building, sprinklers shall be installed
in accordance with Section 1103.5.5. The value of the building or structure
(excluding land) shall be established by the Cook County tax assessment records
for the year prior to the initial remodeling or reconstruction. Owners of tax-
exempt properties shall produce documentation verifying the building's
valuation, which will be subject to the review and approval of the building
code official. Compliance with this section is mandatory once either of the
aforementioned conditions is met despite any efforts to comply with other
sections of this chapter and should not be construed to reduce or invalidate
any other obligations contained herein.
      Note: Directing this requirement regardless to what level of alteration,
is based on cost valuation. Not sure if village board, but a way to get safer
levels, can change 25% to 50% for smoke alarms.
   Section 105.1.1.2
   Section 105.1.1.2 is added to read as follows:
      Permit Required. No person shall move any building on, though, or over
any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the village without
having obtained a permit. The application shall also include the proposed route
and number of days for the move when application is made.
   Section 105.1.1.3 is added to read as follows:
      Bond. Every person applying for a permit under section 3410.1 shall
submit with his application a cash bond in the amount of $50,000.00 with a
lawful corporate surety to be approved by the building official, conditioned
upon his compliance with all of the provisions of this article, and agreeing to
pay and hold the village harmless from any claim which may be made against it
by reason of occupation of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place
by the building or structure moved.
   105.2 is amended to read as follows:
      Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit is amended to read as follows:
      IRC R105.2 Building (1) Work exempt from permit: One-story detached
accessory structures which are accessory to residential buildings and
constructed under the provisions of the IRC used as tool and storage sheds,
tree supported play structures, playhouse and similar uses, provided the floor
area does not exceed 200 square feet and the structure is in accordance with
the village of Berkeley zoning regulations12-9-3 requirements and restrictions.
Two hundred square feet in congruent with the zoning code.
   Section R105.2 (2) is amended by adding:
      IRC R105.2 (2) Work exempt from permit: 45 inches or less in height and
in accordance with the Village of Berkeley zoning code regulations Chapter 10
fences sections 12-10-1 through 12-10-12.
   Section R105.2 (5) is amended by adding:
   Section R105.2 (7) is amended by adding:
      R105.2 Building (7): Swimming pools entirely above or below ground
accessory to a one- and two-family dwelling or Group R-3 occupancy, which are
less than:
      (1)   A round pool has a depth not greater than one foot and a diameter
greater than six feet.
      (2)   An oblong or square pool which has a depth not greater than one
foot and a perimeter greater than 20 feet.
   Section R105.2 (10) is amended by adding:
      R105.2 Building (10) Decks and associated platforms and steps accessory
to buildings, which are 12 inches (762 mm) or less above adjacent grade and
which are not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an
accessible route.
   Section 107 is amended to read:
      Section 107 Temporary uses, equipment and systems. Pending the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy and/or certificate of compliance and upon the
written request of the holder of a building permit, or of the owner, a
temporary occupancy permit to authorize temporary occupancy may be issued by
the building official upon the following conditions:
         1.   Occupancy shall be authorized only in those portions of the
building or structure as indicated on the permit.
         2.   Conditions of the occupancy may be required as deemed necessary.
         3.   In no instance shall the building official utilize the above
procedure where the premises for which a temporary certificate of occupancy has
been requested are not safe for occupancy.
         4.   Temporary occupancy, when allowed, shall not extend for a period
of more than 60 days. This period may be extended for up to 120 more days by
the village building official upon proof by the building permit holder or the
owner of undue hardship that prevents them from achieving compliance.
         5.   The fees for a temporary occupancy permit shall be paid in
accordance with the annual fee schedule or as follows.
         6.   Temporary certificates of occupancy shall only be issued for
single-family detached structures between October 15 and April 15 with the
posting of a cash bond in the following amounts for each incomplete
requirement:
            Landscaping: $2,000.00.
            Driveway on the property: $1,000.00.
            Driveway approach in the right way: $1,000.00.
            Service walks: $400.00.
            Stoops/decks: $600.00.
         7.   Temporary certificates of occupancy shall only be issued for
multi-family structures between October 15 and April 15 with the posting of a
$2,000.00 cash bond per dwelling unit.
         8.   For all other non-residential structures, a temporary certificate
of occupancy shall be issued at any time upon the posting of a cash bond in the
amount of 110 percent of the cost of the incomplete requirements as determined
by the building official.
   Section 108 is amended by adding:
      The fees are established by the village in the annual fee schedule.
   Section 110.1 is added to read as follows:
      Change Of Occupancy. All buildings or parts of a building vacant for more
than one year shall be considered a change of use.
   Section 111.3.1 is added to read as follows:
      Disconnection And Reconnection Of Utility Wires. When it shall be
necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a public utility in moving a
building, the terms of any special or franchise ordinance governing shall
apply, and the bond therein specified shall be given. If no such terms apply,
then the building official shall estimate the expense of repairing the wires,
and the value of the bond to be given to cover the expense shall be 110% of the
value of the work as determined by the building official.
   Section 112.3
      Section 112.3 is amended by deleting "The board of appeals shall be
appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure," and
inserting "The village board shall be the board of appeals."
   Section 113. is amended to read as follows:
      Violation Penalties.
         1.   It is unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this code
or fail to comply with any requirements thereof or erect, construct, alter, or
repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of
the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $1,000.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
         2.   Any person that performs work without obtaining a permit as
required by this code shall pay a permit fee double the amount of fee
calculated for the work in accordance with the annual fee schedule.
         3.   A second violation of the offense within a 12- calendar-month
period shall require payment of a fee to quadruple the amount of the standard
fee as established in the annual fee schedule.
Chapter 2 Amendments
   Section 202, definition of "high rise", is amended to read as follows:
      High Rise: Any building having more than four (4) stories or that is over
40 feet to the highest floor, or that is over 50 feet in height.
Chapter 14 Amendments:
   Section 1402.1, Location on Lot, is amended to read as follows:
      The following vacant lot requirements shall apply to all property within
the village of Berkeley following the demolition or removal of a building. It
is the intention of the village board that, to the fullest extent possible, the
following provisions, or as many as may be fully applicable, shall, in addition
to being applied prospectively, also be applied retroactively to all vacant
lots following demolition that has occurred within the village within a period
commencing 24 months prior to the adoption of this amendment.
      Prior to the issuance of any permit for the wrecking, demolishing, or
razing of any building or other structure in excess of 1,000 square feet, the
owner of said building or structure shall deposit, in escrow, funds in an
amount deemed sufficient by the building official or his designee to secure the
owner's obligations to grade, place topsoil, seed, sod, and/or fence any
unimproved surface. Should the owner and/or owner's successor(s) in interest
fail to perform said duties, the village may draw on said funds to complete all
required tasks. For the demolition of a building or structure, or part thereof,
greater than 1,000 square feet in area, the vacant lot resulting thereafter
shall be filled and maintained, and the owner or successive owner shall be
required to provide the following supporting documents and is subject to the
following requirements and submittals:
         1.   A site management plan shall be submitted for review and approval
if new construction is to commence within 90 days from the issuance of the
building permit for the demolition work, and indicate the following items:
            a.   The property drawn to a scale of not less than one-inch equals
20 feet (1" = 20') unless otherwise approved by the building official.
            b.   Existing buildings to be removed or retained.
            c.   All easements, existing utility lines, well and septic systems
on the subject property and all adjacent parkways and property within 20 feet.
            d.   Silt fencing, protective tree fencing, and perimeter safety
fencing in required locations.
            e.   Means of primary ingress/egress from the public ways to the
site and points for emergency access, traffic control devices and measures, and
on-site and off-site parking areas.
            f.   Temporary areas for the storage or staging of debris, soil,
construction materials and construction equipment.
         2.   A site restoration plan shall be submitted for review and
approval if new construction will not commence within 90 days from the issuance
of the building permit for the demolition work, and indicate the following
items:
            a.   The property drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
20 feet (1" = 20') unless otherwise approved by the building official.
            b.   Measures to restore the site in accordance with the applicable
stormwater and floodplain regulations to the natural grade, establish soil
stabilization or groundcover, and an itemized cost estimate to complete the
work.
            c.   A statement indicates that the site restoration work will be
completed with a required 90-day period after substantial completion of the
demolition work. An extension of time may be granted by the fire chief or his
designee if unforeseen circumstances are determined to impede the completion of
the restoration.
         3.   Upon completion of demolition, all debris, equipment and
temporary protection shall be removed from the site. In no case shall
demolition debris be allowed to remain on the site longer than seven days after
the structure has been demolished.
         4.   Upon completion of demolition, the owner and/or the owner's
successor(s) shall immediately restore the public right-of-way to its original
condition upon completion of the work, including restoration of openings, broom
sweeping walks and streets, mow grassy areas and, if required, by raking of
grassy areas.
         5.   On completion of demolition, the property owner and/or the
owner's successor(s) in interest shall fill the property with clean inorganic
material with the upper eight inches filled in friable topsoil and graded to
the level of sidewalks, alleys, or adjoining property with allowance for
settlement.
         6.   On completion of demolition, the property owner and/or owner's
successor(s) in interest shall schedule and permit an inspection by the
building official to determine compliance with the village code.
         7.   Unless construction of a new building on the site commences
within 90 days of completion of demolition, the property owner and/or owner's
successor(s) shall seed the property with grass or place sod thereon no later
than 15 days after completion of demolition. The temporary construction fence
shall be removed no later than 15 days after such seeding or sodding.
      It is unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this section or
fail to comply with any requirement hereof, or demolish a building or structure
in violation hereof, or fail to comply with the requirements of this section
concerning a vacant lot following the demolition of a building or structure,
and any such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00
nor more than $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 13
ACCESSIBILITY CODES
SECTION:
10-13-1: Adoption Of Codes
10-13-2: Conflicting Provisions
10-13-1: ADOPTION OF CODES:
   The international existing building code, 2012 edition, with appendices A,
B, C, and E, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., published in
pamphlet form, is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the village
regulating the repair, alteration, change of occupancy and relocation of
existing buildings.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-13-2: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
The international accessibility code shall be applied by the building official
when requirements addressed in that code are not covered by the state of
Illinois accessibility code. The state of Illinois accessibility code shall
take precedence whenever there is a conflict between the two (2) codes. (2016
Code)
CHAPTER 14
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
SECTION:
10-14-1: Adoption Of Code
10-14-2: Amendments To Code
10-14-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
   The international swimming pool and spa code, 2024 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the pool and spa
code of the village regulating the design, construction, alteration, movement,
renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance of swimming pools, spas, hot
tubs, aquatic facilities and related equipment, with such amendments as set
forth in section
10-14-2 of this chapter.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
10-14-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The swimming pool and spa code adopted in section
10-14-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Title. These regulations shall be known as the swimming pool and spa code of
the village of Berkeley, hereafter referred to as "this code".
Section 109.2 is amended to read as follows:
   The fees for work shall be as indicated in the village annual fee schedule.
Section 109.6 is amended to read as follows:
   The building official may authorize the refunding of fees as allowed by
ordinance.
Section 113.4 is amended to read as follows:
   Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements hereof or who shall erect, install, alter, or
repair swimming pools, spas or related equipment in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to fines
of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars, and each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate violation.
Section 114.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Upon notice from the building official that work is being done contrary to
the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall
immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the
work. The notice shall state the condition under which work is authorized to
resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required
to give a written notice prior to stopping work. Any person who shall continue
any work on the system after having been served a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00)
dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
Section 321.1 is amended to read as follows:
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of premises on which is
located a pool which has dimensions greater than swimming pools described below
to discharge the water from such pools in such a manner that the discharged
water shall flow beyond the property line of the parcel on which such pool is
located unless the water flows directly into a paved area directly draining
into a stormwater sewer.
   This section shall apply to all pools which are larger than:
      (1) A round pool having a depth greater than one foot and a diameter
greater than six feet.
      (2) An oblong or square pool which has a depth greater than one foot and
a perimeter greater than 20 feet.
(2016 Code; amd. Ord. 25-52, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 15
MOVING AND WRECKING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Permit Requirements
10-15-2: Bonds Required
10-15-3: Requirements And Restrictions On Moving Certain Buildings
10-15-4: Procedures For Moving Buildings
10-15-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
move or wreck any building or structure along or upon the streets, alleys, or
public highways of the village unless a moving or wrecking permit from the
building official is obtained prior to the act. (1976 Code § 15.32.010)
   B.   Application For Permit: All applications for moving or wrecking permits
shall be made to the building official and shall describe the streets, alleys,
and public highways proposed to be used in the moving or wrecking of said
building or structure. Should the building official approve the application, he
shall issue a moving or wrecking permit to the applicant, provided the
applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter as to bonds,
fees, and all other requisites in connection with the permit. (1976 Code §
15.32.020)
   C.   Permit Fees: The building owner shall pay to the village a fee for a
permit for the moving, raising, lowering, underpinning and/or wrecking of any
building or structure within the village as established in the annual fee
schedule. (Ord. 96-05, 2-6-1996; amd. 2016 Code)
10-15-2: BONDS REQUIRED:
   A.   Indemnification: Before the building official issues a moving permit,
the applicant for such permit shall file with the village, on a form to be
furnished by the village, a bond in the penal sum of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00), with surety to be approved by the village attorney, and
conditioned to indemnify, save and keep harmless the village from any and all
loss, costs, expense or liability of any kind whatsoever which the village may
suffer or be put to or which may be recovered from by reason of the issuance of
such permit or by reason of any act or thing done or neglected to be done under
or by virtue of the authority given in such permit. (1976 Code § 15.32.080;
amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Performance Bond (Surety): The owner of the building or structure shall
post, or provide for the posting, a performance bond (surety) naming the
village as an insured beneficiary in the sum of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 96-05, 2-6-1996;
amd. Ord. 02-63, 12-17-2002; 2016 Code)
   C.   Backfilling And Restoration Bond: Prior to the issuance of a permit by
the village for the moving or wrecking of a building or other structure within
the village, the owner of the building or structure shall post or cause to be
posted with the village a performance bond (surety) of a style and form
acceptable to the village to ensure that the foundation and foundation
appurtenances be removed in their entirety; that an adequate amount of backfill
be provided, compressed and leveled to grade and seeded with not less than
three inches (3") of topsoil; that any catch basin top be removed and the catch
basin completely backfilled; and that utility services to the premises be
sealed at the point of connection to the village service lines; and that all
common areas, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks and alleys, be
returned to a condition of good order and repair satisfactory to the village,
ordinary wear and tear excepted. (Ord. 96-05, 2-6-1996)
10-15-3: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS ON MOVING CERTAIN BUILDINGS:
   A.   Buildings or structures moved in the village from one block to another,
or upon, along, or across any street or alley used by and for the public, that
are worth more than one-third (1/3) of the cost of duplicating such buildings
or structures in their proposed new location with new construction and
materials, shall comply throughout with the building code and zoning ordinance
of the village, both as to construction and use in the new location, and the
acceptance of a permit for moving of such buildings or structures shall impose
the obligation to cause the same to be made to comply with the building code,
and failure to cause the same to be made to comply with the building code
constitutes a violation of the building code. (1976 Code § 15.32.030)
   B.   No building or structure worth less than one-third (1/3) of the cost of
duplicating the same in its proposed new location with new construction and
materials shall be moved from its present to another location. The costs and
values referred to and made necessary to be determined in applying this
subsection shall be furnished by the owner and shall be verified and approved
by the building official before a permit to move the building or structure
involved shall be issued or will be recognized as valid. (1976 Code §
15.32.040)
   C.   No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to move any building
which has been damaged to an extent greater than one- third (1/3) of its value
by fire, decay, or otherwise, such value to be determined as prescribed in this
subsection; nor shall such person, firm, or corporation be permitted to move
any frame building of such a character as is prohibited to be constructed
within the fire limits from any point outside the fire limits to any point
within the fire limits; nor shall such person, firm or corporation be permitted
to move any building to a location which will cause the destruction of or
injury to any tree or trees on public property in any residential section of
the village. (1976 Code § 15.32.050; amd. 2016 Code)
10-15-4: PROCEDURES FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Lights And Warning Devices:
      1.   Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which
is being moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the superintendent
of public works so as to warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion
of the street which is so blocked.
      2.   The person, firm, or corporation moving any building through the
streets shall keep warning signs and lanterns or lights at night on the
building so as to prevent any person or vehicle from colliding therewith. (1976
Code § 15.32.110)
   B.   Utility Wires Or Cables: Whenever it is necessary to interfere with
wires or cables of a public utility in moving a building, the terms of any
special or franchise ordinance governing shall apply, and the bond therein
specified shall be given. If no such terms apply, then the superintendent of
public works shall estimate the expense of fixing the wires and bond to be
given to cover this. (1976 Code § 15.32.120; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Fire Alarm Wires: When any moving building approaches any fire alarm
wire or pole which is endangered by the moving of such building, it shall be
the duty of the mover to notify the chief of the fire department at least
twenty four (24) hours before reaching such wire or pole so that they may be
removed or cared for by the village authorities. (1976 Code § 15.32.130; amd.
2016 Code)
CHAPTER 16
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
10-16-1: System Of Numbering
10-16-2: Chart
10-16-3: Placement Of Numbers On Certain Buildings
10-16-1: SYSTEM OF NUMBERING:
All lots, buildings, and structures in the village shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan:
   A.   Numbers east and west shall begin with 5100 at the west line of Fifty
First Avenue, with the odd numbers on the south sides of the streets.
   B.   Numbers north and south shall begin with 800 at the present north
limits of the village, which is the east and west centerline of section six,
township 39 north, range 12 east of the third principal meridian. One number or
digit shall be assigned to each twenty five feet (25') of frontage, with 800
numbers to the mile and the numbers changing from 100 to another hundred at
each eighth mile. (1976 Code § 12.12.010)
10-16-2: CHART:
The clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every lot in
the village which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested. (1976 Code
§ 12.12.020)
10-16-3: PLACEMENT OF NUMBERS ON CERTAIN BUILDINGS:
Each commercial building and industrial building that has two (2) or more
businesses in that building with separate street addresses, and each rental
residential building with more than three (3) rental residential units, shall
display on the outside of each entrance door, excluding doors on the front of
the building on which the address is displayed and truck loading dock doors,
that business' or unit's street number. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 17
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Short Title
10-17-2: Purpose
10-17-3: Definitions
10-17-4: Disclosure Declaration Required; Contents
10-17-5: Performance Guarantee
10-17-6: Public Report; Inspections; Delivery To Prospective Purchasers
10-17-7: Notice To Tenants; Rights Of Tenants To Purchase
10-17-8: Warranties
10-17-9: Association Bylaws
10-17-10: Resale By Original Purchaser
10-17-11: Unlawful Representations
10-17-12: Complaints; Penalties; Enforcement
10-17-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may hereafter be referred to as the CONDOMINIUM
CONVERSION REGULATIONS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
10-17-2: PURPOSE:
The village board of trustees desires to encourage home ownership and promote a
wide range of housing options within the village. Conversions of apartment
buildings to owner occupied condominium buildings presents great opportunity to
increase owner occupied multi-family housing opportunities for current and
future village residents. While the village desires to facilitate conversion of
rental apartment buildings to owner occupied condominium buildings, the village
wants to ensure that such conversions are done in a fair and equitable manner
to protect existing apartment residents. The village also seeks to ensure that
such conversions are done so in strict conformity with current village codes,
including, without limitation, building, life safety, and zoning codes. (Ord.
2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
10-17-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AGENT: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation
or any other entity or combination of entities who represents or acts for or on
behalf of a developer in selling or offering to sell any condominium unit.
ASSOCIATION: The co-owners acting as a group in accordance with the bylaws and
the declaration.
BLANKET ENCUMBRANCE: A trust, deed, mortgage, judgment, or other lien or
encumbrance including an option or contract to sell or a trust agreement
affecting a condominium including any lien or other encumbrance arising as a
result of the imposition of any tax assessment by a public authority.
BOARD OF MANAGERS: The body designated to act on behalf of the unit owners'
association provided and referred to in the Illinois condominium property act.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building official of the village.
CERTIFICATE OF CODE COMPLIANCE: A written statement, issued by the village, as
evidence of a condominium project's compliance with the applicable codes of the
village.
CHILDREN: Includes a natural child, a stepchild, adopted child or a foster
child, living on the tenant's premises, who is less than eighteen (18) years of
age and dependent upon the tenant for support and maintenance.
CLOSING OF THE SALE: The operation of transferring ownership of a condominium
to the prospective purchaser from the developer through a deed of conveyance.
CODE INSPECTION REPORT: A written report issued by the village as evidence that
all units and common elements in a condominium project have been inspected for
compliance with all applicable code standards of the village.
COMMON ELEMENTS: Those elements within a condominium building or on a property
with a condominium building that are undedicated and either under the common
ownership of the individual condominium unit owners or by the association.
Common elements are subdivided into the following categories:
   A.   General Common Elements: All common areas and facilities within a
condominium building or upon the property of a condominium building, including,
without limitation, hallways, public area furnishings, driveways, undedicated
sidewalks, undedicated internal circulation streets, undedicated landscaping
elements, and undedicated public utilities.
   B.   Limited Common Elements: Those common areas and facilities to be
reserved for the use of a certain number of condominium units, including,
without limitation, special corridors, stairways and elevators, sanitary
services common to the units of a particular floor, and the like.
COMMON EXPENSES: The proposed or actual expenses affecting the property,
including reserves, if any, lawfully assessed by the board of managers of the
unit owners' association.
CONDOMINIUM: Property which is subject to the Illinois condominium property
act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 605/1 et seq., as amended from time to
time, and to this chapter, as amended from time to time, portions of which are
designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for
common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. A condominium
includes, without limitation:
   A.   Land on which the building stands in fee simple or leased; provided,
that the leasehold interest of each unit is separable from the leasehold
interests of the other units;
   B.   Foundations, main walls, roofs, halls, columns, girders, beams,
supports, corridors, fire escapes, lobbies, stairways, and entrance and exit or
communication ways;
   C.   Basements, flat roofs, yards, and gardens except as otherwise provided
or stipulated;
   D.   Premises for lodging of janitors or persons in charge of the building,
except as otherwise provided or stipulated;
   E.   Compartments or installations of central services such as power, light,
gas, cold or hot water, heating, central air conditioning or central
refrigeration, swimming pools, reservoirs, water tanks and pumps, and the like;
   F.   Elevators, garbage and trash incinerators and, in general, all devices
or installations existing for common use; and
   G.   Other elements of the building related to its common use or necessary
to its existence, upkeep, and safety.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A plan by a developer to sell residential condominium
units in a building, whether through conversion to condominium status or
construction of new buildings with condominium ownership.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT: A three-dimensional area identified as such in the
declaration and on the condominium plat, and including all improvements
contained within the area except those excluded in the declaration. A
condominium unit may include two (2) or more noncontiguous condominium units.
CONVERSION: The offering for sale by a developer or developer's agent of
condominium units that were previously rental units.
DEVELOPER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture or
corporation or any other entity or combination of entities or any successors
thereto who undertake to develop a condominium project either by conversion to
condominium status or construction of new buildings.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more major life activities; or a record or history of such an impairment; or
being perceived or regarded as having such an impairment.
OFFERING: Any inducement, solicitation, advertisement, publication or
announcement to the general public to encourage a person to acquire a
condominium unit in a condominium project.
PERSON: A natural individual, corporation, trustee, or other legal entity, or
any combination thereof.
PLAT OF CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION: The plat of a duly licensed surveyor
establishing the condominium units, accessory units, and common elements.
PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER: A person who visits the condominium project site for the
purposes of inspection for possible purchase or who requests the property
report.
SITE: Any land area on which a part of the condominium is located.
UNIT OWNER: A person or persons that own(s) a condominium unit in the
condominium project. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
10-17-4: DISCLOSURE DECLARATION REQUIRED; CONTENTS:
   A.   Presale Requirements: Not less than thirty (30) business days prior to
offering for sale any condominium units in a condominium project, a developer
shall: 1) prepare a disclosure declaration, certified by affidavit that all
disclosures are true; 2) file an original certified disclosure declaration with
the building official; and 3) deliver a copy of the disclosure declaration
filed with the building official to all tenants in a conversion condominium.
   B.   Posting Of Declaration: A copy of the disclosure declaration shall be
prominently posted in a public area of the developer's sales office, as well as
maintained on file for public inspection during normal business hours in the
sales office of the developer.
   C.   Required Contents: The disclosure declaration shall, at a minimum,
contain the following information about the condominium project:
      1.   A statement indicating the name, address, and business telephone
number of the developer and owner, including, but not limited to, all partners
of a partnership, all officers and directors of a corporation, all beneficial
owners, or all beneficiaries of a trust, as well as the following:
         a.   All persons with a financial interest in the offering except
stockholders in corporations subject to the registration requirements of the
federal securities law; and
         b.   All professionals or professional firms involved in the
condominium development, including, without limitation, architects,
contractors, attorneys, engineers, and accountants.
      2.   Site plan showing size and dimensions of the condominium project,
together with all improvements, including the following information:
         a.   Description of the condominium units offered and the nature and
extent of individual ownership in such condominium unit;
         b.   Extent of ownership of all common elements;
         c.   Ownership of all property and facilities on the site which are
not part of the condominium, including any dedicated elements;
         d.   Description and location of all existing and proposed facilities,
including, without limitation, public utilities, stormwater management
facilities, recreational facilities, parking facilities, and roads on and
contiguous to the condominium property;
         e.   Architectural, engineering, and site plans, as well as other
documents as required by the building official, shall be incorporated by
reference, providing information on the location, scope of maintenance
requirements, and completed repairs prior to sale of individual condominium
units of all condominium facilities; and
         f.   Location, ownership rights, and availability to unit owners and
condominium visitors of off street parking facilities. If the parking
facilities are not a common element or are not otherwise deeded as part of
individual condominium units, the following statement in bold lettering in a
conspicuous caption is required:
THE PARKING FACILITIES ARE NOT OWNED BY THE ASSOCIATION OR UNIT OWNERS, AND
UNIT OWNERS MAY BE DEPRIVED USE OF SAME.
      3.   Estimated start and completion dates for the developer's
construction, renovation, or conversion work, as well as the amount of
penalties that may be imposed upon the developer by the village for applicable
code violations or failure to prosecute and complete such work in a timely
manner.
      4.   Permitted uses for individual condominium units by the declaration,
bylaws of the association, and applicable zoning provisions.
      5.   Statement of title, listing all restrictions of record and the
condition of title.
      6.   Statement of all financial aspects of the condominium project,
including, without limitation:
         a.   Name of construction mortgagor or the interim mortgagor;
         b.   Name of institution offering long term mortgage financing for the
condominium units, if available, and terms and conditions of such mortgages;
         c.   Nature and extent of any protection of purchasers' deposits in
escrow accounts;
         d.   Statement of developer's financial ability to complete
construction, renovation, or conversion of proposed condominium units as well
as common elements and other facilities, including projected costs and methods
of payment, within a timely manner or as may be required by the building
official; and
         e.   Nature and extent of any protection to prospective purchasers if
developer defaults on its blanket encumbrance.
      7.   Statement of any pending litigation which would affect the
developer's ability to convey clear title to individual condominium unit
purchasers or common elements to the association.
      8.   Sales documents and literature, including, without limitation:
         a.   Purchase contract;
         b.   Forms of warranty deed or other instrument of conveyance;
         c.   Sample deed of trust, mortgage and promissory note;
         d.   Statement of sales prices, terms and options;
         e.   Sales brochure and floor plans;
         f.   Name, address, and business telephone number for selling agent;
         g.   Terms and conditions of sale, including required earnest money
deposit, estimated itemized closing and settlement costs, taxes and expected
special assessments levied either by the association or a governmental entity;
and
         h.   Estimated monthly payments to be itemized as to principal,
interest, taxes, condominium fee and utilities for a period of one year from
the expected date of settlement.
      9.   Required legal documents binding or to be binding upon the
condominium (draft documents are acceptable until final version is available),
including, without limitation:
         a.   Declaration or master deed;
         b.   Articles of incorporation or charter of the association;
         c.   Bylaws and regulations of the association;
         d.   Leases of real or personal property applicable to the
condominium;
         e.   Schedules of ownership interest in the common elements;
         f.   Coverage and amounts of condominium insurance policies; and
         g.   Management contract, employment contract, or any other contract
affecting the use, maintenance or access to all or any part of the condominium.
      10.   Statement of management and expected operation of the condominium
project, including, without limitation:
         a.   Name, address, designated agent, and business telephone number of
management agent, if any, and the services the agent will perform;
         b.   Statement disclosing that the developer may not enter into any
exclusive contract whatsoever for management or services of a condominium
project or individual condominium units that would exceed one year after the
date that an association begins governing a condominium project;
         c.   Term of any management contract and charges and circumstances, if
any, under which the charges may be increased;
         d.   Conditions, if any, under which the contract may be canceled or
terminated; and
         e.   Statement disclosing any relationship between the developer and
the management firm and their respective corporate officers and controlling
interests.
      11.   Estimated one year operating budget for the condominium project,
from the expected date that control of the condominium project would pass to
the association, including monthly payments to be prorated to each condominium
unit. In particular, the operating budget shall include, without limitation,
all: a) operational costs; b) management costs; c) fixed costs; and d) reserve
costs. If no reserve is to be provided, the following capitalized statement
under a conspicuous caption entitled:
         NO RESERVE FUND HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED
         THE DEVELOPER HAS NOT PROVIDED A RESERVE FUND FOR CERTAIN POSSIBLE
FUTURE COSTS OF THE CONDOMINIUM. ACCORDINGLY, IT MAY BE NECESSARY TO PROVIDE
FOR A SPECIAL ASSESSMENT TO ALL CONDOMINIUM UNIT OWNERS TO PAY FOR SUCH COSTS
SHOULD THEY OCCUR.
The developer will be held financially responsible for any intentional
misrepresentations in his budget analysis.
      12.   Method and timing of transfer of control over the condominium
project to the association; the association's relationship with the developer,
and the nature and extent of any interest retained by the developer in the
condominium project. The transfer of control to the association shall take
place within sixty (60) days from the date of issuance of the public report by
the duly constituted authorities.
      13.   Alternative provisions if an insufficient number of units is sold
to cover the proposed operating budget.
      14.   In the case of a conversion, a report from an Illinois licensed
engineer stating the condition and rated life and expected useful life of the
roof, foundation, external and supporting walls, mechanical, electrical,
plumbing and structural elements and all other common facilities, together with
an estimate at net present value of repair and replacement costs, which costs
shall be detailed by apportionment among the individual condominium units based
upon each unit's percentage ownership in the above listed structural and
service elements.
      15.   Statement of all warranties and disclaimers being made to the
purchaser.
   D.   Prospective Purchasers; Purchase Contracts:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the developer, after filing the disclosure
declaration with the building official, to materially change the terms of the
property report without first notifying the building official in writing of
such intended change and substantially notifying all purchasers and prospective
purchasers of such change.
      2.   After execution of a purchase contract for a condominium unit, and
prior to the closing of the sale, the developer must deliver to the buyer a
copy of any amendments, supplements, or modifications to the disclosure
declaration.
      3.   The prospective purchaser may rescind, in writing, the purchase
contract within five (5) days after receiving any amendments, supplements, or
modifications to the disclosure declaration without any liability, and shall
immediately be entitled to the return of any deposit.
      4.   All purchase contracts shall provide the following clause:
         Seller hereby grants to purchaser a period of seven days within which
to review the condominium documents made available to the purchaser pursuant to
the village of Berkeley's Condominium Conversion Regulations Ordinance.
         Notwithstanding any other provision of this agreement, if the
purchaser is not satisfied with said condominium documents, the purchaser may,
at his election, by written notice to the seller at any time prior to midnight
local time on the seventh day following the date the contract is signed by the
purchaser, terminate this agreement, and the purchaser's deposit shall be
refunded and the parties hereby shall have no further rights or liabilities
under the agreement.
The clause must be located either immediately above the purchaser's signature
or under a conspicuous caption entitled "Purchaser's Right To Cancel".
      5.   The rights of purchasers under this chapter may not be waived in the
purchaser contract, and any attempted waiver shall be automatically void and
without effect.
      6.   Every purchase contract shall contain a provision requiring that
rental arrangements will be afforded the prospective purchaser for a definite
period of time in the eventuality that the condominium project does not succeed
in anticipated sales.
      7.   Every purchase contract shall provide that in the eventuality the
condominium project is not consummated within a reasonable period of time, the
prospective purchaser or purchasers will be afforded rental arrangements for a
reasonable period of time, and that a specific portion of the rental payment
will be applied to the condominium unit purchase price as settlement. (Ord.
2005-64, 11-15-2005)
10-17-5: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
   A.   Prior to the issuance of any permit for any work on a condominium
project, the developer shall obtain and submit a performance guarantee for the
construction and installation of all public and private improvements, and the
estimated amount of total deposits that the developer plans to take for each
condominium unit in a condominium project, to the village engineer for approval
and acceptance in accordance with this section.
   B.   The developer shall submit a guarantee for the following improvements,
as deemed necessary by the village engineer:
      1.   Permanent subdivision monuments and lot corner markers.
      2.   Transportation system improvements, including:
         a.   Public and private streets, and all related frontage and
intersection improvements.
         b.   Streetlights.
         c.   Parkway tree plantings.
         d.   Street signs, signals and apparatus.
         e.   Public and private sidewalks, trails and bike paths.
         f.   Other traffic related improvements contemplated as part of the
subdivision or development.
         g.   Environmental protection and site preparation measures,
including:
            (1)   Grading and related site preparation work;
            (2)   Erosion and sediment controls during the various phases of
site development (including site and lot grading, construction entrances,
diversion dikes, silt fences, sediment traps, seeding and site stabilization);
and
            (3)   Other special environmental protection measures which are a
component of the final engineering plans.
         h.   Public utility systems, including:
            (1)   Public and private storm sewer systems (pipes, inlets,
manholes, swales, detention ponds, and all related structures and apparatus);
            (2)   Public water system (pipes, valves, fire hydrants and related
system improvements); and
            (3)   Sanitary sewer system (pipes, manholes, lift stations and
related system improvements).
         i.   Common facilities which are contemplated as part of the
condominium project specified in the final engineering plans.
         j.   Other public and private improvements specified in the final
engineering plans.
   C.   The developer shall submit to the village engineer estimates for the
cost of construction (or actual executed construction contracts) for public and
private improvements contemplated in the final engineering plan, as well as the
total estimated amount of deposits that the developer intends to take from the
contract purchasers of all condominium units in the condominium project. The
total estimated deposits shall be based upon the required deposit amount the
developer establishes in the disclosure declaration, pursuant to subsection 10-
17-4C8g of this chapter. The village engineer shall review such estimates or
construction contracts and, if acceptable, approve the amount of the
performance guarantee. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be based
upon:
      1.   One hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the total estimate of
construction costs, deposits, and inspection fees for all guaranteed
improvements; or
      2.   One hundred ten percent (110%) of the total construction costs as
indicated in an approved and executed construction contract, plus estimated
deposits and inspection fees for all guaranteed improvements.
   D.   Performance guarantees shall be in a form approved by the village
engineer and shall specify the terms and conditions noted below:
      1.   The guarantee shall have an expiration date not less than three (3)
months beyond the date specified in the approved subdivision or development
agreement.
      2.   Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of such
guarantee, the village administrator shall be given written notice by means of
certified or registered mail, indicating that such guarantee is to expire. No
guarantee shall expire absent such notice.
      3.   Failure of the developer to install such guaranteed improvements
prior to the scheduled completion date, as specified in the approved site
development schedule, shall be considered a default by the developer and the
issuing institution.
      4.   The guarantee shall only be released or reduced by the issuing
institution upon written certification by the village engineer stating:
         a.   That said guarantee may be released or reduced in accordance with
this section; and
         b.   The amount of such discharge or reduction.
      5.   If, at any time, the village determines that the institution issuing
the guarantee is without adequate capital, assets, earnings and liquidity and
is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves, is insolvent,
is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is otherwise in danger of
being unable to honor such guarantee at any time during its term, or if the
village otherwise reasonably deems itself to be insecure, then the village
shall have the right to demand that the developer provide a replacement
guarantee from an institution satisfactory to the village. Such replacement
guarantee shall be deposited with the village not later than ten (10) days
following such demand.
      6.   If the developer fails or refuses to: a) complete the construction
of the public and private improvements; or b) reimburse a contract purchaser
for a deposit made on a terminated sale contract covered by the guarantee; or
c) to correct any defect or deficiency in such improvements upon request by the
village; or d) in any other manner fails or refuses to meet fully any of its
obligations under the guarantee or the applicable subdivision or development
agreement as required pursuant to section
11-3-14 of this code, then the village may, in its sole and absolute
discretion, retain all or any part of the guarantee. The village thereafter
shall have the right to exercise any other action it deems reasonable and
appropriate to mitigate the effects of such failure or refusal, and to
reimburse itself or a contract purchaser from the proceeds of the guarantee for
all of its costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative
expenses. If the funds remaining in the guarantee are insufficient to repay
fully the village or all aggrieved contract purchasers for all such costs and
expenses, and to maintain a cash reserve equal to the required guarantee during
the entire time of such costs and expenses, and to maintain a cash reserve
equal to the required guarantee during the entire time such guarantee should
have been maintained, then the developer shall, upon demand of the village
therefor, immediately deposit with the village such additional funds as the
village determines necessary.
   E.   Performance guarantees required under this section shall be in a form
approved by the village administrator. The following types of performance
guarantee are acceptable, provided they are consistent with the regulations
below:
      1.   Cash Escrow: A cash deposit may be used as a guarantee, provided the
total amount of the guarantee required is placed with the village administrator
and administered in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision or
development agreement.
      2.   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit And Cash; Surety Bond: An irrevocable
letter of credit or surety bond may be used as a guarantee, provided such
letter of credit or surety bond is issued by a financial institution approved
by the village administrator, the administration of such letter of credit or
surety bond conforms to the terms of the subdivision or development agreement,
and the letter of credit or surety bond is accompanied by a cash deposit in an
amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the total guarantee amount. The cash
deposit shall, at all times until released, as provided herein, be maintained
at not less than ten percent (10%) of the initial total guarantee amount. The
financial institution issuing the irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond
shall be:
         a.   Insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation or federal
savings and loan insurance corporation;
         b.   Chartered in the state of Illinois or have a registered agent in
Illinois;
         c.   Have adequate capital, assets, earnings and liquidity to ensure
the financial soundness of the issuing institution, as determined by the
village administrator; and
         d.   In the case of a surety bond, be licensed and authorized by the
Illinois department of insurance to sell and issue sureties in the state of
Illinois.
   F.   The developer may make a written request to the village engineer to
partially reduce the amount of the approved performance guarantee. The village
engineer shall be authorized to approve such partial reductions in the amount
of the performance guarantee, provided:
      1.   There shall be no more than three (3) partial reductions approved in
the amount of the performance guarantee during the life of the subdivision;
      2.   Partial reductions shall be authorized only following the acceptable
completion of the following improvements:
         a.   All underground storm drainage, sanitary sewer and water supply
systems have been properly installed and all erosion and sediment controls are
operational;
         b.   All curb, gutter, sidewalk and base course paving for public and
private streets have been properly constructed; and
         c.   All lots have been graded and all storm detention facilities are
operational;
      3.   The inspection reports for the subdivision evidence acceptable
completion of the above;
      4.   The amount of such partial reduction shall not exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the estimated cost to construct such improvements;
      5.   In no event shall the amount of the performance guarantee be reduced
to a level which, in the sole and absolute opinion of the village engineer,
would not allow the village to complete the installation of public and private
improvements associated with the subdivision; and (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
      6.   In no event shall any portion of the cash deposit be reduced prior
to final release of the performance guarantee. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd.
2016 Code)
   G.   Acceptance of any dedicated public improvements in any condominium
project shall be as set forth in section
11-3-14 of this code. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
10-17-6: PUBLIC REPORT; INSPECTIONS; DELIVERY TO PROSPECTIVE PURCHASERS:
   A.   Submission Of Disclosure Declaration; Issuance Of Public Report:
      1.   A copy of the disclosure declaration, and any amendments and
supplements thereto, shall be promptly filed by the developer with the building
official upon its completion and shall be accompanied by a fee as established
in the annual fee schedule. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Within ninety (90) business days after receipt of a complete
disclosure declaration, the building official shall:
         a.   Determine whether the submitted disclosure declaration complies
with the requirements of section
10-17-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
         b.   Issue a public report of his findings which shall contain all
material facts reasonably available from the disclosure declaration and
structural inspections. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
         c.   Examine, or cause to be examined, whether the developer can: 1)
convey or cause to be conveyed the units offered for disposition if the
purchaser complies with the terms of the offer; and 2) provide reasonable
assurance that all proposed improvements will be completed as represented.
(Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
      3.   If no public report is issued within ninety (90) days, the public
report will be deemed to have been issued and the developer may proceed. (Ord.
2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Structural Inspections:
      1.   Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a complete disclosure
declaration, the building official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, the
entire structure to determine compliance with all applicable codes of the
village and shall notify the developer in writing of all violations and
necessary corrective action.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days prior to the closing of any sale of any
condominium unit, the developer shall correct any cited violations so as to
bring the structure into code compliance.
      3.   Upon satisfactory final inspection, the building official shall
issue a code inspection report and certificate of code compliance. In no event
will the village issue a certificate of occupancy prior to the building
official issuing his code inspection report and certificate of code compliance.
(Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
   C.   Delivery To Prospective Purchasers: Subject to the provisions contained
herein, a developer or agent shall not enter into a binding contract or
agreement for the sale of a condominium unit until: (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005;
amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   A copy of the disclosure declaration, any amendments and supplements
thereto, and a true copy of the public report, any amendments and supplements
thereto, have been given to the prospective purchaser;
      2.   Seven (7) days after the public report has been delivered to the
prospective purchaser; and
      3.   A receipt signed by the prospective purchaser has been received by
the developer or agent acknowledging that the prospective purchaser has
received and has had an opportunity to review the disclosure declaration and
the public report. The developer shall keep receipts on file for a period of
three (3) years. Receipts shall be subject to inspection by the chief building
official at any reasonable time.
   D.   Filing Of Disclosure Declaration And Public Report; Public Inspection:
The disclosure declaration, amendments and supplements thereto, and the public
report, amendments and supplements thereto, shall be kept on file with the
building official and made available for public inspection during normal
business hours. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
10-17-7: NOTICE TO TENANTS; RIGHTS OF TENANTS TO PURCHASE:
   A.   Notice Required: Not less than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to
conversion of the first condominium unit, the developer shall give each of the
tenants in possession of units subject to this chapter written notice of intent
to convert. The notice of intent must set forth the rights of tenants under
this chapter and must include this section as an attachment. Such notice shall
be hand delivered or sent by first class mail and certified mail, return
receipt requested.
   B.   Tenant Occupancy Termination: No tenant may be required to vacate his
or her rental unit upon less than one hundred eighty (180) days' written
notice, except by reason of nonpayment of rent, conduct that disturbs other
tenants' peaceful enjoyment of the premises, or other substantial violations of
the terms of the rental agreement. The terms of tenancy may not be altered
during the one hundred eighty (180) day period. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
   C.   Tenant's Right To Purchase:
      1.   During the one hundred eighty (180) day period following the
delivery to tenants of the notice of intent, the developer shall offer the
tenant his unit.
      2.   The tenant's offer to purchase shall be held open until tenant's
acceptance or refusal, but in no event longer than the expiration of the one
hundred eighty (180) day period. Inaction by the tenant after the expiration of
the one hundred eighty (180) days shall constitute a waiver of his right of
first purchase. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
      3.   Said offer shall be either a first time offer to the tenant at a set
price, or the right of first refusal to that tenant when a bona fide offer has
been submitted for that unit by a third party. Under either procedure, the
tenant shall have thirty (30) days to execute his own contract for the unit
from the date of receipt of the offer or right of first refusal.
      4.   If a tenant fails to execute a contract during the thirty (30) day
period set forth in subsection C3 of this section, the developer may not offer
to sell that unit during the following one hundred eighty (180) days at a price
or on terms more favorable to the prospective purchaser than the price or terms
offered to the tenant without first making the same offer to the tenant, who
shall have at least fifteen (15) days within which to accept the offer.
      5.   The provisions in this subsection do not apply to any unit in a
conversion condominium if the dimensions of the converted unit do not
substantially conform to the dimensions of the unit before conversion;
provided, however, where available, another unit similar to the preconversion
dwelling's dimensions must be offered to the affected tenant. (Ord. 2005-64,
11-15-2005)
10-17-8: WARRANTIES:
   A.   Purchase Contract Warranties: All purchase contracts for the first time
sale of any condominium unit covered under this chapter shall contain the
following express warranties by the developer:
      1.   Common Elements And Systems: "Common elements and systems" shall
refer to the roof, foundation, external and supporting walls and other
structural elements, the electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
other mechanical systems, and all other common facilities, including, but not
limited to, private sidewalks, recreational areas and common open space (but
excluding decorating and carpeting). The developer shall warrant the materials,
workmanship, operation, construction, or condition of all such items or
elements for two (2) years from the day of transfer of title of the first unit
so transferred. The developer shall provide his own warranty, whether or not
any manufacturer's warranty currently exists.
      2.   Individual Unit Mechanical Equipment: "Individual unit mechanical
equipment" shall refer to all appliances, and other mechanical equipment,
including heating, electrical and plumbing systems physically located within
the individually owned units. The developer shall warrant the materials,
workmanship, operation, construction, and condition of said items for two (2)
years from the date of title transfer of that individual unit.
      3.   Warranty Exclusions: The following are exempt from all of the above
warranties, provided the work was done in accordance with existing applicable
codes:
         a.   Damage caused by acts of unauthorized third parties, including
vandalism, negligence, improper maintenance, or improper operation by anyone
other than the developer or his employees, agents, or subcontractors. (Ord.
2005-64, 11-15-2005)
         b.   Acts of God or nature and accidents, including, but not limited
to, fire, explosion, smoke, water escape, windstorm, hail, lightning, flood and
earthquake. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
         c.   Normal wear and tear and normal deterioration.
         d.   Ordinary maintenance and repairs.
   B.   Repair And Replacement: The developer shall have the option to repair
or replace warrantied systems or elements, or to pay the cash value of such
repair or replacement; except, that where the developer fails, upon notice and
reasonable time as set forth below, to repair, replace, or pay for said item or
system, or to state in writing why he/she does not fall within the warranty,
the association or the unit owners may decide whether to repair or replace the
items. The developer shall not be required to honor his/her own warranty unless
or until the unit owner or association, as the case may be, shall have first
sought to enforce existing manufacturer's warranties.
   C.   Notification Of Repair Or Replacement: Following timely notification
during the period of the warranty by a unit owner or the association, the
developer shall, within thirty (30) days of receiving notice, make any required
repairs or replacements. If the developer fails to comply with the warranty
provisions, the association may notify the developer in writing of its
intention to correct the condition at the developer's expense. If the developer
fails to comply within fourteen (14) days after being notified by the
association, or as promptly as conditions require in case of emergency, the
association may have the work done and shall have recourse to the escrow or
other security provided pursuant to subsection D of this section.
   D.   Acceptable Securities: To assure compliance with the warranties set
forth in this section, the developer shall set up escrows or other appropriate
security acceptable to the village pursuant to regulations promulgated under
this chapter, which shall provide for said escrows or other security to revert
to sole control of the developer at the expiration of the different warranty
periods, unless outstanding claims exist against them. Escrows or other
appropriate security shall be in an amount constituting the total of one
percent (1%) of the sales price of each unit sold. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
10-17-9: ASSOCIATION BYLAWS:
   A.   The association bylaws shall include, without limitation, the following
information:
      1.   Legal right of the association to control the administration,
maintenance and repair of common elements; and to levy common charges upon such
owners to replace or alter portions of the condominium project;
      2.   Manner of election of the governing groups and details relating to
their number, terms, powers and duties, removal and the quorum required for
meetings;
      3.   Provisions for meetings of owners of condominium interests,
including the notices required for such meetings, and the rights and powers of
such owners;
      4.   Percentages of votes required by the owners or the association for
all actions;
      5.   Details concerning the operations and management of the condominium
by the association;
      6.   Statement on the method and timing of transfer of control over the
condominium project to the association, the association's relationship with the
developer, and the nature and extent of any interest retained by the developer;
      7.   Manner of collecting from the apartment owners their share of the
common expenses;
      8.   Designation and removal of personnel necessary for the maintenance,
repair and replacement of the common areas and facilities;
      9.   Method of adopting and of amending administrative rules and
regulations governing the details of the operation and use of the common areas
and facilities; and
      10.   Such restrictions on and requirements respecting the use and
maintenance of the apartments and the use of the common areas and facilities as
are designed to prevent unreasonable interference with the use of their
respective apartments and of the common areas and facilities by the several
apartment owners.
   B.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the
requirements for association bylaws in this section shall be the minimum
requirements for any condominium project in the village. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-
2005)
10-17-10: RESALE BY ORIGINAL PURCHASER:
   A.   Prohibition On Exclusive Broker Arrangements: There shall be no clause
in the purchase contract between the developer and the prospective purchaser of
a condominium unit that would create an exclusive sales agreement with a real
estate agent as to the subsequent sale of the condominium unit. Any condominium
owner shall have the right to decide what agent, if any, shall be used in the
subsequent sale of a condominium unit. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
   B.   Subsequent Purchaser Information: An owner, other than a developer,
offering for sale his or her own unit shall provide to the purchaser,
concurrently with execution of any contract for sale, a copy of the association
bylaws and the following information: (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016
Code)
      1.   A statement setting forth: a) the amount of the monthly common
expense assessment; b) any unpaid common expense or special assessment
currently due and payable from the selling unit owner; c) the information on
the actual expenditures made for all repairs, maintenance, operation, or upkeep
of the building in which the unit is located within the last three (3) years as
found in the regular books of the association, and set forth tabularly with the
budget of the condominium. If the property has not been occupied as a
condominium for a period of three (3) years, the information shall be provided
for the maximum period the property has been occupied;
      2.   A statement of any future capital expenditures approved by the
association or the board of directors;
      3.   A statement of the amount of the reserves for capital expenditures
and of any portions of those reserves designated by the association for
specified projects;
      4.   The most recent regularly prepared balance sheet and income and
expense statement, if any, of the association;
      5.   The current operating budget of the association;
      6.   A statement of any judgments against the association and the status
of any pending suits to which the association is a party, of which it has
knowledge;
      7.   A statement describing any insurance coverage provided for the
benefit of unit owners;
      8.   A statement of whether the board of managers has knowledge of any
violations of all applicable housing and building codes or other applicable
codes with respect to the unit or any other portion of the condominium;
      9.   A copy of the bylaws and rules and regulations of the association.
   C.   Association Provided Information: The association, within ten (10) days
after a request by a unit owner, shall make a good faith effort to furnish a
certificate containing the accurate information necessary to enable the unit
owner to comply with this section. A unit owner delivering a certificate is not
liable to the purchaser for any erroneous information from the association;
provided, that the errors are unknown to the owner. A purchaser is not liable
for any unpaid assessment or fee greater than the amount set forth in the
certificate prepared by the association. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
10-17-11: UNLAWFUL REPRESENTATIONS:
   A.   Reliance On Required Documents: A disclosure declaration, and any
property report based thereon, shall not be deemed a finding by the village
that the disclosure declaration is true and accurate, or that the village has
in any way passed upon the merits or given approval to the condominium project.
   B.   Misrepresentations: It shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made to
a prospective purchaser any representation contrary to the foregoing. It shall
likewise be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made in a property
report to a prospective purchaser any statement or representation that is
knowingly false or misleading. It shall also be unlawful for anyone to make or
cause to be made to any prospective purchaser any representations which differ
from the statements in the property report or amendments to that report. (Ord.
2005-64, 11-15-2005)
10-17-12: COMPLAINTS; PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Complaints: Any person subjected to any unlawful practice as set forth
in this chapter may file a complaint in writing to the village administrator.
The village administrator is hereby authorized and directed to receive
complaints and conduct such investigations as he deems necessary pursuant to
the authority vested in that office.
   B.   Violations Procedure: Whenever it is determined by the village
administrator that there has been a violation of this chapter or any duly
adopted rule or regulation of the village, the village administrator is
authorized, at his/her discretion, to commence with one or more of the
following procedures:
      1.   Attempt to conciliate the matter by conference or otherwise and
secure a written conciliation agreement; or
      2.   Seek a written assurance of discontinuance which shall be signed by
the developer and the village administrator; or
      3.   Institute injunctive or other appropriate action or proceeding in
any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a restraining order, permanent or
temporary injunction or any other appropriate form of relief; or
      4.   Institute criminal proceedings. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
   C.   Penalty: Any person who wilfully violates any provision of this
chapter, or who wilfully makes an untrue or misleading statement of material
fact to be stated therein, or who wilfully fails to state any fact required to
be stated therein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016
Code)
   D.   Other Remedies: Nothing in this section shall prevent any person,
including the village, from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which
such person might otherwise be entitled or from filing an appropriate complaint
with a court of law or equity.
   E.   Contract Rescinded: If the developer fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter, the buyer may, at any time prior to the closing
of the sale, rescind, in writing, the purchase contract, without any liability
on the buyer's part and shall thereupon be entitled to the return of any
deposits made on account of the contract. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-15-2005)
CHAPTER 18
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
10-18-1: Title
10-18-2: Purpose And Scope
10-18-3: Definitions
10-18-4: Licensing Requirements
10-18-5: Fees; Lien Provisions
10-18-6: Property Maintenance Regulations
10-18-7: Responsibilities Of Owner And Manager
10-18-8: Access For Inspections
10-18-9: Violations
10-18-10: Notice Of Violation; License Suspension And Revocation
10-18-11: Crime Free Housing
10-18-12: Penalties
10-18-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the BERKELEY RENTAL RESIDENTIAL
HOUSING CODE. (2016 Code)
10-18-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter, through its property maintenance
standards, inspections and licensing, is to correct and prevent violations in
rental residential dwellings and protect and promote the public health, safety
and welfare of the residents and guests of rental residential dwelling units
including:
      1.   Protecting the public health and safety by obtaining compliance with
the property maintenance standards of the village.
      2.   Protecting the character and stability of residential areas.
      3.   Correcting and preventing housing conditions that adversely affect
or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health,
including the physical, mental and social well being, of persons occupying
rental residential dwelling units.
      4.   Preventing the overcrowding of dwellings by requiring compliance
with minimum space standards per occupant for each dwelling unit.
      5.   Facilitating the enforcement of property maintenance for the
maintenance of existing residential buildings and thus preventing slums and
blight.
   B.   Scope:
      1.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to the
construction, maintenance, use, and occupancy of all rental residential
property, where applicable, and shall apply uniformly to the alteration,
repair, equipment, use, occupancy, and maintenance of all existing rental
residential dwelling units irrespective of when or under what code or codes
such dwelling units were originally constructed or rehabilitated. It shall be
the duty of the village to enforce the provisions of this chapter as authorized
by this code and the property maintenance code of the village as adopted and
amended by the village.
      2.   a. This chapter shall not apply to the following structures:
            (1)   Hotels, motels, and other structures which rent rooms to
occupants which are primarily transient in nature.
            (2)   Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses licensed and
inspected by the village, state or federal government including, but not
limited to, nursing homes, retirement centers, rest homes, etc.
            (3)   Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses owned by
governmental agencies and public housing authorities.
         b.   Except as provided in section
10-18-11 of this chapter, this chapter is not intended to and does not affect
the rights and obligations of the parties to a lease, oral or written, of a
rental residential property. (2016 Code)
10-18-3: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms, when used in
this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
AGENT:      A person authorized to act for and under the direction of another person when
            dealing with third parties.
CODE        The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this
OFFICIAL:   chapter, or any duly authorized representative.
CRIME FREE  A seminar sponsored by the Berkeley or other police departments or other private
HOUSING     parties to provide information to landlords and their designated agents
SEMINAR:    regarding the landlord-tenant relationship and requirements of village codes,
            including the crime free housing lease provision.
MULTIPLE-   Rental residential property with more than two (2) rental residential dwelling
UNIT        units, which are not single- unit dwellings, in a building with all units in
BUILDING:   that building owned by the same owner.
            Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable
            interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the county or
OWNER:      village as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the
            property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the
            executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
            possession of real property by a court having jurisdiction.
            A person, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity
PROPERTY    designated in writing by the property owner to the code official to manage a
AGENT:      rental residential property, including the authority to receive notices or
            citations.
            Any felony violation for the following:
               1.   Homicide.
               2.   Kidnapping.
               3.   Possession of explosives or incendiary devices.
               4.   Unlawful use of a weapon or firearm.
               5.   Mob action.
               6.   Child pornography.
               7.   Controlled substance violation.
               8.   Felony production, sale, distribution or possession of cannabis.
               9.   Gang activity violations as described in the streetgang terrorism
            omnibus prevention act.
QUALIFYING     10.   Unlawful contact with a gang member.
OFFENSE:       11.   Violation of the methamphetamine control and community protection act.
               12.   Assault.
               13.   Battery.
               14.   Prostitution.
               15.   Soliciting or patronizing a prostitute.
               16.   Keeping a house of prostitution.
               17.   Sexual assault or sexual abuse.
               18.   Arson.
               19.   Criminal damage to property.
               20.   Theft.
               21.   Interference with a public/peace officer.
               22.   Trespass.
RENTAL
RESIDENTIAL A residential dwelling unit let or intended to be let for rent or lease. The
DWELLING    term does not include an owner occupied dwelling unit.
UNIT:
RENTAL
RESIDENTIAL The lot and rental residential dwelling units on that lot.
PROPERTY:
SINGLE-UNIT Rental residential property with only a single-family attached or detached
DWELLING:   rental residential dwelling unit as defined in the village zoning ordinance.
TENANT:     An occupant of a rental residential dwelling unit.
 
   B.   Words or phrases used in this chapter and not herein defined shall be
defined as provided by the property maintenance code and building code of the
village, as adopted and amended in this title. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 23-49, 10-
3-2023)
10-18-4: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any owner, person, firm, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity to operate, maintain, or offer to rent
within the village a rental residential dwelling unit, whether vacant or not,
without first obtaining a rental residential license for each multiple-unit
building or single- unit dwelling as provided in this chapter.
      2.   It is unlawful for a person to occupy a rental residential dwelling
unit, or for any owner or property agent to allow anyone to occupy a rental
residential dwelling unit, which is not within a licensed rental residential
building.
      3.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity to offer for rent or to occupy any vacant dwelling unit or
any dwelling unit that becomes vacant in a rental residential building for
which a license is under suspension.
   B.   Application For License:
      1.   No license shall be issued except upon written application filed
with the village. A complete application for a license shall be filed not less
than thirty (30) days prior to the issuance thereof. Said application shall be
signed by the legal titleholder of the rental residential property. Any person
seeking to renew a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall file a
completed application not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of
the currently valid license. Application forms may be obtained from the village
and shall contain such information as the code official may require including,
but not limited to:
         a.   The address of the rental residential property.
         b.   The number of dwelling units within the rental property.
         c.   Name, address and work and home telephone numbers of each owner.
When the owner is a land trust, the application shall include the name and
address of each person holding a beneficial interest and/or power of direction
therein.
         d.   If the owner is not a resident of the village, then either:
            (1)   Name, address, and work and home telephone numbers of any
person appointed as managing agent with authority to accept service or notice
of a violation. If the managing agent is other than a natural person, the above
information shall also be provided for that employee of the managing agent
specifically assigned to the rental residential property; or
            (2)   A statement by the owner that service by regular mail upon
the owner at the address stated in the application will be considered
sufficient service for all purposes.
         e.   Name, address and work and home telephone numbers of the janitor
(s) or engineer(s) in charge of the maintenance of the rental residential
property and its systems, including emergency repairs.
         f.   Name, address and work and home telephone numbers of any person
(s) (other than those listed pursuant to subsections B1c, B1d and B1e of this
section), if any, having authority to make any decision with respect to the
management and/or maintenance of the rental residential property. Attached to
the application shall be a statement of such person's authority to manage,
lease, and/or maintain the rental residential property.
         g.   The name, address, and telephone number of each company that
services any alarm systems in the rental residential building.
         h.   A copy of a plan evidencing what improvements, renovation(s),
and/or replacements are budgeted for the license year for a multiple-unit
building.
      2.   Every owner shall notify the code official of any change in the
above information within seven (7) days of any change.
   C.   Issuance Of License; Inspection:
      1.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a license for a rental
residential property, including the payment of all required fees, the code
official shall schedule an inspection. Pending the inspection and issuance or
denial of the license, the code official shall allow the continued occupancy of
a rental residential dwelling unit that was previously licensed.
      2.   Licensing inspections shall include the building exterior, common
areas, basement, and all rental residential dwelling units except as hereafter
required. The code official shall determine the order and inspection process.
The code official shall, prior to entering an occupied dwelling unit, require
the resident manager or owner to be present during the inspection. Unless
otherwise specified in a court order or warrant, the code official will not
inspect or search personal property of the tenant. The code official, while
performing the duties of office, will otherwise fully consider the privacy and
dignity of the tenant and will not enter or open closets, medicine cabinets, or
the other closed cabinets or lockers unless the code official has reasonable
grounds to believe that to do so would establish evidence of code violations.
      3.   When a licensing inspection of a rental residential property reveals
any violation of applicable codes, the code official shall give notice of the
compliance time frame as provided in section
10-18-10 of this chapter.
      4.   A licensing reinspection will be conducted at the end of the
compliance time frame. Upon completion of the licensing reinspection of the
rental residential property, a license shall be issued if the multiple-unit
building or single-unit dwelling meets the requirements of this code. If the
code official finds the requirements of applicable village codes have not been
met, a written notice of violation stating the defects shall be issued as
provided in section
10-18-10 of this chapter.
      5.   Subsequent inspections of a multiple-unit building or single-unit
dwelling required because of cited violations not being corrected at the time
of that inspection shall be subject to the reinspection fees set forth in the
annual fee schedule.
   D.   Terms Of Licenses:
      1.   The license for multiple-unit buildings shall be for a twelve (12)
month period.
      2.   The license for a single-unit dwelling shall be for a twenty four
(24) month period beginning from the first day of the month after the license
application is received.
   E.   Posting License: Rental residential buildings having more than two (2)
dwelling units shall post the license in the common area or on site office,
which shall have included the permitted occupancy limits for those units.
   F.   Nontransferability Of License; Purchase Of Existing Property: A license
for a rental residential property cannot be transferred to another rental
residential property or a succeeding owner. A purchaser of an existing licensed
rental residential building shall make application and obtain a new license in
compliance with this chapter prior to the issuance of the real estate transfer
tax stamp, except no additional license fee shall be assessed nor inspection
required until the renewal application at the beginning of the next license
year. (2016 Code)
10-18-5: FEES; LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Fees Established:
      1.   License Fees:
         a.   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a license
fee as established in the annual fee schedule.
         b.   The license fee shall be paid prior to the beginning of that
rental residential property's license year. If the license fee is not paid
before the beginning of the license year, the fee is delinquent, and the
delinquent license fee shall be increased by an additional amount as
established in the annual fee schedule if paid within thirty (30) days from the
beginning of the license year. If the delinquent license fee is not paid within
thirty (30) days of the beginning of the license year, then the delinquent
license fee, an administrative fee, and interest at six percent (6%) per annum
shall become a lien upon the property after notice as provided in subsection B
of this section.
      2.   Inspection Fees: No inspection fee other than the license fee
established in the annual fee schedule shall be charged for the first
inspection made upon application for issuance or renewal of a license or one
reinspection to determine if violations cited in the first inspection have been
corrected if all units are in compliance at the time of the second inspection.
If any rental residential dwelling unit fails at the second inspection, then a
reinspection fee shall be charged. For every failed second inspection and every
third or subsequent inspection required thereafter to determine if a violation
has been corrected, a reinspection fee as established in the annual fee
schedule shall be charged. If any second inspection fee is not paid within
thirty (30) days of the inspection or third or subsequent inspection fee not
paid prior to the inspection, then the inspection fee, an administrative fee,
and interest at six percent (6%) per annum shall become a lien upon the
property after notice as provided in subsection B of this section.
      3.   Inspection Cancellation Fees: An owner shall be permitted to
reschedule one appointment per building per license year if notice is given to
the village code official scheduled to conduct the inspection at least twenty
four (24) hours before that inspection. If the owner fails to attend a
scheduled inspection or cancels a scheduled inspection with less than twenty
four (24) hours' notice, a rescheduling fee as established in the annual fee
schedule shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license.
   B.   Notice Of Delinquent Payments: Notice shall be given to the owner of
the property or taxpayer of record by personal service or certified mail
advising of the delinquent fees and penalties, and that if not paid within
thirty (30) days, they shall become a lien upon the property.
   C.   Lien Provisions: If the delinquent fees and penalties are not paid,
that amount shall become a lien on the property upon the filing of a notice of
lien in the office of the county recorder. Such lien shall not be valid as to
any purchaser whose rights in and to such property have arisen prior to the
filing of such notice of lien. (2016 Code)
10-18-6: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Smoke And Carbon Monoxide Detection Systems: Each rental residential
dwelling shall be equipped with smoke and carbon monoxide detection systems
which meet the regulations contained in this code.
   B.   Emergency Lighting: Each rental residential dwelling shall be equipped
with an emergency lighting system which meets the regulations contained in this
code.
   C.   Exit Signs: Each multiple-unit dwelling shall be equipped with exit
signs that meet the regulations contained in this code.
   D.   Perimeter Curbs:
      1.   All existing off street parking facilities for multiple- unit
buildings containing three (3) or more parking spaces shall be enclosed by a
barrier along the perimeter of the parking facility at the end of each parking
space where there is an adjacent residential property which is at a lower
elevation.
      2.   The barriers shall be a six inch (6") wide by eighteen inch (18")
high concrete barrier curb or an equivalent in design and function as approved
by the village engineer.
   E.   Illumination Standards:
      1.   All off street parking areas for multiple-unit buildings shall
illuminate those parking facilities from sunset to sunrise. The level of
illumination at any point in the parking facility shall not be less than one
foot-candle measured at the pavement.
      2.   On the exterior of each multiple-unit building at each means of
egress, there shall be a light illuminated from sundown to sunrise providing
not less than one foot-candle of light measured at the door handle.
   F.   Extermination Of Insect Infestations: If, upon inspection, there is an
insect infestation in more than one dwelling unit of a multiple-unit building,
the owner shall be required to contract with a licensed extermination company
to exterminate the common area and all infested units not less than on a
monthly basis for the remainder of the license year.
   G.   Required Receptacles:
      1.   Every habitable space in a rental residential dwelling shall contain
at least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets.
      2.   Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded type
receptacle or a GFCI (ground fault circuit interrupter) protected outlet when
located within six feet (6') of a water source.
      3.   Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle equipped with a
ground fault circuit interrupter, and all bathroom receptacles must be GFCI
protected outlets when located within six feet (6') of a water source.
      4.   Kitchen countertop receptacles must be GFCI protected outlets, and
all kitchen island and peninsula receptacles must be GFCI protected outlets
when located within six feet (6') of a water source.
      5.   All receptacle outlets shall have the appropriate faceplate cover
for the location.
      6.   Property owners will have one year from the effective date hereof to
be in compliance. (2016 Code)
10-18-7: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER AND MANAGER:
   A.   Managing Agent For Multiple-Unit Building: In the event that the owner
of a multiple-unit building appoints a managing agent, that managing agent
shall:
      1.   Have an office at the multiple-unit building with regular business
hours; or
      2.   Live at the multiple-unit building and have regular business hours
thereat; or
      3.   Have an office within the corporate limits of the village with
regular business hours; and
      4.   Be authorized to receive notices and process on behalf of the owner.
   B.   Record Of Tenants: The owner of a rental residential property shall
maintain a record for each property with the full legal names and dates of
birth of every tenant in each dwelling unit. The owner of a rental residential
property shall make available to the code official, upon request, the occupant
records required to be maintained under this section.
   C.   Emergency Contact Person: The owner or property agent of a rental
residential property shall provide each tenant with the name and telephone
number of a responsible person who, in emergency situations, will be available
on a twenty four (24) hour basis and who has the authority to make repairs as
needed. The owner shall also cause said information to be posted and maintained
within the main entryway of every rental residential structure.
   D.   Notice Of Maximum Occupancy: The owner of a rental residential property
shall inform each tenant in writing, prior to occupancy, of the maximum number
of persons allowable by the occupancy standards of the village property
maintenance code as determined by the code official or the lease, whichever is
less.
   E.   Educational Programs: All owners and managers are encouraged to attend
landlord training programs which include such issues as property maintenance,
applicant screening, rental agreements, ongoing management, and community
building.
   F.   Tenant Applications: All owners and managers are required to have all
prospective tenants complete a written application that encourages self-
screening and uncovers past behavior to determine if the applicant meets the
written tenant criteria.
   G.   Leases: All owners and managers are required to lease rental
residential dwelling units only pursuant to a written lease containing their
rules and regulations. (2016 Code)
10-18-8: ACCESS FOR INSPECTIONS:
If any owner, property agent, occupant or other person in control of a rental
residential property or a dwelling unit contained therein fails or refuses to
consent to free access and entry to the property or dwelling unit under his
control for any inspection pursuant to this chapter, the code official or his
designee shall apply to the circuit court for an administrative search warrant
or other appropriate court order authorizing such inspections. (2016 Code)
10-18-9: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Owner Violations: The following shall constitute violations of this
chapter:
      1.   Failure of the owner of a rental residential building to license
such building with the code official.
      2.   Failure of the owner of a rental residential building to vacate all
tenants from said building within forty five (45) days after the license has
been revoked.
      3.   Failure of the owner of the rental property to maintain the
structure and premises in compliance with applicable building, property
maintenance and zoning ordinances in this code.
   B.   Other Violations: The following shall constitute violations of this
chapter:
      1.   Failure of the occupants of the rental residential property to
vacate such property within forty five (45) days after receiving notice from
the code official that such property is not properly licensed or that the
license has been revoked.
      2.   Any person other than an inspector from the village who removes or
defaces any notices which have been posted pursuant to this chapter without the
approval of the code official shall be liable for the penalties provided by
this chapter.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage
or possess alcoholic liquor except in the original container with the seal
unbroken on the common area of a multiple-unit building, including all yards
outside of a rental residential dwelling, except in areas designated by the
owner of the rental residential dwelling, having advised the police department
in writing. This subsection shall not be effective until the owner of the
rental residential building posts signs providing reasonable notice hereof to
persons entering the property. (2016 Code)
10-18-10: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   When a licensing or other inspection of a licensed rental residential
property reveals any violations of applicable codes, a compliance time frame
will be set by the code official. In establishing a compliance time frame, the
code official shall determine the reasonable minimal time necessary to correct
the violations based upon the number and severity of the violations. The code
official shall serve or send notice to the property owner or the listed
property agent by regular U.S. mail at the last address provided on the most
recent license application. Said notice shall include the following:
      1.   Description of the property sufficient for identification;
      2.   A statement listing the violations of applicable codes;
      3.   A statement of the date upon which a reinspection will occur; and
      4.   An explanation that if, upon completion of the reinspection, the
requirements of applicable village codes have not been met, the license for the
rental residential property will be denied or suspended and/or a complaint
filed against the owner in the circuit court.
   B.   A reinspection will be conducted at the end of the compliance time
frame.
      1.   If any violation is not corrected, the code official may issue a
written notice extending the time to correct the violations if there has been a
good faith effort to correct the violations and the failure to do so was due to
factors beyond the control of the owner.
      2.   If the code official finds that the requirements of applicable
village codes have not been met upon the completion of such reinspection, the
license for the rental residential property shall be suspended.
      3.   A license may also be suspended when any information provided in the
license application is determined by the code official to be false or when the
licensee is convicted by a court of a violation of any property maintenance
regulations.
      4.   In the alternative, the code official may request the village
attorney to file a complaint against the owner in the circuit court.
   C.   When a license is suspended, the code official shall personally serve
or send notice to the property or the listed property agent at the last address
provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall include the
following:
      1.   Description of the property sufficient for identification.
      2.   A statement of the reasons for suspension.
      3.   An explanation of the property owner's right to reinspection prior
to revocation.
If the property owner changes his address or changes property agents and fails
to notify the code official, such notice shall be sufficient if sent by
certified mail to the owner or his property agent's last address provided on
the last license application.
   D.   A property owner whose license has been suspended may request a
reinspection prior to revocation. If, upon reinspection, the code official
finds that the licensed property in connection with which the notice was issued
is now in compliance with this chapter, including the payment of all
outstanding fees, the code official may reinstate the license. The request for
a reinspection shall not stay the revocation of the license unless the code
official grants such request pursuant to a showing of good cause by the
property owner.
   E.   A license may also be revoked when, in the opinion of the code
official, emergency conditions exist in a rental residential property that
require the immediate vacating of a structure as specified in the village's
property maintenance code.
   F.   A license which has been properly revoked as herein provided shall not
be reinstated. The property owner may, however, obtain a new license after all
violations have been corrected and by following the procedures for obtaining a
new license as set forth in this chapter.
   G.   Whenever a license is revoked, the code official shall send notice to
the property owner or the listed property agent at the last address provided on
the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by registered
mail, return receipt requested. The code official shall also notify all tenants
of the rental residential property by posting a notice on all entrances to the
rental residential structure. The notice to the tenants shall include the
following:
      1.   You are hereby notified that the license for this structure has been
revoked pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 18 of the Berkeley Village Code.
      2.   You must vacate this structure within 45 days of the date of this
notice.
      3.   If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be in violation of
the Berkeley Village Code and subject to penalties of fines with a minimum of
$100.00 and a maximum of $1,000.00 for each day you are in violation.
   H.   Whenever an owner or property agent of a rental property fails to
license said property, the code official shall notify all tenants of the rental
property by posting a notice on all entrances to the rental property indicating
the following:
      1.   You are hereby notified that the owner or agent of this rental
structure has failed to license this rental property in violation of the
Berkeley Village Code.
      2.   You must vacate this structure within 45 days of this notice.
      3.   If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be subject to the
penalties and fines with a minimum of $100.00 and a maximum of $1,000.00 for
each day you are in violation.
(2016 Code)
10-18-11: CRIME FREE HOUSING:
   A.   Any owner of property, which property is being rented out as a rental
residential dwelling unit, must attend and complete a village crime free multi-
housing program seminar ("seminar"). The owner, agent or designee of a new
rental unit must attend the seminar prior to obtaining or being issued a new
village rental residential license.
   B.   A property manager shall be considered an agent of the owner. If a new
property manager is hired, notification of the change will be made to the code
official within seven (7) days of the change and the new property manager shall
have three (3) months after hiring to attend the seminar.
   C.   Any owner, agent or designee shall attend the seminar once every four
(4) years and be compliant with this chapter prior to the expiration of a
license for that particular year.
   D.   The crime free multi-housing coordinator, as designated by the chief of
police, shall provide the village clerk's office and/or finance department with
a list of owners, agents and/or designees who have attended the seminar, with
verification that the owner, agent or designee has complied with this section
and is eligible to obtain, maintain or renew the operating license.
   E.   Any owner, agent or designee of residential rental property shall
utilize a crime free lease addendum or have a clause in the lease similar to a
crime free lease addendum for any leases executed. A copy of the crime free
lease addendum shall be provided to the crime free multi-housing coordinator
prior to expiration of the rental permit for renewals and within sixty (60)
days of initial application for new applicants. At the seminar, the crime free
multi-housing coordinator shall provide, at no cost, samples of the crime free
lease addendum and shall review any clauses within actual leases with the
village's legal department to determine if the clause is similar to the crime
free lease addendum. The crime free housing addendum or equivalent lease clause
must make a conviction for a qualifying offense by a tenant or member of the
household a lease violation, subject to the limitations in this section
including, without limitation, in subsections H, I, and J below. The landlord
shall have authority under the crime free lease addendum or equivalent lease
clause to initiate an eviction proceeding as specified in the Illinois Compiled
Statutes forcible entry and detainer statutes, when appropriate in the
landlord's discretion, upon a conviction for a qualifying offense by a tenant
or member of the household.
   F.   It is hereby declared an aggravated nuisance for any property owner,
agent, or manager to allow or permit nuisance activities constituting either a
nuisance property or aggravated nuisance property as defined under section
5-2A-1 of this code. The owner, agent, or manager shall be subject to all the
applicable provisions and penalties of Article 5-2A of this code.
   G.   The village may seek to enforce this section by seeking any and all
remedies under this chapter, including the imposition of fines. In addition,
the village administrator may suspend and/or recommend revocation of any
license issued hereunder if it appears to his/her satisfaction from the report
of any village officer or village employee or any other available information
that the licensee is violating and/or is in violation of the provisions set
forth in Article 5-2A of this code. Any suspension or revocation of a license
shall be pursuant to the provisions set forth in title 4, chapter 1 of this
code and the penalties as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   H.   A tenant who is an innocent party or the victim of a crime, including
but not limited to actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence
will not be in violation of this Section. Nothing in this Section prohibits the
eviction of the perpetrator of the domestic violence, sexual violence, or other
criminal activity. A tenant is encouraged to report crimes without fear of
their status as a tenant.
   I.   A tenant will not be in violation of this Section, and a nuisance
property or aggravated nuisance property cannot be established in any way,
based on:
      1.   Contact made to the police or seeking other emergency services, if
(i) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic
violence or sexual violence; (ii) the intervention or emergency assistance was
needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or (iii)
the contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with
a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's
disability;
      2.   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence
or sexual violence against the tenant, household member, or guest occurring in
the rental unit or on the premises; or
      3.   Criminal activity or a local ordinance violation occurring in the
rental unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence
or sexual violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household,
guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest or other
party.
   J.   A violation of this Section, a crime free lease addendum, or an
equivalent lease clause required herein may constitute good cause for immediate
termination of the lease; provided, however, that a violation shall not be good
cause to terminate the tenancy if the immediate termination of the lease would
violate Section 1-2-1.5 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended (65 ILCS 5/
1-2-1.5). (2016 Code; amd. Ord. 23-49, 10-3-2023)
10-18-12: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any owner, property agent, occupant or person who fails to comply with
any section of this chapter applicable thereto, and continues in this failure
after due notice and opportunity to correct, given pursuant to this chapter,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each day each section of this code is violated after expiration of the time for
correction of the violations.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from taking any other
legal or equitable remedies available to the village, including any emergency
action permitted by law when any portion of the rental residential building is
a danger to persons or property. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 19
STRUCTURES FOR PUBLIC GATHERINGS
SECTION:
10-19-1: Permitted Structures; Compliance With Building Regulations
10-19-2: Requirements For Other Structures
10-19-3: Additional Building Requirements
10-19-1: PERMITTED STRUCTURES; COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to hold, manage or conduct any meeting or entertainment of
any kind in the village in any premises other than a building constructed in
full compliance with the ordinances and laws pertaining thereto for auditorium,
theater or lodge room purposes, except in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. (2016 Code)
10-19-2: REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER STRUCTURES:
   A.   Inspections:
      1.   No gathering or entertainment of any kind shall be held or presented
in any premises other than a building as described in section
10-19-1 of this chapter unless such premises has been examined by the building
official not more than three (3) days before the date of such gathering and
found to be free from any fire hazard and found to be suitable for the purpose.
      2.   No structure enclosed by a roof shall be used for such purpose
unless the same is constructed of nonflammable materials.
      3.   Tents or structures covered by canvas or other materials may be so
used if such canvas or other material has been properly treated so as to be
rendered fire resistant.
   B.   Village Notified Of Event Inspections: It shall be the duty of any
person conducting, calling for or managing any gathering in any premises other
than a theater, lodge room or auditorium building constructed as provided in
section
10-19-1 of this chapter, to notify the village clerk of the date of such
intended use at least ten (10) days before such meeting is to take place. Upon
such notice, the building official shall inspect the premises to determine
whether or not it complies with the provisions hereof. Any permit issued for
any such gathering shall be subject to the condition that there shall be full
compliance with this chapter, whether or not such condition is embodied in the
permit. (2016 Code)
10-19-3: ADDITIONAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Exits:
      1.   Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises used
for purposes of a meeting or entertainment of any kind in the village to permit
rapid egress of all persons attending, and there shall be at least two (2)
separate exits located at least thirty feet (30') from each other. There shall
be two (2) linear feet of doorway or exit space for each one hundred (100)
people accommodated.
      2.   All doors or gates or exits from premises used for purposes of a
meeting or entertainment of any kind in the village shall open outward, and no
such exit shall be so constructed or locked that egress from inside the
premises is blocked.
   B.   Seating:
      1.   Any stand or rows of seats used in premises used for any meeting or
entertainment of any kind in the village shall be so constructed as to be safe
for the use designed and shall be sufficiently strong to carry the same weight
and stress as is required for the construction of the auditorium floors of
theater buildings, not less than one hundred (100) pounds per square foot.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of
persons in excess of the number of actual seats maintained for their
accommodation. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 20
PRESALE INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES
SECTION:
10-20-1: Purpose
10-20-2: Presale Inspections
10-20-3: Code Compliance Stamp
10-20-4: Recordation Prohibited Without Code Compliance Stamp
10-20-5: Title Notification
10-20-6: Exemptions
10-20-7: Minimum Standards
10-20-8: Inspection Procedures; Appeal
10-20-9: Follow Up Repairs; Reinspection
10-20-10: Conditional Certificate Of Compliance; Procedures
10-20-11: Payment Of Current Water Bills And Debts Due Village
10-20-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
10-20-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to require a presale inspection of
residential, commercial or industrial buildings or structures in the Village
for compliance with the Village's Property Maintenance Codes prior to the
issuance of a Code compliance stamp on the deed for the sale or transfer of the
real property on which that building or structure is located. (Ord. 16-23, 5-
17-2016; amd. Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-2: PRESALE INSPECTIONS:
   A.   No real property within the Village shall be sold, transferred or
retitled unless the seller obtains a presale inspection by the building
official or his or her designee. The inspection report shall state that the
building complies with all applicable building and zoning regulations of the
Village that were inspected, or in the alternative lists the building and
zoning violations.
   B.   The request for a presale inspection should be made at least thirty
(30) days prior to the scheduled date of the closing. A sale for purposes of
this section includes contract sales, exchanges, conversions to condominiums
and transfers of any legal or beneficial interest of the real estate. If the
request is not filed, the required fees are not paid, or a person participates
in such a sale in violation of this section either as a seller or by receipt of
a sales commission in connection therewith, that person shall be in violation
of this chapter and be subject to the penalties as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Any contract executed in violation of this chapter shall be
voidable by the buyer.
   C.   The building official shall supply a form for the requested presale
inspection which shall specify the address of the real property being sold or
transferred, the improvements located thereon, the type of construction of such
improvements, and the number of apartments contained therein. If such real
property is commercial or industrial property, the number of square feet of
space shall be specified. Upon receipt of the form and payment of the
inspection fee(s) as provided in the annual fee ordinance, the building
official shall cause such buildings or structures on the real property to be
inspected. Inspections shall include all of the building or structure when all
utilities are connected and servicing the building and structure.
   D.   The inspection report will be valid provided the real property is
transferred within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date such application
is submitted and the appropriate inspection fee paid to the Village. Any real
property to be transferred more than one hundred eighty (180) days following
such date is subject to reapplication, reinspection and the repayment of fees
in accordance with this chapter as if no previous inspection report had been
issued.
   E.   If the Village's inspector is unable to inspect any portion of the
property or equipment in or on the property for any reason including but not
limited to the termination of electric, gas or water service at the time of
inspection, the Village shall require the establishment of an escrow amount
with the buyer’s attorney in an amount as determined by the Village building
official and/or his/her designee of the estimated cost to bring any uninspected
portion of the property or equipment in the building into Code compliance and
if related to those terminated utilities in an amount of not less than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each utility that has been terminated.
   F.   A Village of Berkeley compliance agreement shall be completed by the
party posting the escrow. If there are any violations or fees related to the
escrow or building during the escrow period and any fines, penalties, judgments
or other costs authorized by this Code are accessed; those fines, penalties,
judgments or other costs shall be deducted from the escrow prior to its
release, and, after all deductions are made, any escrow remaining will be
refunded upon compliance within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016; amd.
Ord. 17-44, 7-18-2017; Ord. 17-55, 9-5-2017; Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-3: CODE COMPLIANCE STAMP:
The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, shall affix the Village Code
compliance stamp to a deed only after all violations have been fully corrected
to the satisfaction of the building official who has issued a certificate of
Code compliance. In addition, no Village Code compliance stamp shall be affixed
to a deed or other document of conveyance unless and until all outstanding
fees, charges, fines, and penalties due and owing to the Village under any
rule, regulation, code or ordinance have been paid in full. Any such
outstanding fee, charge, fine, or penalty must be paid in full in cash or by
certified check. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-4: RECORDATION PROHIBITED WITHOUT CODE COMPLIANCE STAMP:
No recordation of any title conveying or purporting to convey title to property
shall be valid unless such documentation is affixed with a stamp from the
Village. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-5: TITLE NOTIFICATION:
The Village stamp shall be reflected on the schedule B of any title insurance
commitments or report prepared by any title company. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016;
amd. Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The following sales and transfers are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter, provided the sale and transfer in each case is accompanied by
documents and information setting forth the facts or such other record as the
Village Administrator may require. An exempt sale or transfer shall not relieve
compliance under this chapter for subsequent non-exempt sales and non-exempt
transfers of the property in question.
   A.   Transfers involving real property acquired by or from any governmental
body.
   B.   Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of
transfer secures debt or other obligations, and no new or additional parties
take possession of the property.
   C.   Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of
transfer, without additional consideration, confirms, corrects, modifies, or
supplements a deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer previously
recorded or delivered.
   D.   Transfers in which the deed is a tax deed.
   E.   Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of
transfer releases property which secures debt or other obligations.
   F.   Transfers between a subsidiary corporation and its parent or between
subsidiary corporations of a common parent either pursuant to a plan of merger
or consolidation or pursuant to a plan of reorganization providing for the sale
of substantially all of the seller's assets.
   G.   Transfers from a subsidiary corporation to its parent for no
consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary's
stock and transfers from a parent corporation to its subsidiary for no
consideration other than the issuance or delivery to the parent of the
subsidiary's stock.
   H.   Transfers made pursuant to a confirmed plan of reorganization as
provided under section 1146(c) of chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy
Code of 1978, as amended.
   I.   Transfers in which the deed or other instrument of transfer is issued
to the mortgagee or secured creditor pursuant to a mortgage or security
interest foreclosure proceeding or sale or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of
foreclosure.
   J.   Transfers in which an additional party is added to title and the
existing or prior titleholder remains in title and continues to reside at the
property.
   K.   Transfers by an executor or administrator to a legatee, heir, or
distributee where the transfer is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy.
   L.   Transfers from a decedent to an executor or administrator.
   M.   Transfers from an incompetent to a conservator or similar legal
representative or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a
former incompetent upon removal of disability.
   N.   Transfers from a bankrupt or person in receivership due to insolvency
to the trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee,
or from such trustee to such receiver or upon redelivery or retransfer by any
such transferee or successor thereto.
   O.   Transfers from a trustee to surviving, substitute, succeeding, or
additional trustees of the same trust.
   P.   Transfers upon the death of a joint tenant or tenant by the entirety to
the survivor.
   Q.   Transfers into or out of a land trust for no additional consideration
and where the titleholder or beneficial owner retains possession and continues
to reside at the property.
   R.   Vacant land. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-7: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The minimum construction and maintenance requirements for buildings and
structures shall be those in the Village's Property Maintenance Code as adopted
in chapter 8 of this title and those regulations that apply to existing
buildings and structures adopted in this Code. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016; amd.
Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-8: INSPECTION PROCEDURES; APPEAL:
   A.   Within three (3) business days after the presale inspection the Village
shall issue a written notice of violations and repairs, if any, and actions
necessary to bring the property into compliance with the regulations in this
chapter. In the event the inspection reveals a building which has been
illegally converted, the Village shall issue a notice of deconversion,
specifying the measures which must be taken in order to bring the illegally
converted structure into compliance with applicable zoning regulations.
   B.   In the event the owner disputes the determination of violations and
repairs, the owner may file a request for administrative review on a form
provided by the Village. An independent administrative adjudication Hearing
Officer appointed by the Village shall hear such appeal at the next
administrative adjudicative hearing. Upon completion of the hearing, the
Hearing Officer will issue a final determination of violation and repairs.
   C.   In the event an owner disagrees with an administrative issuance of a
notice of deconversion, the owner may appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission in accordance with subsection 12-3A-5A of this Code. (Ord. 16-23, 5-
17-2016; amd. Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-9: FOLLOW UP REPAIRS; REINSPECTION:
A person issued a notice of violations and repairs shall proceed to make the
repairs. When all repairs are reported to the Village as being completed, the
building official shall reinspect the property for compliance. If any
violations remain, a one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) reinspection fee shall
be charged for each additional reinspection. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord.
18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-10: CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE; PROCEDURES:
An owner who is unable to complete the repairs identified through the
inspection may nevertheless sell or transfer ownership of property if:
   A.   The grantee, transferee or buyer of the real property has entered into
a compliance agreement with the Village whereby the buyer indicates receipt of
the inspection report, agrees to accept the real property subject to the
existing violations, and agrees to bring the building or structure into
compliance with this chapter within the time period determined by the building
official not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the
transfer of the property. The Village may deny the entering into a compliance
agreement for such violations that are determined by the building official to
be an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare of persons who
may enter or occupy the building. (Ord. 17-55, 9-5-2017)
   B.   No occupancy of the building shall be allowed until a reinspection is
performed by the building official and it is determined that the property is in
compliance.
   C.   In the event the buyer fails to complete the required repairs, and have
the repairs verified on reinspection, the Village shall pursue enforcement
proceedings through the Berkeley administrative adjudication process, or
through the Circuit Court of Cook County. The buyer hereby agrees to submit to
the jurisdiction and venue of the Berkeley administrative adjudication process
and the Circuit Court of Cook County and to waive service of summons subject
only to the notice requirement as required by law in order to enable the
Village to expeditiously obtain an order of compliance with this chapter and
any applicable administrative or judicial remedies to bring the structure and
property into compliance with applicable codes and regulations. (Ord. 16-23, 5-
17-2016; amd. Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-11: PAYMENT OF CURRENT WATER BILLS AND DEBTS DUE VILLAGE:
The seller must pay the current water bill and other fees owed by the seller to
the Village prior to the Village affixing any stamp to the deed. In the event
the owner disputes any such obligation (or any portion thereof), the Village
Administrator or designee shall promptly provide the owner with a
predeprivation due process hearing within five (5) business days of the
request. If the owner disputes the Village's determination as to liability, the
seller may pay the bill under protest, and may pursue any remedies available to
the seller to recover the claimed overcharge. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016; amd. Ord.
18-42, 8-7-2018)
10-20-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
In issuing a certificate of or conditional certificate of compliance, the
Village and its agents do not make any warranty, representation or statement
nor does it intend to insure or guarantee to either buyer or seller of the
property subject to the point of sale inspection or any of their designees,
agents, representatives, heirs, or assigns or any other interested party,
including mortgage companies, insurance companies, banks or any other party
which may have any interest in the property subject to a compliance inspection,
nor does the Village affirm that there are no additional unnoted violations
relative to any other provision of any of the ordinances of the Village, or
relevant statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the County of Cook, the
State of Illinois or the United States of America. (Ord. 16-23, 5-17-2016; amd.
Ord. 18-42, 8-7-2018)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-3: Suitability Of Land For Subdividing
11-1-4: Plat Approval Required; Division Without Platting Prohibited
11-1-5: Buildings Within Major Street Extensions
11-1-6: Variations
11-1-7: Enforcing Officer
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of the present and future development of the village, and for
the promotion of the public health, and the safety, comfort, morals and welfare
of persons living within the territory governed, the provisions and regulations
of this title which shall govern the subdividing and platting of lands lying
within the corporate limits of the village as now or hereafter existing and as
now or hereafter established under provisions of the statutes of the state of
Illinois, are hereby adopted as part of the official plan of the village. (Ord.
60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following words and terms shall be defined
as follows:
SUBDIVISION: A. Any change, rearrangement or resubdivision in the boundary or
divisional lines of any parcel or parcels of real estate or of any public
thoroughfares; or
   B.   The platting of a parcel or tract of land into a single numbered lot
without alteration of its boundaries; or
   C.   A planned development or planned unit development as now or hereafter
defined in this title, the village zoning ordinance, or the zoning ordinance of
Cook County, as the case may be; or
   D.   A development as now or hereafter defined in this title.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A subdivision of land into three (3) or fewer lots;
provided, that such subdivision does not involve any street or utility
extensions, or require any other public improvements, and does not require any
exception or departure from the regulations of this title. (Ord. 06-03, 1-17-
2006)
11-1-3: SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVIDING:
   A.   Lands subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically
unsuitable should not be subdivided for residential purposes, nor for such
other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate
erosion or flood hazard.
   B.   The board of trustees shall not approve the subdivision of land if,
upon adequate investigation conducted by and in the opinion of the village
engineer, it has been determined that, in the best interest of the public, the
site is not suitable for subdivision and development of the kind proposed.
(Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-1-4: PLAT APPROVAL REQUIRED; DIVISION WITHOUT PLATTING PROHIBITED:
   A.   From and after the effective date hereof, no plat of any subdivision
shall be valid nor entitled to record unless and until the same has been
approved by the village board of trustees in accordance with the procedure
provided in this title, and no plat of subdivision shall be approved without
compliance with the standards of design and improvements required in this
title. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
   B.   From and after the effective date hereof, no lot or tract of land
located within the village, or within the area of jurisdiction of the Berkeley
planning and zoning commission, and which contains an area of more than one-
half (1/2) acre, shall be divided or redivided in any manner into two (2) or
more lesser tracts for building site purposes without subdividing or
resubdividing and platting such tract in the manner provided by this title.
(Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016 Code)
11-1-5: BUILDINGS WITHIN MAJOR STREET EXTENSIONS:
After the effective date hereof, no permanent building or structure shall be
erected within the extended street lines of proposed extensions of major
streets shown on the major street plan adopted as part of the official plan of
the village. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-1-6: VARIATIONS:
The village board of trustees may, by ordinance, approve variations from the
requirements of this title in specific cases where such variations do not
affect the general plan or spirit of this title. (Ord. 65-9, 8-6-1965)
11-1-7: ENFORCING OFFICER:
The village administrator shall be the enforcing officer of this title, and it
shall be his/her duty to enforce the provisions hereof. The enforcing officer
may call upon any department or official of the village to furnish him/her with
such information and assistance as he/she may deem necessary for the observance
or enforcement of this title, and it shall be the duty of such department or
officer to furnish such information and assistance whenever required. (Ord. 60-
13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-2-1: Procedure Adopted
11-2-2: Informal Meeting
11-2-3: Preliminary Plat
11-2-4: Final Plat
11-2-5: Minor Subdivisions; Final Plat
11-2-6: Subdivision And Development Agreement
11-2-1: PROCEDURE ADOPTED:
The steps and proceedings hereinafter set forth are hereby adopted as the
procedure to be followed for the approval of a subdivision of lands. (Ord. 60-
13, 7-13-1960)
11-2-2: INFORMAL MEETING:
Before preparing a preliminary plat, the subdivider should meet and consult
informally with the village administrator for the purpose of ascertaining the
locations of proposed major streets, parks, playgrounds, school sites and other
planned projects which may affect the property being considered for
subdivision. At the same meeting, the subdivider should review the minimum
standards of subdivision design set forth in this title. This informal review
should prevent unnecessary and costly revisions in the layout and development
of the subdivision. Formal application or filing of a plat is not required for
this informal advisory meeting. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
11-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   After meeting informally with the village administrator, the subdivider
shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat prior to the making of any street
improvements or the installation of any utilities. The preliminary plat shall
meet the standards of design as set forth in this title, and shall show the
following information: (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   Scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1") or larger.
      2.   Name of subdivision, names and addresses of the owners, the engineer
or surveyor, and the owners of the adjacent property.
      3.   Location of subdivision by section, township, range or other legal
description, together with small scale sketch showing location within the
section.
      4.   Date, approximate north point and graphic scale.
      5.   Acreage of land to be subdivided.
      6.   Zoning classification of lands to be subdivided and all adjacent
lands.
      7.   Contours at an interval of not greater than two feet (2') or at
lesser intervals if deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission.
      8.   Boundary lines of area to be subdivided and their bearings and
distances.
      9.   Existing and proposed easements and their locations, widths and
distances, and identification of all village easements for water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and/or overland storm drainage routes as well as
for all utility easements for gas, electric, telephone and cable television.
      10.   Streets on and adjacent to the tract and their names, widths,
approximate grades and other dimensions as may be required.
      11.   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract showing proposed conditions
to existing utility systems. Rear easements for utility poles and wires shall
be provided wherever possible.
      12.   Lot lines and lot numbers.
      13.   Sites and their acreages, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for
parks, playgrounds, schools or other public grounds; sites, if any, for
semipublic, commercial or multi-family uses.
      14.   Minimum building setback lines.
      15.   Location of railroads, drainage courses, permanent buildings or
other structures and wooded areas.
      16.   Other reasonable information, such as soil tests, if so requested
by the commission in order to make a proper review of the site.
      17.   Copies of proposed deed restrictions, if any, shall be attached to
the preliminary plat.
   B.   1. A subdivider shall present twenty (20) copies of a preliminary plat
and supplementary material to the village engineer, along with a written
application for conditional approval of same. Simultaneously, the subdivider
shall file copies of same with any or all of the following, as appropriate:
         a.   The Illinois department of transportation with respect to roadway
access where such access is a state highway;
         b.   The relevant local highway authority with respect to all other
roadway access; or
         c.   The county health department with respect to sewage disposal
systems if any part of the platted land will not be served by a public sewer
system. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005)
      2.   The subdivider shall request that each department or authority
listed above review the application based solely upon safety or access control
standards and shall request that the department or authority provide written
approval or disapproval, and if disapproval, the reasons therefor along with
improvements that would remove the disapproval, to the planning and zoning
commission and village board of trustees not later than ninety (90) days from
the date the application is received.
   C.   The preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the planning and zoning
commission until it receives approval by the village engineer.
   D.   The village administrator shall submit a copy of the preliminary plat
to the following: (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   Proviso Township supervisor;
      2.   School district 87, school district 93, and school district 209;
      3.   Berkeley park district and/or other appropriate park districts; and
      4.   Appropriate agencies providing sewer and water services, if other
than the village. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005)
   E.   The village administrator, when submitting the copy of a preliminary
plat to the above, shall request that each return a copy of the preliminary
plat, along with notations and recommendations, within fourteen (14) days of
receipt of said preliminary plat.
   F.   The planning and zoning commission shall approve, disapprove or approve
subject to modification the said preliminary plat within ninety (90) days from
the date of the application or the date of filing by the applicant of the last
item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is
extended by mutual consent.
   G.   If a preliminary plat is disapproved, then, within said ninety (90)
days, the planning and zoning commission shall furnish to the applicant a
written statement setting forth the reasons for such disapproval.
   H.   If a preliminary plat is approved subject to modifications, then,
within said ninety (90) days, the planning and zoning commission shall furnish
to the applicant a written statement specifying the nature of the required
modifications.
   I.   If a preliminary plat is approved by the planning and zoning
commission, the original plat and two (2) prints or copies of the preliminary
plat shall be endorsed by the planning and zoning commission as follows:
   VILLAGE OF BERKELEY
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS )
          ) ss
COUNTY OF COOK )
THE PROPOSED PLAN OF SUBDIVISION AS SHOWN ON THIS PRELIMINARY PLAT AND
ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS, HAS RECEIVED PRELIMINARY APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING AND
ZONING COMMISSION OF THE VILLAGE OF BERKELEY, AND SAID PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION IS NOW READY TO RECEIVE THE FINAL PLAT FOR CONSIDERATION.
APPROVED THIS            DAY OF                , 2    , BY THE PLANNING AND
ZONING COMMISSION OF THE VILLAGE OF BERKELEY, ILLINOIS
      BY:
                                                                      
       CHAIR OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
   J.   The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be noted on
three (3) copies of the preliminary plat with any notations made at the time of
approval or disapproval of the specific changes required. The original of the
preliminary plat, so endorsed, shall remain on file with the planning and
zoning commission. One copy, so endorsed, shall be returned to the subdivider,
and one copy, so endorsed, shall be forwarded to the village administrator.
   K.   If a preliminary plat is approved by the planning and zoning
commission, the board of trustees shall accept or reject said plat, by
resolution duly adopted, within thirty (30) days after its next regularly
scheduled meeting following the action of the planning and zoning commission.
   L.   The village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the resolution of
approval or disapproval to a copy of the preliminary plat. If the preliminary
plat is disapproved, the resolution shall state the reasons for the
disapproval. A copy of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the
village clerk.
   M.   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of the
final plat and shall not qualify a plat for recording. The approval of the
preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final plat based thereon is submitted to
the village within one year from the date of such approval in the manner
specified in this chapter.
   N.   A charge shall be made for the examination and approval or disapproval
of every preliminary plat reviewed by the planning and zoning commission. At
the time a preliminary plat is submitted for approval, the subdivider shall
also submit a check payable to the village of Berkeley according to the annual
fee ordinance. The subdivider submitting a preliminary plat shall be
responsible for all fees incurred by the village pertaining to legal,
engineering and land planning expenses incurred by the village as a result of
the submission of said preliminary plat. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005; amd. 2016
Code)
11-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   A final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and it may constitute only a portion of the preliminary plat which
the subdivider proposes to record and develop.
   B.   As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, each
subdivider may be required to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes
and for school sites, pursuant to and in accordance with this title, to serve
the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision. Where the
comprehensive plan or the standards of the village call for a larger amount of
park and recreational land or school sites in a particular subdivision or
planned unit development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land
needed beyond the developer's contribution shall be reserved for subsequent
purchase by the village or other public body designated by the village;
provided, that such acquisition is made within two (2) years from the date of
approval of the final plat. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site, as well as its
surroundings, must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites
dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land.
   D.   The final plat shall, in connection with and in addition to the
requirements for plats set forth in the Illinois plat act, 765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq., as amended from time to time, give the
following information:
      1.   The plat shall be at a scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100' =
1") or larger.
      2.   Date, title, name and location of subdivision, graphic scale and
true north point.
      3.   All dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall
be tied to primary control points. Locations and descriptions of said control
points shall be given. Except where deemed clearly unreasonable or infeasible
by the planning and zoning commission, these control points shall be the
located section corners of the state.
      4.   Name and right of way width of each street, easement, or other
rights of way. Each street name shall be subject to approval or modification by
the board of trustees.
      5.   Lot numbers, lot lines and frontage dimensions.
      6.   Purpose of which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved.
      7.   Minimum building setback lines.
      8.   Location and description of monuments.
      9.   Names and location of adjoining subdivision and streets, the
location of adjoining unplatted properties, and the names and addresses of the
owners of adjoining unplatted properties.
      10.   Certification on plat of title showing that the applicant is the
owner and a statement by such owner dedicating streets, rights of way and any
other sites for public use.
      11.   Certification on plat by surveyor or engineers as to the accuracy
of survey and plat.
      12.   Certification by the county health department when individual
sewage disposal or water systems are to be installed. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005)
      13.   Certification that the subdivider has posted a duly executed
performance guarantee, pursuant to and in accordance with this title. (Ord. 05-
02, 1-18-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
      14.   Cross sections, profiles and grades of streets, curbs, gutters and
sidewalks showing locations of in-street utilities, and drawn to standard
scales and elevations shall be attached to the final plat.
      15.   Protective covenants shall either be placed directly on the final
plat or attached thereto in form for recording.
      16.   Certification on the plat by the planning and zoning commission
that the plat has been approved for recording in the office of the county
recorder of deeds.
      17.   A notarized statement indicating, to the best of the owner's
knowledge, the school district in which each tract, parcel, lot or block lies.
(Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005)
   E.   Application for final approval of a plat shall be made no later than
one year after preliminary approval has been granted. Further, the steps for
approval of a preliminary and final plat may be combined if a petitioner wishes
to proceed directly to final plat approval. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005; amd. 2016
Code)
   F.   The person requesting a subdivision or resubdivision shall present
twenty (20) copies of the final plat with any street profiles or plans required
by the village engineer. Within three (3) business days after the plat is
submitted to the village for approval, the village shall notify the
superintendent of the school board of each school district in which the
proposed subdivided land is located that the plat has been submitted for
approval and is available for inspection. Said notice shall contain the date,
time and place of the hearing to approve or disapprove the plat, and shall be
served by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery.
   G.   The village engineer shall check to determine that the plat, and other
required submittals, have been prepared and made in satisfactory compliance
with this section. If found satisfactory, the village engineer shall return the
one copy of the final plat to the planning and zoning commission with his
approval certified thereon within ten (10) days of receipt thereof.
   H.   One copy shall be transmitted to the county health department when
individual sewerage disposal or water supply systems are to be installed. If
the plat meets the approval of the county health department, it shall return
the copy with its approval certified thereon within ten (10) days of receipt
thereof.
   I.   If a final plan is approved by the planning and zoning commission, the
original plat and two (2) prints or copies of the final plat shall be endorsed
by the planning and zoning commission as follows:
   VILLAGE OF BERKELEY
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
          ) ss
COUNTY OF COOK )
THE PROPOSED PLAN OF SUBDIVISION AS SHOWN ON THIS FINAL PLAT AND ACCOMPANYING
DOCUMENTS, HAS RECEIVED FINAL APPROVAL BY THE VILLAGE OF BERKELEY PLANNING AND
ZONING COMMISSION.
APPROVED THIS            DAY OF                , 20   , BY THE PLANNING AND
ZONING COMMISSION OF THE VILLAGE OF BERKELEY, ILLINOIS
      BY:
                                                                       
       CHAIR OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
   J.   When all required drawings, maps, and other documents have been
submitted and if all such material meets the requirements herein, the village
board of trustees shall approve or disapprove the final plat, by resolution
duly adopted, within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the last required
document or from the date of filing the application for final approval,
whichever date is later. The sixty (60) day period may be extended by mutual
consent of the parties.
   K.   If the proposed plat is disapproved, the village clerk shall attach a
certified copy of the resolution disapproving same to a copy of the final plat.
This resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval. A copy of the
resolution shall be filed in the office of the village clerk.
   L.   If the plat is approved, the village clerk shall attach a certified
copy of the resolution to a copy of the plat. A copy of the resolution, the
final plat, and all supporting documentation shall be filed in the office of
the village clerk.
   M.   The village clerk shall record, or cause to be recorded, a copy of the
final plat in the office of the county recorder of deeds. The subdivider shall
be fully responsible for the costs of such recordation. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005)
11-2-5: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS; FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Application For Minor Subdivision; Fee: Applications for minor
subdivision approval shall be submitted on an application form approved by the
planning and zoning commission, and accompanied by an application fee as set
forth in the annual fee ordinance. The applicant shall furnish at least five
(5) copies of the application and proposed final plat for the minor
subdivision, which plat shall conform to the requirements of subsection F of
this section. (Ord. 06-03, 1-17-2006; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Village Administrator Review And Approval:
      1.   The village administrator, or his/her designee, shall conduct an
initial review of the application and proposed final plat of the minor
subdivision for general completeness. Within ten (10) business days of the
application filing date, the village administrator shall notify the applicant
in writing as to whether the application is complete or whether it has
deficiencies. The specific deficiencies shall be listed in the notification,
and no deficient application will be accepted unless and until such
deficiencies are corrected. In the event that the village administrator does
not deliver notice to the applicant within ten (10) business days after the
application filing date, the application shall be deemed deficient and
rejected.
      2.   The village administrator, or his/her designee, shall review an
application for final plat of minor subdivision approval for compliance with
applicable zoning and subdivision requirements. The village administrator shall
report the findings of the review to the planning and zoning commission.
   C.   Planning And Zoning Commission Review And Recommendation:
      1.   Notice Requirements:
         a.   The planning and zoning commission shall review an application
for final plat of minor subdivision approval only after public notice, as set
forth in this subsection, has been provided;
         b.   The applicant shall notify in writing, by first class mail or
hand delivery, all adjacent taxpayers of record, including taxpayers of record
immediately across streets and other rights of way, not less than fifteen (15)
days nor more than thirty (30) days in advance of the scheduled planning and
zoning commission meeting date. The notice shall contain:
            (1)   Street address, legal description or detailed location of the
subject property;
            (2)   Statement describing the name of the subdivision and the
number of proposed lots;
            (3)   Name and address of applicant;
            (4)   Name and address of the legal and beneficial owner, if any,
of the subject property; and
            (5)   Date, time, and location of the planning and zoning
commission meeting.
         c.   At the planning and zoning commission meeting, the applicant
shall present an affidavit that the above listed notice requirements have been
satisfied.
      2.   Public Meeting: Within forty five (45) business days of the village
administrator's acceptance of an application for final plat of minor
subdivision approval, the planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public
meeting to review the application and make a recommendation, by resolution duly
adopted, to the board of trustees to approve, deny, or approve with conditions
the final plat of minor subdivision. The planning and zoning commission review
period may be extended by mutual consent of the planning and zoning commission
and applicant. The failure of the planning and zoning commission to act within
the time period set forth in this subsection shall be deemed an approval of the
final plat of minor subdivision.
   D.   Board Of Trustees Action: The village administrator shall report to the
board of trustees the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission.
Within thirty (30) business days after receipt of the planning and zoning
commission recommendation, the board of trustees, at a regular meeting, shall,
by resolution duly adopted, approve, deny, or approve with conditions the final
plat of minor subdivision, as well as all related agreements and other
approvals. In the event that the final plat of minor subdivision is denied, the
village administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such denial. The failure of the board of trustees to act within the time period
set forth in this subsection shall be deemed an approval of the final plat of
minor subdivision.
   E.   Copies Provided; Filing Final Plat: Following approval of a final plat
of minor subdivision, the applicant shall furnish the village administrator
with a mylar original of the final plat of minor subdivision that includes all
original certifications and signatures required under subsection F of this
section, and seven (7) copies of the fully executed mylar. The village
administrator shall cause the final plat of minor subdivision to be recorded in
the office of the county recorder. The applicant shall be responsible for all
such recording fees.
   F.   Standards Of Final Plat: A final plat for a minor subdivision shall, in
addition to the requirements of the Illinois plat act, 765 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 205/0.01 et seq., as amended from time to time, conform to the
following standards:
      1.   Be no less than eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches (81/2"
x 14"), nor more than thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36") in size,
and include no more than three (3) sheets.
      2.   Have a scale not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'),
with a north arrow.
      3.   Describe or identify the angular and linear measurements of:
         a.   Subdivision boundaries;
         b.   Blocks, lots, and outlots;
         c.   Lot corners and monuments;
         d.   Permanent and temporary easements;
         e.   Adjacent public and private rights of way;
         f.   Other information as may be required by the village engineer; and
      4.   Name and current mailing address of the Illinois professional land
surveyor who prepared the plat.
      5.   The following village signatures and certification blocks:
         a.   Mayor: Indicating date of plat approval by the mayor and board of
trustees; (Ord. 06-03, 1-17-2006)
         b.   Village Finance Director: Indicating that there are no delinquent
or current unpaid special assessments associated with the subject property;
(Ord. 06-03, 1-17-2006; amd. 2016 Code)
         c.   Village Engineer: Indicating that the final engineering plans and
specifications for the subject property meet the minimum requirements of the
village; and
         d.   Chair Of Planning And Zoning Commission: Indicating the date of
the planning and zoning commission recommendation regarding the plat.
      6.   The following state and county signature and certification blocks
(in the form prescribed by applicable laws and regulations):
         a.   County clerk: Indicating that there are no delinquent or current
unpaid special assessments or taxes associated with the subject property and
that all applicable fees have been received;
         b.   Illinois department of transportation: If the subject property
will have access onto a state highway, indicating that such access is approved;
and
         c.   County highway department: If the subject property will have
access onto a county highway, indicating that such access is approved.
      7.   The following certifications from an Illinois professional land
surveyor certifying that:
         a.   The subject property has been surveyed and subdivided in
accordance with a specific legal description;
         b.   Certain monuments and iron pipes have been located or will be
located on the subject property; and
         c.   Location of subject property in relation to special flood hazard
areas, as identified by the federal emergency management agency on the most
recent flood insurance rate map.
      8.   All owners of the subject property and all mortgagees shall sign, as
evidenced by the signature and seal of a notary public, that they consent to
the subdivision of the subject property.
      9.   If the subdivision and development of the subject property will
alter surface drainage patterns, the applicant's engineer shall sign the plat
and certify that the subdivision design adequately accounts for changes in
surface drainage patterns in accordance with section 2 of the Illinois plat
act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2, as amended from time to time.
      10.   The final plat of minor subdivision shall also include statements
and notations, in forms approved by the planning and zoning commission,
concerning the dedication of any land or granting of any easements, and any
restrictions thereto. (Ord. 06-03, 1-17-2006)
11-2-6: SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
All final plat applications may include a proposed subdivision or development
agreement, as the case may be, in a form approved by the planning and zoning
commission and village attorney. The subdivision or development agreement
shall, without limitation, include or reference the following minimum
information: (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
   A.   Proposed site development schedule for installation of guaranteed
public and private improvements, referencing the final plat or development
plan, and final engineering plans, and stipulating the improvements which must
be installed prior to issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy
for the buildings or structures to be constructed.
   B.   Description and estimated cost of public and private improvements, in a
form and amount approved by the village engineer, providing a detailed
accounting of the various types and amounts of improvements included in the
estimate.
   C.   Type and summary of terms of performance guarantee for the construction
of public and private improvements.
   D.   Method of satisfying the applicable requirements for dedicating, or
contributing for the future acquisition or development of, public grounds in
accordance with chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   A summary of the covenants, restrictions and easements necessary for
the subdivision or development, including the responsibilities of a property
owners' association, if proposed.
   F.   Agreement to pay:
      1.   A fair and equitable share of all water, sanitary sewer and/or storm
sewer improvements developed in the area surrounding the property that benefit
the property, as determined by the village engineer.
      2.   All applicable costs, payments, permit fees or other fees
attributable to the subdivision or development.
   G.   An acknowledgment by the owner, subdivider or developer, as the case
may be, that the village is not and shall not be, in any way, liable for any
damages or injuries that may be sustained as the result of village review and
approval of any plans for the subject property.
   H.   Such other acknowledgments, indemnifications and hold harmless
agreements as the village administrator and village attorney may require.
   I.   All other provisions deemed necessary by the planning and zoning
commission in order to fulfill the purpose and intent of this title. (Ord. 05-
02, 1-18-2005)
CHAPTER 3
STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Minimum Standards
11-3-2: Streets And Alleys
11-3-3: Sidewalks
11-3-4: Blocks
11-3-5: Lots
11-3-6: Building Setback Lines
11-3-7: Easements
11-3-8: Dedication Of Public Grounds
11-3-9: Natural Features
11-3-10: Trees
11-3-11: Water And Sewer Systems
11-3-12: Inspections
11-3-13: Performance Guarantee
11-3-14: Acceptance Of Improvements
11-3-1: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The requirements of this chapter are hereby adopted as the minimum standards of
design of the subdivision and of improvements required to be constructed or
installed therein. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-3-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Streets:
      1.   No topsoil shall be scaled off any property prior to issuance of
building permit.
      2.   A public street or streets shall be provided to afford convenient
access to all property within the subdivision. No private street or
thoroughfare shall be permitted.
      3.   The proposed street system shall extend existing adjoining streets
unless the extension thereof would not be practical.
      4.   Where, in the opinion of the village board, it is desirable to
provide for street access to adjoining property, the proposed streets shall be
extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
   B.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided at the rear of all lots or tracts
intended for business, commercial or industrial use, and multiple-family use,
but shall not be provided in residential blocks.
   C.   Widths Of Streets And Alleys:
      1.   The minimum width of right of way of a street, alley or
thoroughfare, measured between the lines of property abutting upon the right of
way, shall not be less than the following:
         a.   Major streets, being those to be used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic, and shown on the major thoroughfare plan, and streets through business
areas, eighty (80) to one hundred feet (100') as required.
         b.   Residential streets, sixty six feet (66').
         c.   Cul-de-sacs, which are permanent dead end streets, with permanent
turnaround having an inside diameter of not less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord.
60-13, 7-13-1960)
         d.   Alleys, to serve multi-family residential blocks, twenty feet
(20'). (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   The entire right of way shall be provided where any part of the
subdivision is on both sides of the right of way.
      3.   When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing
right of way, which is less than the required width, the subdivider shall
dedicate additional right of way to meet the requirement, but not exceeding
one-half (1/2) of the total required width.
   D.   Grades Of Streets: Grades of major streets shall not exceed seven
percent (7%). Grades of other streets shall not exceed ten percent (10%).
   E.   Curves In Streets: Curves in streets shall be permitted, provided, no
curve shall be greater than that approved by traffic engineers as reasonably
safe for traffic at the particular location of the curve.
   F.   Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125') shall not be permitted if the same can be
reasonably avoided.
   G.   Pavements:
      1.   Street Pavement:
         a.   All streets within the subdivision shall be improved with a
durable hard surface roadway. The pavement shall be equal to or superior to
existing paved streets in the village.
         b.   The minimum width of the paved roadway, back to back of curb,
shall be as follows:
            (1)   On residential streets, not less than twenty seven feet
(27').
            (2)   On major streets, not less than fifty feet (50').
            (3)   On streets through business areas, not less than fifty feet
(50').
         c.   Before any paving work is commenced, all street grading shall be
properly completed as shown on the grading plan submitted with final plat of
subdivision.
         d.   After grading of the streets is completed and approved, and
before the base course of the roadway pavement is laid, all of the underground
work, such as sewer, water and gas mains, house service connections therewith,
and any underground conduits for electric and telephone lines shall be
completely installed in place and approved by village engineer.
         e.   The surface course of the roadway pavement shall not be laid
until the backfilling of all trenches dug for the installation of the
aforementioned utility services have completely settled, or compacted to the
satisfaction of the village engineer.
         f.   Before the surface course of the roadway pavement is laid, all
depressions in the base course shall be properly filled and brought to the
required grade so as to create a level surface.
      2.   Alley Pavement: All alleys shall be improved with a roadway
consisting of not less than five inches (5") when thoroughly compacted or eight
inches (8") crushed stone or gravel of the following width: Through business
areas, not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
   H.   Curb And Gutter: A suitable curb and gutter shall be constructed along
the outside lines of all street pavements. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016
Code)
   I.   Street Names:
      1.   Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment or continuation of
existing streets already named shall bear the name of such existing streets. In
no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names,
irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive,
place or court, or an abbreviation thereof.
      2.   All private driveways crossing public sidewalks shall have seven
inches (7") of concrete at the area where driveway crosses or connects with the
sidewalk. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
   J.   Street Signs: An appropriate street sign shall be erected at each
street intersection within the subdivision. The type of sign and the location
thereof shall be subject to the approval and direction of the village
superintendent of public works. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016 Code)
   K.   Ornamental Street Lighting: Ornamental street lighting shall be
provided throughout the subdivision by the subdivider and shall be installed
subject to the approval of the village board. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-3-3: SIDEWALKS:
If the property subdivided is located within the corporate limits of the
village, or immediately adjacent thereto, sidewalks are required to be
constructed to compare with existing village sidewalks. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-3-4: BLOCKS:
Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots, except where
fronting on major streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of
the property, in which case, the village board will approve a single tier of
lots. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-3-5: LOTS:
   A.   Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight street lines or radial curved street lines.
   B.   Residential lots served by a public sewerage system and public water
supply system shall not be less than fifty feet (50') wide at the building
setback line, nor less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area.
   C.   The size of lots or tracts laid out and intended for business use shall
be adequate to provide for off street service and paved parking facilities
required by the type of use and development contemplated.
   D.   The size and width of lots shall in no case be less than the minimum
requirements of the village zoning ordinance. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-3-6: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
The minimum depth of building setback lines from the street need not be greater
than the requirements fixed by the village zoning code. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960;
amd. 2016 Code)
11-3-7: EASEMENTS:
Where no alleys are provided, there shall be dedicated easements of not less
than ten feet (10') in width for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary
sewer, gas, water or other utility pipes or lines along the rear of each lot
and along the side lot lines where necessary. The easements shall be so laid
out that a proper continuity may be had for such utilities from lot to lot and
from block to block. No building shall be constructed upon the easements. (Ord.
60-13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016 Code)
11-3-8: DEDICATION OF PUBLIC GROUNDS:
   A.   Whenever a proposed subdivision has an area of two (2) acres or more
(exclusive of public streets and thoroughfares), the subdivider may be required
to dedicate a reasonable area therein for public grounds for park, playground,
recreational or similar public purpose, and school grounds, which area so
dedicated shall be in addition to all dedications for public streets and
thoroughfares.
   B.   In determining the area to be so dedicated as public grounds, the
village board shall give due consideration to the present and anticipated
density of population within such subdivision, to the age range and other
characteristics of the anticipated population, which can influence the kind and
amount of public grounds and to the present and future prospective public
requirements for such public grounds.
   C.   No subdivider shall be required to dedicate as public grounds more than
five percent (5%) of the total area of any subdivision, exclusive of public
streets and ways, contained within such subdivision.
   D.   The subdivider shall be required to provide a title insurance policy,
acceptable in form and substance to the village attorney, for any public
grounds dedicated to the village that shall show such public grounds free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances. The subdivider shall also grant all
necessary easements and licenses, acceptable in form and substance to the
village attorney, to the village providing public and emergency access to the
public grounds.
   E.   All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of
electricity, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and
gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made
therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included within the definition of
"improved" sites may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of any
such school site and the construction of school facilities thereon. (Ord. 05-
02, 1-18-2005)
11-3-9: NATURAL FEATURES:
In all subdivisions, due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural
features such as large trees, watercourses, historical and similar community
assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property.
(Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-3-10: TREES:
Trees are to be planted on part of the subdivision devoted to public use. The
species of trees and the location thereof shall be subject to the requirements
of title 8, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016 Code)
11-3-11: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS:
   A.   Water Supply: When located within the service area of a public water
supply system, water mains not less than six inches (6") in diameter shall be
constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such manner as to serve
adequately all lots and tracts with connection to such public system, together
with shutoff valves and fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed
throughout entire water system in accordance with the regulations of this code
and with approval of the village engineer and chief of the fire department.
(Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Storm Drains: An adequate system of stormwater drainage shall be
constructed and installed, consisting of pipes, tiles, manholes, inlets and
other necessary facilities, that will prevent the accumulation of stormwater at
any place under normal conditions. Open ditches shall be prohibited. Such
drainage system shall be subject to approval by the village engineer.
   C.   Sanitary Sewers: When located within the service area of a public
sanitary sewerage system, sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed throughout
the entire subdivision in such manner as to serve adequately all lots and
tracts with connection to such public system.
   D.   House Services:
      1.   House services shall be constructed to connect with the utility
service mains constructed within any street or thoroughfare, to serve each
adjoining lot, tract or building site. Such house services shall extend from
the main to a point at least eight feet (8') beyond the outside curb lines of
the proposed roadway pavement in the street, and at least one foot (1') beyond
the outside lines of proposed alley pavement.
      2.   All such house services connected with utility mains constructed
within any street or thoroughfare shall be located at the approximate
centerline of each lot, and no deviation shall be made from this requirement
except upon prior approval by the village engineer.
      3.   Upon completion of the construction in place of all such house
service connections with utility mains, an accurate map or maps showing the
location of all such mains, together with manholes, shutoff valves and other
similar facilities being a part thereof, by distances in feet from street
lines, and of all such house service connections in distances in feet from the
side lot lines, approved by the village engineer, shall be filed in the office
of the village clerk. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
11-3-12: INSPECTIONS:
All public improvements to be made under the provisions of this title shall be
inspected during the course of construction by the village engineer, or other
competent person appointed by the village board. The compensation for such
inspection and other costs incurred in connection with such inspection shall be
paid by the subdivider to the village. The final completion of all such
improvements shall be subject to the approval thereof by the village engineer
and acceptance by the village board. (Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960; amd. 2016 Code)
11-3-13: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
   A.   Prior to the issuance of any permit for any work on a subdivision, the
subdivider shall obtain and submit a performance guarantee for the construction
and installation of public and private improvements to the village engineer for
approval and acceptance in accordance with this section.
   B.   The subdivider shall submit a guarantee for the following improvements,
as deemed necessary by the village engineer:
      1.   Permanent subdivision monuments and lot corner markers.
      2.   Transportation system improvements, including:
         a.   Public and private streets, and all related frontage and
intersection improvements.
         b.   Streetlights.
         c.   Parkway tree plantings.
         d.   Street signs, signals and apparatus.
         e.   Public and private sidewalks, trails and bike paths.
         f.   Other traffic related improvements contemplated as part of the
subdivision or development.
      3.   Environmental protection and site preparation measures, including:
         a.   Grading and related site preparation work;
         b.   Erosion and sediment controls during the various phases of site
development including site and lot grading, construction entrances, diversion
dikes, silt fences, sediment traps, seeding and site stabilization; and
         c.   Other special environmental protection measures which are a
component of the final engineering plans.
      4.   Public utility systems, including:
         a.   Public and private storm sewer system (pipes, inlets, manholes,
swales, detention ponds, and all related structures and apparatus);
         b.   Public water system (pipes, valves, fire hydrants and related
system improvements); and
         c.   Sanitary sewer system (pipes, manholes, lift stations and related
system improvements).
      5.   Common facilities which are contemplated as part of the subdivision
specified in the final engineering plans.
      6.   Other public and private improvements specified in the final
engineering plans.
   C.   The applicant shall submit to the village engineer estimates for the
cost of construction (or actual executed construction contracts) for public and
private improvements contemplated in the final engineering plan. The village
engineer shall review such estimates or construction contracts and, if
acceptable, approve the amount of the performance guarantee. The amount of the
performance guarantee shall be based upon:
      1.   One hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the total estimate of
construction costs and inspection fees for all guaranteed improvements; or
      2.   One hundred ten percent (110%) of the total construction costs as
indicated in an approved and executed construction contract, plus inspection
fees for all guaranteed improvements.
   D.   Performance guarantees shall be in a form approved by the village
engineer and shall specify the following terms and conditions:
      1.   The guarantee shall have an expiration date not less than three (3)
months beyond the date specified in the approved subdivision or development
agreement.
      2.   Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of such
guarantee, the village administrator shall be given written notice by means of
certified or registered mail, indicating that such guarantee is to expire. No
guarantee shall expire absent such notice.
      3.   Failure of the subdivider to install such guaranteed improvements
prior to the scheduled completion date, as specified in the approved site
development schedule, shall be considered a default by the subdivider and the
issuing institution.
      4.   The guarantee shall only be released or reduced by the issuing
institution upon written certification by the village engineer stating:
         a.   That said guarantee may be released or reduced in accordance with
this section; and
         b.   The amount of such discharge or reduction.
      5.   If at any time the village determines that the institution issuing
the guarantee is without adequate capital, assets, earnings and liquidity as
required in this section, is unable to meet any federal or state requirement
for reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or
is otherwise in danger of being unable to honor such guarantee at any time
during its term, or if the village otherwise reasonably deems itself to be
insecure, then the village shall have the right to demand that the subdivider
provide a replacement guarantee from an institution satisfactory to the
village. Such replacement guarantee shall be deposited with the village not
later than ten (10) days following such demand.
      6.   a. If the subdivider fails or refuses to complete the construction
of the public and private improvements covered by the guarantee or fails or
refuses to correct any defect or deficiency in such improvements upon request
by the village, or in any other manner fails or refuses to meet fully any of
its obligations under the guarantee or the applicable subdivision or
development agreement, then the village may, in its sole and absolute
discretion, retain all or any part of the guarantee.
         b.   The village thereafter shall have the right to exercise any other
action it deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the effects of such
failure or refusal and to reimburse itself from the proceeds of the guarantee
for all of its costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative
expenses. If the funds remaining in the guarantee are insufficient to repay
fully the village for all such costs and expenses, and to maintain a cash
reserve equal to the required guarantee during the entire time such guarantee
should have been maintained, then the subdivider shall, upon demand of the
village therefor, immediately deposit with the village such additional funds as
the village determines necessary.
   E.   Performance guarantees for the installation of public and private
improvements shall be in a form approved by the village administrator. The
following types of performance guarantee are acceptable, provided they are
consistent with the following regulations:
      1.   Cash Escrow: A cash deposit may be used as a guarantee, provided the
total amount of the guarantee required is placed with the village administrator
and administered in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision or
development agreement.
      2.   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit And Cash; Surety Bond: An irrevocable
letter of credit or surety bond may be used as a guarantee, provided such
letter of credit or surety bond is issued by a financial institution approved
by the village administrator, the administration of such letter of credit or
surety bond conforms to the terms of the subdivision or development agreement,
and the letter of credit or surety bond is accompanied by a cash deposit in an
amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the total guarantee amount. The cash
deposit shall, at all times until released, as provided herein, be maintained
at not less than ten percent (10%) of the initial total guarantee amount. The
financial institution issuing the irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond
shall be:
         a.   Insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation or federal
savings and loan insurance corporation;
         b.   Chartered in the state of Illinois or have a registered agent in
Illinois;
         c.   Have adequate capital, assets, earnings and liquidity to ensure
the financial soundness of the issuing institution, as determined by the
village administrator; and
         d.   In the case of a surety bond, be licensed and authorized by the
Illinois department of insurance to sell and issue sureties in the state of
Illinois.
   F.   The subdivider may make a written request to the village engineer to
partially reduce the amount of the approved performance guarantee. The village
engineer shall be authorized to approve such partial reductions in the amount
of the performance guarantee, provided:
      1.   There shall be no more than three (3) partial reductions approved in
the amount of the performance guarantee during the life of the subdivision;
      2.   Partial reductions shall be authorized only following the acceptable
completion of the following improvements:
         a.   All underground storm drainage, sanitary sewer and water supply
systems have been properly installed, and all erosion and sediment controls are
operational;
         b.   All curb, gutter, sidewalk and base course paving for public and
private streets have been properly constructed; and
         c.   All lots have been graded and all storm detention facilities are
operational;
      3.   The inspection reports for the subdivision evidence acceptable
completion of the above;
      4.   The amount of such partial reduction shall not exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the estimated cost to construct such improvements;
      5.   In no event shall the amount of the performance guarantee be reduced
to a level which, in the sole and absolute opinion of the village engineer,
would not allow the village to complete the installation of public and private
improvements associated with the subdivision; and
      6.   In no event shall any portion of the cash deposit be reduced prior
to final release of the performance guarantee pursuant to this subsection.
   G.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in subsection F of this
section, public improvements shall not be considered accepted by the village
unless and until each of the following reviews and actions have been
successfully performed:
      1.   Filing with the village engineer a formal written request to accept
the improvements by the subdivider;
      2.   Certification by the village engineer that all or specific
individual public improvements required to be constructed or installed have
been fully or individually completed in accordance with all applicable plans
and specifications and that the inspected construction or installation thereof
has been approved;
      3.   Submission by the applicant of all appropriate as built drawings of
improvements, as approved by the village engineer;
      4.   All appropriate village code enforcement complaints have been
resolved to the satisfaction of the village administrator;
      5.   All necessary maintenance guarantees have been received and approved
by the village engineer; and
      6.   The adoption by the board of trustees of a resolution officially
accepting the improvements and releasing the applicable performance guarantee
on behalf of the village.
   H.   Following the village acceptance of all public improvements and the
certification by the village engineer that all public and private improvements
included in the guarantee have been one hundred percent (100%) completed to the
satisfaction of the village engineer, the village administrator shall release
the guarantee.
   I.   Prior to the acceptance of required public improvements by the village,
the subdivider shall execute a maintenance agreement, acceptable in form and
substance to the village attorney, for the repair or replacement of defective
materials and workmanship for a period of time extending one year from the
effective date of village acceptance of such improvements. A maintenance
guarantee conforming with the requirements of this subsection shall be
submitted with the maintenance agreement. The amount of the maintenance
guarantee shall be ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the initial
performance guarantee for the subdivision. The village engineer shall be
authorized to execute such agreements on behalf of the village following board
of trustees acceptance of such improvements. If, after one year, no defects in
workmanship or materials have developed, the maintenance guarantee shall be
released by the village engineer. In the event any defects are identified by
the village engineer during the term of the maintenance guarantee, the balance
of such guarantee shall be released only after: 1) the village has been fully
reimbursed for amounts expended in correcting defective improvements; or 2) the
subdivider or developer has successfully repaired all such defects to the
satisfaction of the village engineer. (Ord. 05-02, 1-18-2005)
11-3-14: ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares
which are therein dedicated as such, whether located within the corporate
limits of the village or outside thereof, or contains existing streets outside
of said corporate limits, the approval of the plat by the board of trustees, or
the subsequent annexation of the property to the village, shall not constitute
an acceptance by the village of such streets or thoroughfares, nor of the
improvements constructed or installed thereon or therein, irrespective of any
act or acts by any officer, agent or employee of the village with respect to
such streets or improvements. The acceptance of such streets or thoroughfares
shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the village board after
there has been filed with the village clerk a certificate by the village
engineer certifying that all improvements required to be constructed or
installed in or upon such streets or thoroughfares in connection with the
approval of the plat of subdivision by the village board have been approved by
him.
   B.   No permanent connection shall be made or maintained with the sanitary
or storm sewer or water supply systems of the village to serve property within
the subdivision until the certificate by the village engineer, as hereinabove
provided, has been filed, and not until any money owing the village for permit
fees for the connections with said systems, or any of them, have been paid.
(Ord. 60-13, 7-13-1960)
TITLE 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSES AND INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Authority And Purposes
12-1-3: General Scope
12-1-4: Interpretation
12-1-5: Application To Variations And Special Uses
12-1-6: Building Permits Issued Prior To Effective Date
12-1-7: Severability
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited, and referred to as the BERKELEY ZONING
ORDINANCE. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSES:
The provisions of this title are adopted pursuant to the village's home rule
authority under section 6(a) of article VII of the constitution of the state of
Illinois (1970), and the authority granted to the village by the Illinois
municipal code 1 , for the following purposes:
   A.   Overall Purpose: To maintain Berkeley as a residential suburb by
preserving and enhancing aesthetic values of a village comprised principally of
well maintained single-family residential neighborhoods and small business
areas oriented to serve the needs of local residents.
   B.   Purposes Related To Land Use Patterns: The purposes of this title
related to land use patterns are:
      1.   Implement the goals and policies of the village official
comprehensive plan; and
      2.   Facilitate the redevelopment of properties within the village in a
manner consistent with the goals and objectives of the village comprehensive
plan; and
      3.   Encourage and promote detached single-family homes as the principal
land use in the village; and
      4.   Secure adequate natural light, clean air, privacy, a safe
environment, and convenience of access to property; and
      5.   Promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, and the
general welfare of the village; and
      6.   Encourage and enhance the preservation of natural resources,
aesthetic amenities, and natural features; and
      7.   Establish a rational pattern of land uses and encourage the most
appropriate use of individual parcels of land in the village; and
      8.   Encourage compatibility between different land uses; and
      9.   Protect the scale and character of the existing areas of the village
from the encroachment of incompatible uses; and
      10.   Limit the bulk and density of new and existing structures to
preserve the existing scale of development in the village; and
      11.   Provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses that
adversely affect the character and value of permitted development.
   C.   Purposes Related To Public Infrastructure: The purposes of this title
related to public infrastructure are:
      1.   Facilitate the most efficient use of existing and planned public
facilities and utilities; and
      2.   Protect existing public facilities and utilities from being
overloaded due to excess development; and
      3.   Protect and enhance a pattern of interconnected streets and highways
that is unified, integrated, safe, effective, and efficient; and
      4.   Protect residential streets from degradation by nonresidential
traffic; and
      5.   Reduce congestion and promote safety on streets and highways by
limiting traffic generation through the control of land use intensity; and
      6.   Avoid or lessen the hazards of flooding and stormwater accumulation
and runoff; and
      7.   Establish and regulate setback lines along streets and highways,
property lines, and storm floodwater runoff channels or basins.
   D.   Purposes Related To Expectations And Taxable Value: The purposes of
this title related to justifiable expectations and taxable value are:
      1.   Protect and respect the justifiable reliance of existing residents,
business owners, and taxpayers on the continuation of existing, established
land use patterns; and
      2.   Protect and enhance the taxable value of land and buildings.
   E.   Purposes Related To Administration: The purposes of this title related
to administration are:
      1.   Define the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies
necessary to administer this title; and
      2.   Establish procedures for the efficient and effective use of the
provisions of this title; and
      3.   Establish standards for the review of applications filed pursuant to
this title; and
      4.   Prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
title. (2005 Zoning Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.
12-1-3: GENERAL SCOPE:
   A.   Territorial Application: This title shall apply to all land,
structures, and uses within the corporate limits of the village.
   B.   General Application:
      1.   All structures erected hereafter, all uses of land or structures
established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocations of existing
structures occurring hereafter, and all enlargements and extensions of,
additions to, changes in, and relocations of existing uses occurring hereafter
shall be subject to all regulations of this title applicable to the zoning
districts in which such land, structures, or uses are located.
      2.   Existing structures and uses that do not comply with regulations of
this title shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this title
relating to nonconformities.
   C.   General Prohibition:
      1.   No structure, no use of any structure or land, and no lot of record
or zoning lot, now or hereafter existing, shall be established, enlarged,
extended, altered, moved, divided, or maintained in any manner contrary to the
provisions and regulations of this title.
      2.   Without limiting the foregoing, any such activity that would cause
any existing structure not to comply with this title or that would create any
parcel of land that could not be developed in compliance with this title shall
be prohibited.
   D.   Principal Uses And Structures In Residential Districts: No zoning lot
zoned in any residential district in the village shall be used for more than
one principal use or one principal structure.
   E.   Exempt Uses:
      1.   Utility Lines: The following utility uses are exempt from the
provisions of this title: poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals,
pipes, mains, and valves, but not including substations located on or above the
surface of the ground, for the distribution to consumers of telephone, cable
television or other communications, electricity, gas or water, or for the
collection of sewage or surface water. All such uses shall, however, comply
with the subdivision and other applicable ordinances of the village.
      2.   Railroad Uses:
         a.   All railroad rights of way used for railroad purposes, trackage,
and passenger stations existing on the effective date of this title shall be
exempt from its provisions.
         b.   Any other railroad facilities or uses, or any change of such
existing facilities or uses, shall be subject to all of the provisions of this
title.
   F.   Private Agreements: This title is not intended to abrogate, annul, or
otherwise interfere with any platted building line, easement, covenant, or
other private agreement or legal relations; provided, however, that where the
regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such platted building line, easement, covenant, or other
private agreement or legal relationship, the regulations of this title shall
apply. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Greater Restrictions Controlling: In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
and general welfare. When the provisions of this title impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or regulation, the
provisions of this title shall be controlling. When the provisions of any
statute, other ordinance, or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
title, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, or regulation shall be
controlling.
   B.   Provisions Cumulative: The provisions of this title shall be
interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all
other codes, laws, and ordinances in existence or which may be passed governing
any subject matter of this title. The several provisions of this title shall
also be interpreted to be cumulative of each other. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this title shall be construed to be consistent
with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other codes, laws, and
ordinances, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be
given their fullest application.
   C.   Consent, License Or Permit Limitations: The provisions of this title
shall not be interpreted to be, or to grant, a consent, license, or permit to
use any property or to establish, locate, construct, or maintain any structure
or use, or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity.
   D.   Unlawful Use Or Structure: This title shall not be interpreted to
validate or make lawful any unlawful use or structure existing upon the
effective date of this title. Any such unlawful use or structure shall remain
unlawful to the extent that said use or structure is in conflict with the
provisions of this title. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-1-5: APPLICATION TO VARIATIONS AND SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Existing Variations And Special Uses: Any variation or special use
permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this title, or any
amendment hereto, that could be lawfully issued pursuant to the provisions in
effect after such effective date shall continue to be valid after such
effective date, subject to any conditions placed thereon at the time of
issuance. Any structure or use lawfully authorized by any such variation or
special use permit that could not be so issued after such effective date shall
be subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this title dealing with
nonconformities.
   B.   Existing Uses And Structures Newly Requiring Special Use Permits: The
owner of any use or structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this
title, or any amendment hereto, that did not, prior to such effective date,
require a special use permit but which, after such effective date, does require
a special use permit, may secure a special use permit pursuant to the standards
and procedures of chapter 17, article A of this title. Unless and until such a
special use permit is so secured, such use shall be subject to the provisions
of chapter 14 of this title dealing with nonconformities. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-1-6: BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE:
   A.   Building Permits Not Affected: All work, structures, and uses
authorized by building permits issued prior to the effective date of this
title, or any amendment hereto, and for which a certificate of occupancy had
been issued prior to such effective date, shall not be affected by this title.
Except as provided in subsections B and C of this section, no certificate of
occupancy shall be issued following the effective date of this title, or any
amendment hereto, unless the work, structure, or use for which the certificate
of occupancy is sought is made to fully comply with the applicable provisions
of this title, or any such amendment.
   B.   Change Not Required, Conditions: Nothing in this title, or any
amendment hereto, shall be deemed to require any change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any structure, if:
      1.   A building permit for such structure was lawfully and properly
issued prior to the effective date of this title, or any such amendment hereto;
such permit had not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date, and
construction pursuant to such permit is started prior to the expiration of such
permit; or
      2.   A building permit application was on file with the village building
department and complete in all material respects prior to the effective date of
this title.
   C.   Issuance Of Certificate Of Occupancy: Upon completion pursuant to
subsection B of this section, such structure may be occupied by, and a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for, the use designated on such
permit, subject thereafter to the provisions of chapter 14 of this title
dealing with nonconformities. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-1-7: SEVERABILITY:
The several provisions of this title shall be severable in accordance with the
following rules:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall determine any provision of
this title to be invalid, such determination shall not affect any other
provisions of this title.
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this title to a particular parcel of land, a
particular structure or a particular use, such judgment shall not affect the
application of said provisions of any other land, structure or use. (2005
Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Interpretation
12-2-2: Word Usage
12-2-3: Definitions
12-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation of this title, the rules and definitions as provided in
sections
12-2-2 and
12-2-3 of this chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context
clearly indicates otherwise. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-2-2: WORD USAGE:
   A.   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
   B.   Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words
in the plural number shall include the singular number.
   C.   The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The
feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter gender shall
include the masculine and feminine.
   D.   The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
   E.   The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint
ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations, and any other
similar entities.
   F.   The phrase "used for" shall include "intended for", "designed for",
"occupied for", "maintained for", and "arranged to be used or occupied for"
whenever that interpretation would result in the regulation being more
restrictive in its application to any use or structure.
   G.   The word "village" means the village of Berkeley, Cook County,
Illinois.
   H.   The word "county" means the county of Cook, Illinois.
   I.   Any word not defined in section
12-2-3 of this chapter shall have the meaning given in any applicable village
ordinance or code or, if none, in "Webster's New International Dictionary"
(latest edition), except for words employed to refer to the permitted uses and
special uses of this title, which shall be interpreted, insofar as applicable,
in accordance with the meaning established in the "North American Industry
Classification System" (latest edition), as amended through the effective date
of this title.
   J.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this title and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control.
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this title, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section:
ABUT: Having a common border with, or being separated from, such a common
border by a right of way, alley, or easement.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE/USE: See chapter 9 of this title.
ALLEY: A public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
ALTERATION: Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy
of an existing structure.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL: Any change in the supporting members of a building or
structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders; provided,
however, that the application of any exterior siding to an existing building
for the purpose of beautifying and modernizing shall not be considered a
structural alteration.
AMENDMENT: See chapter 16 of this title.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
diagnostic observation, or treatment of domestic animals.
ANTENNA: A wire or set of wires used in the transmission and reception of
electromagnetic waves, and including the supporting structure. This includes,
but is not limited to, amateur radio antennas, television antennas, and
satellite receiving dishes.
ASSEMBLY USES: A structure or place for groups of people to gather for an event
or regularly scheduled program that is educational, cultural, spiritual,
social, or recreational in nature.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM): A mechanized consumer banking device operated
by a financial institution for the convenience of its customers, whether
outside or in an access controlled facility. ATMs located within a building
shall be considered an accessory to the principal use unless the ATM is likely
to be an independent traffic generator.
BANK: A financial institution that is open to the public and engaged in deposit
banking, and that performs closely related functions such as making loans,
investments, and fiduciary activities. Currency exchanges and quick loan shops
are specifically excluded from this definition.
BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a
pole or a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal
flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be
considered banners.
BASEMENT: A story partly underground and having at least one-half (1/2) of its
height above the average adjoining grade.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way or corporate boundary lines of
the village of Berkeley, or other natural barriers.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a lot after the minimum open space
requirements have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended to support, enclose, shelter, or
protect persons, animals, or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage of a lot area covered by any building or
structure.
BUILDING DEPTH: The longest straight line that can be drawn through a structure
substantially parallel to the side or corner side lot lines of the lot where it
is located.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded entirely by open space.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot where it is located.
BUILDING WIDTH: The longest straight line that can be drawn through a structure
parallel to the front lot line.
BULK REGULATIONS: The regulations of this title pertaining to permissible or
required height, volume, area, floor area, floor area ratio, dimensions,
building coverage, lot coverage, and usable open space applicable to uses and
structures. This term does not include yard requirements.
CELLAR: A portion of a structure located partly or wholly underground and
having half or more than half its clear floor to ceiling height below grade.
CEMETERY: A burial ground including structures such as mausoleums,
columbariums, incidental management offices and maintenance facilities.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: The definition of "childcare" distinguishes among types of
childcare establishments, as follows:
   A.   Family Care Child Home: A private residence where care, protection, and
supervision are provided, for a fee, at least twice a week to no more than six
(6) children at one time, including children of the adult provider.
   B.   Group Childcare Center, Class A: A building or structure where care,
protection, and supervision are provided, on a regular schedule, at least twice
a week to at least seven (7) and no more than twelve (12) children, including
children of the adult provider.
   C.   Group Childcare Center, Class B: A building or structure where care,
protection, and supervision are provided, on a regular schedule, at least twice
a week to more than twelve (12) children, including children of the adult
provider.
COMMERCIAL USE: Any use permitted by right in a business district.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street, one end of which is closed and consists of a
circular turnaround.
CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility registered by department of agriculture to
perform activities to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing
organizations with usable medical cannabis in compliance with the compassionate
use of medical cannabis pilot program act 1 .
DAYCARE CENTER: A facility providing daytime supervision, training, recreation
and care for children of preschool age, for the disabled, or for those with
chronic disabilities and before or after school care of children.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units permitted per net acre of land.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change, other than maintenance of existing structures,
paved areas, or utilities, to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
without limitation, the construction or installation of new, or enlargement of
existing, structures, streets or utilities; dredging, filling, drilling,
mining, grading, paving, or excavating operations; and open storage of
materials.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: Any accessory building or structure or portion thereof
to a principal use that is designed, intended or used to transact business for
the convenience of customers who remain in motor vehicles. These facilities
include, but are not limited to, restaurants, banks, financial institutions, or
any business having drive-up or curb service.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential
purposes, including one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings, but
not including hotels and boarding and lodging houses.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A detached residential building containing three (3) or
more dwelling units, including what is commonly known as an apartment building,
but not including group, row, or town houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (GROUP, ROW, AND TOWN HOUSES): A building
containing dwelling units, each of which has primary ground floor access to the
outside and which are attached to each other by party walls without openings.
The term is intended primarily for such dwelling types as townhouses and
duplexes.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED: A residential building containing not more
than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an
independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with
separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping.
EASEMENT: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the owner to, or for
the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.
FACADE: The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall
viewed by persons not within the building.
FAMILY:
   A.   One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single,
nonprofit housekeeping unit; provided, that a group of four (4) or more persons
who are not within the second degree of kinship shall not be deemed to
constitute a "family".
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this definition, a
"family" shall be deemed to include four (4) or more persons not within the
second degree of kinship occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single,
nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are handicapped persons as
defined in title VIII of the civil rights act of 1968, as amended by the fair
housing amendments act of 1988. Such unrelated individuals shall have the right
to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and to the same extent as any
family unit as defined in subsection A of this definition.
FENCE: A structure, other than a building, which is a barrier and used as a
boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the area of the several floors of a building,
including area used for human occupancy in basements, attics, and penthouses,
as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars,
unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy, or any floor space
in accessory buildings or in the main building intended and designed for the
parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this
title, or any such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and
ventilating equipment. It shall include the horizontal area at each floor level
devoted to stairwells and elevator shafts.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: Determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings
on a lot by the area of that lot.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of the street, measured along
such street, between an intersecting or intercepting street and another
intersecting or intercepting street, a right of way in excess of thirty feet
(30'), an end of a dead end street, a watercourse, or a village boundary.
GARAGE: A structure, or part thereof, designed or used for the parking and
storage of vehicles.
GRADE: The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a
building. In case walls are parallel to, and within five feet (5') of, a
sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA: The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and
exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any,
expressed in square feet and measured from the centerline of joint partitions
and from outside wall faces.
GROUND COVERAGE: See definition of Lot Coverage.
GROUP HOME FOR THE HANDICAPPED:
   A.   A dwelling shared by four (4) or more handicapped persons, including
resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long
term, family like environment in which staff persons provide care, education,
and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary
goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to
reach their maximum potential. As used herein, the term "handicapped" shall
mean having:
      1.   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of
living independently;
      2.   A record of having such an impairment; or
      3.   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
   B.   However, "handicapped" shall not include current illegal use of, or
addiction to, a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose
residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety
of other individuals.
   C.   The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not include alcoholism
or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-
convicts, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to
incarceration.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs;
to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and
the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the curb level if
the building is not more than ten feet (10') from the front lot line or from
the grade in all other cases.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area containing buildings or places in which historic
events occurred or having special public value because of notable architectural
or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the
community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation.
HOME OCCUPATION 2 : An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment
which:
   A.   Is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit
as a residence;
   B.   Is carried on solely within the main dwelling and does not alter or
change the exterior character or appearances of the dwelling;
   C.   Is located in a residential district;
   D.   Is created and operated as a sole proprietorship.
HOTEL: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to
the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreational facilities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the
infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. "Impervious
surface" shall include graveled driveways and parking areas.
IMPROVEMENT OR FACILITY, PUBLIC: A sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage
appurtenance, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, planting strip, or other
facility for which the village or another governmental agency may assume
maintenance or operational responsibility.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A planned, coordinated development of a tract of land with two
(2) or more separate industrial buildings. Such development is planned,
designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with
special attention given to on site vehicular circulation, parking, utility
needs, building design and orientation, and open space.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use
engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive
materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
JUNKYARD: An open area where wastes or used or secondhand materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, processed, or handled. "Materials" shall include, but
are not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and
bottles. An "automobile wrecking yard" is also considered a "junkyard".
KENNEL: An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs, cats, or
other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or
selling of animals is conducted as a business.
LOADING SPACE: An area used for the standing, loading or unloading of a truck
or a trailer.
LOT: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which is recorded in the
office of the Cook County recorder, or a parcel of land separately described in
a recorded instrument.
LOT AREA: The area of horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through
front, side, and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on, and at the intersection of, two (2) or more
streets.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas,
excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features.
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, FLAG: A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a
narrow corridor.
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: A line dividing one lot from another lot or from a street or alley.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The line separating the front of the lot from the street. When
a lot or building site is bounded by a public street and one or more alleys or
private street easements or private streets, the front lot line shall be the
nearest right of way line of the public street.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite to the front property line. Where the
side property lines of a lot meet in a point, the rear property line shall be
assumed to be a line not less than ten feet (10') long, lying within the lot
and parallel to the front property line. In the event that the front property
line is a curved line, then the rear property line shall be assumed to be a
line not less than ten feet (10') long, lying within the lot and parallel to a
line tangent to the front property line at its midpoint.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot that is not a front or rear lot line. On
a corner lot, a side lot line may be a street lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: See definition of Lot.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD: A lot or parcel of land that has less than the required
minimum area or width as established by the zone in which it is located; and
provided, that such lot or parcel was of record as a legally created lot on the
effective date of this title.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot that has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2)
substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through
lot, both street lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance
between these side lines; or if the side property lines are not parallel, the
width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of
the lot at a distance equal to the front setback required for the district in
which the lot is located. The axis of a lot shall be a line joining the
midpoints of the front and rear property lines.
LOT, ZONING: A tract of land consisting of one or more lots of record, or parts
thereof, under single fee simple title ownership or control, located entirely
within a block and occupied by, or designated by, its owner or developer at the
time of filing for any zoning approval or building permit as a tract to be
developed for a principal building and its accessory buildings, or a principal
use, together with such open spaces and yards as are designed and arranged, or
required under this title, to be used with such building or use.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by department of financial and
professional regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualified patients in
compliance with the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act 3 .
MOTEL: A building or group of detached or connected buildings designed or used
primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers and a
parking space adjacent to a sleeping room. An automobile court or a tourist
court with more than one unit or a motor lodge shall be deemed a "motel".
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: Any building that does not meet the limitations on
building size and location on a lot, for the district in which such building is
located, for the use to which such building is being put.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A use or activity which lawfully existed prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of this title, but which fails by reason of
such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the use district in which
it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use
regulations for its zoning district, but which complied with applicable
regulations at the time the use was established.
OFFICE: A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
OFFICE PARK: A large tract of land that has been planned, developed, and
operated as an integrated facility for a number of separate office buildings
and supporting ancillary uses with special attention given to circulation,
parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
OPEN SPACE: Land used for recreation, resource protection, amenity, and/or
buffers. In no event shall any area of a lot constituting the minimum lot area
nor any part of an existing or future road or right of way be counted as
constituting open space.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Open space within or related to a development, not in
individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and
intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development.
OWNER: Includes the holder of legal title as well as holders of any equitable
interest, such as trust beneficiaries, contract purchasers, option holders,
lessees under leases having an unexpired term of at least ten (10) years, and
the like. Whenever a statement of ownership is required by this title, full
disclosure of all legal and equitable interests in the property is required.
PARCEL: A continuous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by, or
recorded as the property of, the same person or persons.
PARK: An area open to the general public and reserved for recreational,
educational, or scenic purposes.
PARKING LOT: An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be stored
for the purposes of temporary, daily, or overnight off street parking.
PARKING, SHARED: The development and use of parking areas on two (2) or more
separate properties for joint use by the businesses on those properties.
PARKING SPACE: An unobstructed space or area other than a street or alley that
is permanently reserved and maintained for the parking of one motor vehicle.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: See chapter 17, article B of this title.
PRINCIPAL USE: The use of a zoning lot, whether a permitted or specially
permitted use, designated by the owner of such lot as the primary or main use
of such lot and to which any other use on such lot must be accessory.
RESTAURANT: A business establishment whose principal business is the selling of
unpackaged food to the customer in a ready to consume state, in individual
servings, or in nondisposable containers, and where the customer consumes these
foods while seated at tables or counters located within the building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: An establishment that delivers prepared food and/or
beverages to customers in motor vehicles, regardless of whether or not it also
serves prepared food and/or beverages to customers who are not in motor
vehicles, for consumption either on or off the premises.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: An establishment that offers quick food service, which
is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for
service, or prepared, fried, or griddled quickly, or heated in a device such as
a microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the customer's table, and
food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or other special use.
ROAD, PRIVATE: (See also definitions of Right Of Way and Street.) A way open to
vehicular ingress and egress established as a separate tract for the benefit of
certain, adjacent properties. This definition shall not apply to driveways.
ROAD, PUBLIC: (See also definitions of Right Of Way and Street.) All public
property reserved or dedicated for street traffic.
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted to conceal an area from
view.
SETBACK: The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and
the related front, side, or rear property line.
SITE PLAN: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete
dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings,
structures, uses, and principal site development features proposed for a
specific parcel of land.
SPECIAL USE: See chapter 17, article A of this title.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is
no floor above, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. The
floor of a story may split levels; provided, that there is not more than a four
foot (4') difference in elevation between the different levels of the floor. A
basement shall be counted as a story; a cellar shall not be counted as a story.
Any area in which the distance from one floor to the floor or ceiling above it
is more than sixteen feet (16') shall be deemed to consist of one story for
each sixteen feet (16') of height or major fraction thereof.
STREET: A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for
passage or travel by motor vehicles, that provides direct or indirect access to
property.
STREET FRONTAGE: The distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a
public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the farthest
distant lot line intersecting the same street.
SUBSTANTIAL REMODELING: Includes any increase in square footage which is
suitable for occupancy; addition; relocation; change in number of living units;
development of or change in an open area; or other change in a facility, but
excluding painting, ordinary maintenance, and demolition or removal.
TEMPORARY USE: See section
12-4-10 of this title.
THROUGH LOT: See definition of Lot, Through.
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Single-Family, Attached (Group, Row, And
Town Houses).
TRANSITIONAL USE: A permitted use or structure that by nature or level and
scale of activity acts as a transition or buffer between two (2) or more
incompatible uses.
VARIANCE: See chapter 15 of this title.
WAREHOUSE: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION: A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and
distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding
bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
YARD: Any open space located on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground up, except for accessory buildings, or such
projections as are expressly permitted in this title. The minimum depth or
width of a yard shall consist of the horizontal distance between the lot line
and the nearest point of the foundation wall of the main building.
YARD, FRONT: (See also definition of Lot Line, Front.) A clear, unoccupied
space on the same lot with a building, extending across the entire width of the
lot and situated between the front line of the building and the front line of
the lot.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building. Rear yard depth shall
be measured at right angles to the rear line of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest line
of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the
absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines.
Side yard width shall be measured at right angles to side lines of the lot.
ZERO LOT LINE: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or
more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line.
ZONE: A portion of the territory of the village, exclusive of streets, alleys,
and other public ways, within which certain uses of land, premises, and
buildings are not permitted and within which certain yards and open spaces are
required and certain height limits are established for buildings. (2005 Zoning
Code; amd. Ord. 2006-04, 2-21-2006; Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-2006; Ord. 06-24, 7-18-
2006; Ord. 14-11, 7-1-2014; Ord. 15-20, 3-3-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
2 1. See also section
  12-4-5 of this title.
3 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-3-1: Organization
12-3-2: Zoning Administrator
12-3-3: Zoning Administrator Review
12-3-4: Certificates Of Occupancy
12-3-5: Fees
12-3-6: Enforcement And Penalties
12-3-1: ORGANIZATION:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in the:
   A.   Office of the zoning administrator, under the supervision of the
village administrator;
   B.   Planning and zoning commission; and
   C.   Corporate authorities. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-3-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby established the office of zoning
administrator, who shall be appointed by the village president with the consent
of the board of trustees. The zoning administrator may be removed by the
village president without cause with the consent of the board of trustees.
   B.   Duties: The zoning administrator shall represent the village
administrator in the administration and enforcement of this title, and will be
under the supervision of the village administrator, and in addition thereto and
in furtherance of said authority, he shall:
      1.   Determine conformance of applications for zoning certificates with
regulations of this title.
      2.   Issue all zoning certificates following approval as required in this
title, and maintain records thereof.
      3.   Issue all certificates of occupancy, and maintain records thereof.
      4.   Issue permits for the temporary use of tents as provided by section
12-4-10 of this title.
      5.   Maintain permanent and current records of the administration and
enforcement of this title, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments,
variations, appeals, and applications, thereof.
      6.   Conduct inspections of structures and uses of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this title as needed and required.
      7.   Maintain permanent and current records of all nonconforming uses by
location, type of activity, and the type and the degree of nonconformance,
including the date such use is temporarily damaged, or discontinued, and if
damaged, the degree of damage rendered to the property.
      8.   Receive, file and forward to the planning and zoning commission for
consideration all applications for variations and appeals or for other matters
on which the board is required to act under this title.
      9.   Receive, file and forward to the planning and zoning commission all
applications for amendments, special uses, or other matters on which the
planning and zoning commission is required to act under this title.
      10.   Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this title, amendment, and make reports of these recommendations
to the board of trustees.
      11.   Provide and maintain public information facilities relative to all
matters pertaining to this title. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-3-3: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR REVIEW:
   A.   Authority: The zoning administrator shall have authority to review
every application filed under this title prior to any such application being
considered for approval by the planning and zoning commission or corporate
authorities.
   B.   Purpose:
      1.   The zoning administrator's review serves two (2) purposes:
         a.   Provides a procedure for reviewing plans for conformance with
this title and a means of evidencing such conformance; and
         b.   Serves as an adjunct to, and thus must be conducted prior to or
with, all other applications filed pursuant to this title with respect to a
specific use or development proposal.
      2.   The zoning administrator's review serves as a vehicle for routine
plan review prior to consideration by other officials, boards, or commissions,
thereby avoiding needless reviews of defective plans.
   C.   Relation To Other Applications: No application for a zoning variation,
special use permit, amendment, or development concept plan shall be processed
unless first reviewed by the zoning administrator. It is the intent of this
section that no application for a zoning variation, special use permit,
amendment, or development concept plan for a specific use or development
proposal shall be processed until the zoning administrator is satisfied that
the proposed use or development complies with the provisions of this title in
all respects except those within the scope of any such application.
   D.   Application Requirements For Zoning Administrator Review:
      1.   Any application made under this title shall be made on a form
provided by the zoning administrator and shall have affixed to it the
certificate of an architect or structural engineer licensed by the state of
Illinois that the building or structure and the proposed use thereof complies
with all provisions of this title respecting performance standards for
manufacturing and similar uses.
      2.   Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of an application, the zoning
administrator shall examine said application and if he finds the proposed use
of land, building, or structure does not comply with applicable performance
standards and other applicable regulations of this title, he shall notify the
architect or the structural engineer and person filing the application, in
writing, of his finding.
      3.   Failure of the professional architect or the structural engineer to
show that such application is in compliance, or of the applicant to submit a
revised application which shows compliance within thirty (30) days of such
notification, shall be cause for denial of an application.
      4.   The zoning administrator shall, upon making a finding that an
application is complete and that the proposed use complies with all applicable
provisions of this title, approve and authorize the application for further
consideration by other officials, boards, or commissions.
In any case where an application is denied, the zoning administrator shall
state specific reasons therefor and shall site specific provisions of this
title upon which such denial is based. If relief from such demand would be
available pursuant to a companion application, the zoning administrator shall
so inform the applicant and shall promptly process such companion application.
If relief from the zoning administrator's denial of the application would be
available by variation, special use permit, or other provision of this title,
but no application for such relief has been filed, the zoning administrator
shall so state and shall refer the applicant to the appropriate provisions of
this title.
   E.   Plats: Every application filed under this title shall be accompanied by
a plat conforming to the standards for a preliminary plat as set forth in the
village subdivision ordinance, or as otherwise prescribed by the zoning
administrator.
   F.   Effect Of Zoning Administrator's Approval: The zoning administrator's
approval of an application shall not authorize the establishment, expansion, or
extension of any use, nor the development, construction, relocation,
alteration, or moving of a building or structure, but shall merely authorize
the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any additional
permits and approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the
village. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-3-4: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Authority: The zoning administrator shall have the authority to issue
certificates of occupancy; provided, however, that no such certificate shall be
issued except in accordance with the provisions of this section and the
provisions of the village building code.
   B.   Purposes: For the purposes of this title, the certificate of occupancy
provides a procedure for the inspection of the completed premises to ensure
compliance with this title and approved plans prior to commencement of the use
or occupancy of such premises.
   C.   Certificate Required; Change Of Use:
      1.   Unless a certificate of occupancy shall have first been obtained
certifying compliance with the provisions of this title:
         a.   No structure, or addition thereto, constructed, reconstructed,
remodeled, altered, or moved after the effective date of this title shall be
occupied or used for any purpose.
         b.   No land, vacant as of the effective date of this title, shall be
used or occupied for any purpose.
         c.   Except for changes involving only substitution of occupants in
existing dwellings units, no use or occupancy of any land or structure shall be
changed to any other use or occupancy, whether or not construction, remodeling,
alteration, or moving is involved.
      2.   Nothing in this section shall prevent the continuance of the present
occupancy or use of any existing building, except as may be necessary to ensure
for and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the village.
   D.   Application For Certificate; Fee:
      1.   Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made
concurrently with any application filed under this title and shall be processed
at such time as the applicant notifies the zoning administrator in writing that
the subject structure or use is ready for a certificate of occupancy.
      2.   An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied
by as built plans depicting the structure or use built and bearing the
certificate of a surveyor, engineer, architect, land planner, or owner-
designer, as may be appropriate, certifying that the structure or use conforms
in all respects to the approval granted.
      3.   Within ten (10) days following receipt of a completed application,
the zoning administrator shall cause the subject structure or use to be
inspected and shall take the following actions based upon such inspection:
         a.   If all work has been completed and the structure and use thereof
are in full and complete compliance with all applicable provisions of this
title, other relevant codes and ordinances of the village, the applicant's
plans as approved and any conditions attached to any approval issued pursuant
to this title, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of occupancy;
or
         b.   If, however, all work is not complete or is in any manner not in
full compliance with all applicable requirements, the zoning administrator
shall deny the application and shall inform the applicant in writing of the
specific deficiencies on which such denial is based, citing the particular
provisions of the applicable codes and ordinances of the village, the
particular items in the applicant's plans or the applicable special approval
conditions with respect to which compliance is lacking.
      4.   A fee shall be charged for each original certificate, and for each
copy thereof provided by section
12-3-5 of this chapter.
   E.   Contents Of Certificate Of Occupancy: Each certificate of occupancy
issued pursuant to this section shall state the specific use of the subject
property for which it is issued; shall identify the specific plans submitted
with the application for the certificate of occupancy; and shall set forth any
conditions imposed in connection with the approval.
   F.   Filing Of Certificates Of Occupancy: Every certificate of occupancy
issued pursuant to this section shall be kept on file with the zoning
administrator and shall be a public record open to inspection in accordance
with the provisions of the Illinois freedom of information act 1 .
   G.   Temporary Permit Pending Certificate Issuance: A temporary permit may
be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its date,
during the completion of any building, structure, or land improvement, or
during partial occupancy thereof. Application for a temporary permit shall be
accompanied by a statement covering the items of work to be completed and the
reasons the temporary permit is requested.
   H.   Certificate Of Occupancy For Existing Uses: The zoning administrator
may issue a certificate of occupancy certifying the lawful existence and use of
any existing structure or use in the same manner, and subject to the same
standards and limitations, as authorized by this section with respect to new
structures and uses. Such certificates shall be prima facie evidence of the
facts contained in it with respect to any structure or use as of the date of
its issue and remain effective for that purpose for so long as neither the use
or the structure nor the applicable provisions of this title are changed.
   I.   Certificate Of Occupancy For Legal Nonconformities: The zoning
administrator may issue a certificate of occupancy certifying the lawful
existence and use of any nonconforming use, structure, or lot in the same
manner, and subject to the same standards and limitations, as authorized by
this section with respect to new structures and uses and subject also to the
provisions of this title regarding nonconformities. (2005 Zoning Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
12-3-5: FEES:
   A.   Payment Of Fee: Any application filed under this title shall be
accompanied by an applicable fee as set forth on a schedule of current zoning
application fees on file with the office of the village clerk, the village
administrator, and zoning administrator.
   B.   Application Fee As Minimum Fee; Certain Other Expenses: An application
fee is the minimum fee established by the corporate authorities from time to
time, by resolution duly adopted, to cover the expenses that may be incurred
due to staff time to review and process such application, and other expenses
such as printing and publication of notices, postage, and other costs. As such,
the application fee does not include additional charges, fees, and other costs
incurred by the village for its use of any retained consultants or attorneys in
the review, processing, and approval of any such application.
   C.   Cost Recovery Ordinance: An applicant under this title shall be
responsible to reimburse the village for all administrative and professional
costs incurred by the village in the review, processing, and approval of an
application, as required in ordinance 99-03, as amended.
   D.   Prohibition On Transfer Of Funds Between Applicant And Village
Consultant: At no time shall there be any transfer of funds from any applicant
to any village consultant or village staff personnel. All payments to
consultants shall be executed only under the conditions specified in this
section. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-3-6: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   General Enforcement Authority: Upon finding the existence of any
violation of this title, the zoning administrator shall have the authority and
duty to take or direct all actions necessary or appropriate to punish and abate
such violation.
   B.   Civil And Administrative Enforcement:
      1.   Stop And Cease And Desist Orders: Upon finding the existence of any
violation of this title, the zoning administrator shall notify, in writing, the
person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it; specifically, the zoning
administrator shall order the discontinuance of any illegal use of land or
structures; the removal of illegal structures, additions or alterations; and
the discontinuance of illegal structures, additions or alterations; and the
discontinuance of illegal work being done.
      2.   Legal Actions: In the enforcement of this title, the zoning
administrator shall exercise all the powers authorized by the statutes of the
state of Illinois and the codes and ordinances of the village to ensure
compliance with, or to prevent or abate any violations of, the provisions of
this title, and in particular, shall, where necessary or appropriate, institute
or cause to be instituted by the village attorney in the name of the village
any and all actions, legal or equitable, including appeals, that may be
required for the enforcement of this title.
      3.   Abatement; Liens: Where authorized by state statute, the zoning
administrator may order any work necessary to abate any violation of this title
and shall assess the cost of such work to the property owner. Upon the failure
of the owner to pay such cost, the zoning administrator shall file a lien for
such costs, and for all costs of collection, against the property in question.
      4.   Revocation Of Permits: The violation of any provision of this title,
or of any permit or approval granted pursuant to it, or of any condition
imposed pursuant to it shall be grounds for the revocation of any rezoning,
permit, variation or approval granted pursuant to this title and affecting the
property involved in the violation. The zoning administrator may recommend and
the board of trustees may order such revocation; provided, however, where the
original rezoning permit, variation or approval was granted following a public
hearing required pursuant to this title, the revocation shall be preceded by a
similar hearing.
      5.   Fines: In the enforcement of this title, the zoning administrator
shall, where necessary and appropriate, order the issuance and enforcement of
citations to recover fines and penalties for the violation of this title as
authorized by state law and this title.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person who shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to
comply with, or who shall resist enforcement of, any provision of this title
shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense; provided,
however, that the zoning administrator shall levy fines according to the
following tiered schedule:
 
Between first through third day   $200.00
Between fourth through sixth day  225.00
Between seventh through tenth day 250.00
From eleventh day forward         Not less than $300.00 nor more than $750.00
 
      2.   The zoning administrator may, in his sole and absolute discretion,
stop levying fines upon satisfactory evidence that a violator of this title has
begun to or is in the process of remedying any such violation. In the event
that a violator of this title stops without good cause or otherwise fails to
finish any remedial action to cure any violation of this title, the zoning
administrator shall be authorized to again levy fines of between three hundred
dollars ($300.00) and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day for any
such violation that remains uncorrected.
   D.   Private Remedies Preserved: Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to prevent any person entitled to relief in law or equity by reason
of a violation of the provisions of this title from bringing an appropriate
action to secure such relief. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE A. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
12-3A-1: Commission Created
12-3A-2: Membership Requirements And Restrictions
12-3A-3: Terms Of Members
12-3A-4: Proceedings Of Commission
12-3A-5: Hearings And Appeals; Notices; Stays Of Proceedings
12-3A-6: Powers And Duties
12-3A-7: Powers In Capacity As Architectural Review Committee
12-3A-8: Conflict Of Interest
12-3A-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
A planning and zoning commission for the village is hereby created. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-3A-2: MEMBERSHIP REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Appointment: The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven
(7) members, one of whom shall be the chairman, and the said seven (7) members
shall be appointed by the village president, with the consent of the board of
trustees.
   B.   Residency: Members of the planning and zoning commission shall reside
within the village or within unincorporated territory contiguous with the
village.
   C.   Chairman: The chairman of the planning and zoning commission shall be
designated by the village president, with the consent of the board of trustees.
   D.   Removal Of Members: The village president shall have the power to
remove any member of said board for cause and after a public hearing.
   E.   Expenditures: In the performance of its duties, the planning and zoning
commission may incur such expenditures as shall be authorized by the corporate
authorities.
   F.   Compensation: Each member shall be compensated at such rate as may be
from time to time determined by the corporate authorities. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-3A-3: TERMS OF MEMBERS:
   A.   Terms: Members appointed by the village president, consented to by the
board of trustees, shall serve the following terms: two (2) shall be appointed
for a term of one year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and the remaining
three (3) for a term of three (3) years. Members so appointed shall, after the
expiration of first term, if they are reappointed, be appointed for a period of
three (3) years.
   B.   Vacancies: All vacancies occurring in the planning and zoning
commission shall be filled by appointment of the president, subject to consent
of the board of trustees, for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same
manner as original appointments. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-3A-4: PROCEEDINGS OF COMMISSION:
   A.   Conduct Of Meetings:
      1.   Meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be held at the
call of the chairman and at such other times as the planning and zoning
commission may determine.
      2.   Such chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
      3.   Quorum requirements:
         a.   In the case of meetings, four (4) members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall constitute a quorum to conduct business.
         b.   In the case of hearings, in the event there is no quorum of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, any two (2) or more members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission present for a public hearing, notice for which has been duly
given, are hereby designated as a committee of the Planning and Zoning
Commission authorized to conduct such public hearing. However, no
recommendation or decision regarding any public hearing may be made except at a
properly and legally convened meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at
which a quorum exists.
      4.   All meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be open to
the public.
   B.   Vote Required: The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission present and eligible to vote shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning
administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter which is
authorized by this title to render a decision or recommendation.
   C.   Rules Of Procedure: The planning and zoning commission shall adopt its
own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its own proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other
official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each
case of a requested variation or appeal, and the reasons for approving or
denying, or recommending approval or denial of, such variation or appeal, as
the case may be, shall be specified.
   D.   Records: All records of proceedings, findings, determinations and
actions of the planning and zoning commission shall be filed with the zoning
administrator and shall be a public record. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 20-17,
3-17-2020)
12-3A-5: HEARINGS AND APPEALS; NOTICES; STAYS OF PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Appeals to the planning and zoning commission may be
taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, commission
or bureau of the village affected by a decision of the zoning administrator.
Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the
planning and zoning commission by general rule, by filing with the village
administrator a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The village
administrator shall promptly transmit to the planning and zoning commission all
of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the village administrator
certifies to the planning and zoning commission after the notice of appeal has
been filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the planning and
zoning commission, or by a court of record, on application or notice to the
village administrator on due cause shown.
   C.   Setting Time And Place For Hearing: The planning and zoning commission
shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal, shall give
due notice thereof to the parties in interest, and shall render an advisory
decision within a reasonable time to the corporate authorities.
   D.   Testimony At Hearing: Any person may appear and testify at the hearing,
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-3A-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning and zoning commission shall, in addition to all other powers
provided by law, have the following powers:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   To exercise such powers granted by law and as may be conferred by
the corporate authorities of the village.
      2.   To exercise such powers necessary to perform the duties that are set
out in this title
   B.   Comprehensive Plan:
      1.   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a
comprehensive plan of public improvements looking to the present and future
development of the village, which plan shall be known as the official
comprehensive plan of Berkeley. Such plan shall include reasonable requirements
in reference to streets, alleys and public grounds, unsubdivided lands within
the corporate limits of the village and within contiguous unincorporated
territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles
from such limits.
      2.   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities from time to
time such changes in the comprehensive plan as may be deemed necessary by the
corporate authorities or by the planning and zoning commission; provided,
however, that such changes will not affect the general principles of the plan
as adopted.
      3.   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities from time to
time general plans for specific improvements in accordance with such
comprehensive plan.
      4.   To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the
direction of projects for improvements embraced within the comprehensive plan,
to further making of such improvements and generally promote the realization of
the comprehensive plan.
   C.   Duties As Zoning Board Of Appeals: In its capacity as a zoning board of
appeal:
      1.   Subject to the provisions set forth in section
12-3A-5 of this article, hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the zoning administrator or other authorized
official of the village having jurisdiction under this title.
      2.   To hear and make recommendations to the corporate authorities on
applications for variations from the terms provided in this title in this
manner and subject to the standards set forth in this section.
   D.   Duties As Plan Commission: In its capacity as a plan commission:
      1.   To receive copies of all applications for proposed amendments to
this title or the official zoning map and thereafter to hold public hearings,
and submit recommendations thereon to the board of trustees.
      2.   To receive all applications for zoning certificates filed for
special uses and planned developments and hold public hearings thereon.
      3.   To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of the text and the map comprising this title, and to make reports
of its recommendations to the board of trustees not less frequently than
annually.
   E.   Duties As Architectural Review Committee: In its capacity as an
architectural review committee, and subject to the provisions of section
12-3A-7 of this article:
      1.   To hold public meetings, and make recommendations to the zoning
administrator.
      2.   To consult and cooperate with other village departments, and any
other municipal or governmental bodies, on matters affecting the appearance of
the village.
      3.   To study exterior design drawings, landscape and site plans, and
materials for any proposed public works or public improvements, and to make
recommendations to the zoning administrator as to the architectural or
aesthetic aspects thereof.
   F.   Advisory Powers: The powers and duties of the planning and zoning
commission, as established in this section, shall be strictly advisory to the
corporate authorities and shall not have any final determination or decision
authority on any matter or application that comes before it. (2005 Zoning Code;
amd. Ord. 20-17, 3-17-2020)
12-3A-7: POWERS IN CAPACITY AS ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
Whenever the planning and zoning commission acts in its capacity as an
architectural review committee, the following procedures and standards shall
apply:
   A.   Meetings, Quorum And Records: Meetings of the architectural review
committee shall be held at the call of the chairman, and shall be open to the
public. A meeting shall be called whenever an application for a building permit
is submitted for the committee's consideration. The committee shall keep
minutes of its proceedings and shall keep records of its examinations, and
other official action. The committee may adopt its own rules of procedure not
inconsistent with this title.
   B.   Procedure:
      1.   The zoning administrator, upon his or her determination that a
request for a building permit warrants the attention of the architectural
review committee, or upon a similar determination of the corporate authorities,
shall refer such request, together with all necessary drawings, including, but
not limited to, preliminary exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site
plans and other related materials on a specific project for their review.
      2.   The committee shall meet not later than fifteen (15) days from the
date of the zoning administrator's request for meeting, and shall review the
proposed building design, at which time the presence of the petitioner or his
architect shall be requested to answer questions. The committee shall provide
to the petitioner such advice, counsel, suggestions and recommendations on
matters pertaining to appearance as they may deem necessary to develop a plan
that would comply with standards set forth in this section.
      3.   Upon finding that the preliminary exterior drawings, sketches,
landscape and site plans and materials are appropriate to, or compatible with,
the character of the immediate neighborhood and are in compliance with the
general standards provided in this section, the committee shall submit its
recommendations for approval, or revisions, if any, and the underlying
reasoning thereof, to the zoning administrator with a letter signed by the
chairman of the committee.
      4.   The fact that the architectural review committee is considering
compliance of an application with the requirements of this section shall not be
cause for the zoning administrator to delay the review of plans relating to the
building and zoning aspects of the project, while said application is pending.
      5.   The zoning administrator, upon receiving such recommendation from
the committee, shall proceed with the issuance of a building permit if the
recommendation is favorable, and provided the proposed building complies with
all other provisions of this title, and all other applicable village
ordinances.
      6.   If the recommendations of the architectural review committee
pertaining to suggested revisions are rejected by the petitioner, or if the
committee recommends denial of the request for the building permit, the zoning
administrator shall refer this matter to the corporate authorities within seven
(7) days from the date of the committee's communication, or from the date the
zoning administrator is informed by the petitioner or his representative that
they object to the committee's recommendation. The board of trustees shall hear
and decide as provided by law. After receiving the evidence from the applicant,
the zoning administrator, and any owners or occupants of buildings in the
immediate vicinity of the proposed building, the board of trustees shall
determine whether the erection of the proposed building will not meet the
standards, requirements and purposes of this section, and shall affirm the
denial of the permit or shall direct the zoning administrator to issue a
building permit.
   C.   Design Standards: All new construction of buildings and all
alterations, modifications and improvements to existing buildings shall be
architecturally designed in a manner not manifestly inferior, radically
different from, nor incompatible with existing buildings in the neighborhood
(including buildings under construction). The term "architectural design" shall
mean the external style and general arrangement of such portion of a building
or structure as is designed to be open to view from a public street, place, or
way, including the kind, color and texture of the building material of such
portion, and the types of windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs and
other fixtures appurtenant to such portion. The following standards shall be
used by the committee in evaluating any matter before it:
      1.   Repetition Of Design:
         a.   No developer shall construct two (2) or more buildings of like
exterior design on the same side of the street unless such buildings are
separated by two (2) or more buildings or building sites, or combination
thereof, of completely dissimilar design.
         b.   All buildings shall be considered to be of like exterior design
unless they have substantially different floor plans, or they have similar
floor plans, but each building is oriented in a different direction so as not
to expose similar elevations in any one direction, or in the opinion of the
architectural review committee, their elevations are deemed substantially
different in exterior appearance.
      2.   Exterior Materials:
         a.   Freestanding buildings and buildings fronting on more than one
street shall have the same material or different but architecturally harmonious
materials used on all exterior walls. Nothing herein contained shall be held to
require the use of more than one material on any one wall unless such variety
of material is used for decorative purpose.
         b.   All single- and multiple-family dwellings shall be faced with
pressed face bricks or other masonry material, except cinder block, on all
sides. Other materials may be used above the first floor for a specific
architectural effect upon approval by the architectural review committee and
acceptance by the zoning administrator.
         c.   All office and commercial buildings shall be faced with pressed
face brick or glass, except utilization of the other noncombustible material
other than common brick or cinder blocks may be used above the first floor for
a specific architectural effect upon approval by the architectural review
committee and acceptance by the zoning administrator.
         d.   All industrial buildings shall be faced with pressed face bricks
on their entire elevations. Other noncombustible material is only permitted for
a specific architectural effect and only for decorating purpose, provided no
common brick or cinder blocks are used for this purpose, and only upon approval
by the architectural review committee and acceptance by the zoning
administrator.
      3.   Landscaping Plan And Material: All site plans for buildings
constructed in R-3 and R-4 residential districts and B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1,
M-2, and M-3 districts shall be referred to the architectural review committee
with respect to the location, design, and type of plant material used in the
landscaping of sites as required by this title.
   D.   Power To Establish Separate Committee: The corporate authorities may at
any time, and in their sole and absolute discretion, establish a separate
architectural review committee to carry out those responsibilities set forth in
subsection 12-3A-6E of this article and this section. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-3A-8: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No member of the planning and zoning commission shall participate in
discussions or vote on a request related to any matter belonging to a client he
or she is serving, or related to any business of which he or she is owner,
corporation officer, employee, or in which he or she has a partial interest.
Notwithstanding anything in this section, the members of the planning and
zoning commission shall be subject to the requirements of the village ethics
ordinance and all associated disclosure requirements. (2005 Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-4-1: Use Of Land And Structures
12-4-2: Exemptions From Residential Area And Yard Regulations
12-4-3: Yards And Other Open Spaces
12-4-4: Setbacks Along Streets And Thoroughfares
12-4-5: Home Occupations
12-4-6: Commercial Vehicles
12-4-7: Storage Of Junk, Refuse And Disabled Vehicles
12-4-8: Sewerage And Water Systems
12-4-9: Floodplain Areas
12-4-10: Temporary Uses
12-4-11: Structural And Use Encroachments In Yards
12-4-1: USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES:
Unless otherwise established as a permitted or special use in the following
chapters of this title, any application for a land use not contained by name
within a zoning district list of such permitted or special uses, must be added,
if at all, as a text amendment after consideration by the planning and zoning
commission and approved by the corporate authorities. The planning and zoning
commission may recommend and the corporate authorities, in their sole and
absolute discretion, may require that any such use be listed as either a
permitted or special use in one or more districts of the village, as
established under this title. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-4-2: EXEMPTIONS FROM RESIDENTIAL AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   Existing Lot Of Record: Any residential lot of record under single and
separate ownership on the effective date of this title that is unable to meet
the requirements of this title as to applicable area and yard regulations may,
subject to the provisions of this title regarding nonconformities, be used for
a single-family detached dwelling, provided it shall meet all the other
requirements of this title and other applicable ordinances, regulations and
codes.
   B.   Exception: The exemption established in this section shall not apply
where any adjoining lot or tract of land is held under common ownership with
such exempted lot or tract of land, if the combined tract has a land area equal
to or more than the minimum requirement. If the combined tract of land is less
than the minimum requirement, the exemption shall apply to the entire combined
tract.
   C.   Lot Of Record Described: For the purposes of this section, a lot of
record shall be as follows:
      1.   In residence districts, a lot, parcel, or tract of land which was
recorded in the office of the village clerk prior to the effective date of this
title; or
      2.   In residence districts, a lot in a subdivision which was so recorded
after the effective date of this title, provided a preliminary plat for such
subdivision had been given tentative approval, as required by the subdivision
control ordinance of Berkeley prior to the effective date of this title, and a
final plat had been submitted and approved by the village board and thereafter
recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County within the time
periods required by such subdivision regulations for filing and application for
final plat approval and for recording after approval. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-4-3: YARDS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES:
   A.   Vacant Through Lots: On vacant through lots, the front lot line shall
be along the street line designated by the zoning administrator, except that
when a front line has been established on one or more lots in the same block
and all have front lot lines established along the same line, the street line
designated the front lot line for such lot or lots shall be the front lot line
on all vacant through lots in such block. Only those obstructions permitted in
this title in front yards shall be located in that part of a rear yard
adjoining a street that is equivalent in depth to a required front yard, except
where a no access strip has been provided for such lots on the recorded plat,
in which case the no access strip will be considered part of the rear yard.
   B.   Satisfying One Use Or Structure: No legally required yards, open space,
or lot area for any use or structure shall be used to satisfy yard, open space,
or lot area requirements for any other structure or use.
   C.   Development Of Rear Yard Areas: No residential lot within the village
shall have construction ground surfaces in the nature of impervious materials,
stone or a structure of any type in excess of four thousand five hundred
(4,500) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the rear yard area, whichever
dimension is less. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-4-4: SETBACKS ALONG STREETS AND THOROUGHFARES:
   A.   Required Setbacks: Minimum setbacks on lots abutting a street or
thoroughfare shall be the distance required for a front yard, or side yard
adjoining a street, in the districts where such lots are located, measured from
the existing right of way as designated on the official map of the village, and
as duly established by other ordinances of the village or as established by
county or state highway authorities, whichever has the greater right of way
width requirements.
   B.   Established Setbacks: When the established setback is of a depth other
than herein required for a front yard in the district in which the lot is
located and where the contiguous street or thoroughfare right of way widening
is not designated on the official map, the setback for each remaining lot along
such street shall be the average of the setbacks already established on
adjacent lots, and if no setback is established on one of the adjacent lots,
the setback for that lot shall be the average of the required front yard depth
and the established setback on the adjacent lot.
   C.   Setbacks Along Streets And Thoroughfares: Minimum setbacks on lots
abutting a street shall be as required for yards in the district in which they
are located and shall be measured from the street line or from the proposed
street line if one has been designated on the official map. (2005 Zoning Code)
   D.   Setbacks Along Property Lines: Requirements regarding setbacks along
property lines are as established within the applicable zoning district. (Ord.
11-35, 11-15-2011)
12-4-5: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Intent And Purpose: The regulation of home occupations is intended to
protect residential areas from the adverse impacts that are sometimes
associated with home occupations, maintain and preserve the character of
residential neighborhoods and provide for the protection of the health, safety
and welfare of all village residents.
   B.   Defined: A home occupation is an accessory use of a dwelling unit and
its accessory buildings for a lawful business, profession, occupation or trade
of the occupant operated in compliance with the regulations of this section.
   C.   Regulations: Home occupations are permitted only when all of the
following regulations are met:
      1.   Accessory And Secondary: The home occupation shall be secondary to
the residential use of the dwelling and conducted by a member of the family
residing in the dwelling with no assistance from other persons except as is
allowed in this section.
      2.   Separate Entrance: There shall be no separate entrance to the
dwelling for the sole purpose of the home occupation.
      3.   Alteration Of The Dwelling: There shall be no structural alteration
or special construction feature inconsistent with a residential use or that
draws attention to the dwelling as a commercial or business operation.
      4.   Area Of Use: The principal use as a home occupation may extend into
a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total square footage of the
dwelling or accessory building.
      5.   Exterior: There shall be no display or activity that will indicate
from the exterior of the dwelling that it is being used in whole or in part for
any use other than a dwelling. No signs identifying the home occupation shall
be allowed nor shall any outside storage be related to the home occupation.
      6.   Equipment: No equipment shall be utilized other than the type
normally found in a single-family dwelling unit.
      7.   Receipt Or Delivery Of Merchandise: There shall be no commodities
sold or received or services rendered that require receipt of delivery of
merchandise, goods or equipment by other than a vehicle having a plate
classification not higher than B or by vehicles typically employed by parcel or
letter carriers in residential deliveries. No deliveries by semitractor/trailer
trucks shall be permitted.
      8.   Sale Of Merchandise: The sale of merchandise shall not be the
principal use of the home occupation although merchandise may be sold as an
accessory use from the dwelling or if otherwise sold at a location other than
the dwelling or on the internet for pick up at the dwelling.
      9.   Refuse: No refuse shall be generated from the home occupation in
excess of the amount allowable for a residential use, such as the need for a
dumpster for the home occupation, and the home occupation shall not use or
produce combustible or toxic substances.
      10.   Traffic: The home occupation shall not create any traffic hazards
or nuisances in the public streets, nor use more vehicle parking than exists on
the property for the dwelling. The frequency of trips to and from the dwelling
shall be limited to avoid the creation of traffic patterns other than are
customary in a residential neighborhood. The parking of commercial vehicles
shall comply with chapter 12, articles A and B of this title and shall not be
considered exterior evidence of the home occupation.
      11.   Visitation: A home occupation may attract patrons, students or any
business related persons only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. except as otherwise provided in this section.
      12.   Nuisance: There shall be no public or private nuisance. There shall
be no noise, odor, dust, vibration, smoke, glare, television or radio
interference, electrical interference, fire hazard or any other hazard
emanating from the dwelling to create a nuisance other than that usually
experienced in an average dwelling under normal circumstances where no home
occupations exists.
      13.   Compliance With Law: The home occupation shall be in compliance
with applicable federal, state and village law or regulation.
      14.   Instruction Or Teaching: Instruction or teaching, other than
homeschooling, shall be limited to no more than three (3) pupils at one time.
Musical or dance instructions shall only be conducted in a detached single-
family dwelling.
      15.   Daycare: A daycare facility licensed by the state may be a home
occupation and it may provide indoor space, outdoor supervised recreation on
the property, assistance from other persons and may begin at six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. as otherwise approved or required by the state of Illinois.
      16.   Yard/Garage Sales: Yard or garage sales shall not be considered a
home occupation but shall be subject to other regulations in this code. (Ord.
14-7, 7-1-2014)
12-4-6: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
In a residential district, one commercial vehicle which is owned by the
occupant of the dwelling, and which is not more than twenty feet (20') in
length when parked, nor in excess of three- fourths (3/4) ton in capacity, may
be parked in the open on a lot within the buildable area or in the back yard
not closer than six feet (6') to any building on the neighboring property, or
not closer than three feet (3') to any property line, or may be stored in a
garage, carport or screen shelter, or similar structure designed so as to
substantially conceal the vehicle from the view of adjoining property owners,
if parked in the rear yard area. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-4-7: STORAGE OF JUNK, REFUSE AND DISABLED VEHICLES:
The open storage of junk, refuse, scrap, disabled or damaged vehicles, whether
awaiting repair or not, or motor vehicles without a current license plate is
prohibited in all zoning districts. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-4-8: SEWERAGE AND WATER SYSTEMS:
Each use hereafter established which requires sewerage and water facilities
shall be served by public or community sewerage and water systems. (2005 Zoning
Code)
12-4-9: FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
The ground floor including also a basement, cellar or crawl space floor of any
building hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged, or moved to a
floodplain area shall have an elevation that is at least two feet (2') above
flood crest level. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-4-10: TEMPORARY USES:
   A.   Authorization: Subject to the limitations of this section, temporary
uses as hereinafter specified are permitted in the zoning districts hereinafter
specified.
   B.   Definition: A "temporary use" is a use that:
      1.   Is established for a fixed period of time with the intent to
discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time; and
      2.   Does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
structure.
   C.   Zoning Certificate Requirements; Issuance And Revocation:
      1.   Zoning Certificate Required: Except as provided in subsections D1
and D13 of this section, no temporary use shall be established or maintained
unless a zoning certificate evidencing the compliance of such use with the
provisions of this title shall have first been issued in accordance with
section
12-3-3 of this title; provided, however, that permitted temporary uses of
publicly owned or leased buildings and property, other than those included in
subsection D13 of this section, shall be exempt from this requirement.
      2.   Basis For Certificate Denial: Such a zoning certificate may be
denied if the zoning administrator determines that the applicant has failed to
comply with the standards, conditions or terms of any previously issued zoning
certificate for a temporary use or that the permanent use of the subject
property fails to comply in all respects with the provisions of all village
ordinances regulating the development, use and maintenance of the property.
Such a zoning certificate shall be denied if the zoning administrator
determines that the public health, safety or welfare would be, or may
reasonably be expected to be, impaired by the issuance thereof.
      3.   Conditions Of Certificate: Such a zoning certificate may be
conditioned upon such special requirements as the zoning administrator may
determine are necessary to achieve the purposes of this title and to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare.
      4.   Revocation Of Certificate: Such a zoning certificate shall be
revoked if any of the standards and conditions imposed pursuant to this
section, or such zoning certificate, are violated.
   D.   Permitted Temporary Uses: Subject to the regulations and time limits
that follow, and to the other applicable regulations of the district in which
the use is permitted, the following temporary uses, and no others, are
permitted in the zoning districts herein specified: (2005 Zoning Code)
      1.   Garage Sales: In any residential district, but only in compliance
with the following terms and conditions of title 4, chapter 11 of this code.
(2005 Zoning Code; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Indoor And Outdoor Art, Craft And Plant Shows: In any business
district; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior
approval of the zoning administrator on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel
size, parking provisions, traffic access and the absence of undue adverse
impact on other properties. Any such sale shall be limited to a period not to
exceed three (3) consecutive days. In addition to the foregoing, indoor and
outdoor art, craft and plant shows shall be permitted in a residential district
as part of a garage sale and subject to the garage sale regulations in
subsection D1 of this section.
      3.   Sidewalk Retail Sales: In any business district; provided, however,
that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the zoning
administrator on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking
provisions, traffic and pedestrian access and the absence of undue adverse
impact on other properties. Any such sale shall be limited to a period not to
exceed three (3) consecutive days.
      4.   Christmas Tree Sales: In any business or manufacturing district and,
when conducted by a not for profit, religious, philanthropic or civic group or
organization on property owned or leased by such group or organization;
provided, however, that any such use shall be conducted solely by the officers,
directors, members, and employees of any such group or organization, and any
proceeds of such Christmas tree sales shall accrue solely to such group or
organization; provided, further, that any such use shall require the specific
prior approval of the zoning administrator on the basis of the adequacy of the
parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of undue
adverse impact on other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not
to exceed forty five (45) days. Display of Christmas trees need not comply with
the yard requirements of this title.
      5.   Contractors' Offices And Equipment Sheds: In any district when
accessory to a construction project. No such use shall contain any sleeping or
cooking accommodations. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed the
duration of the active construction phase of such project.
      6.   Real Estate Offices, Including Model Units: In any district when
such use is accessory to a new development. No such use shall contain any
sleeping or cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit.
Such use shall be limited to the period of the active selling or leasing of
units or space in such development and to activities related to the development
in which such office is located. No such office shall be used as the general
office or headquarters of any firm.
      7.   Carnivals And Circuses: In any nonresidential district, but only
when sponsored by a not for profit religious, philanthropic or civic group or
organization; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific
prior approval of the zoning administrator on the basis of the adequacy of the
parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access and the absence of undue
adverse impact on other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not
to exceed ten (10) days. Such use need not comply with the yard requirements of
this title except that structures or equipment that might block the view of
operators of motor vehicles on any public or private street shall not be
located in a manner that obstructs sightlines for vehicles traveling on
adjacent public rights of way. Such use need not comply with the maximum height
requirements of this title. The concessionaire responsible for the operation of
any such carnival or circus shall:
         a.   Submit in advance of the event date a site layout displaying
adequate ingress and egress routes for emergency vehicles and no dead end
aisles; and
         b.   Provide for a thorough cleanup of the site upon termination of
the event.
      8.   Sales Of Overstock, Seconds And Similar Goods In Districts Where Not
A Permitted Use: In the M-1 and M-2 districts, when accessory to any use
permitted or specially permitted in such district; but only in compliance with
the following conditions:
         a.   Existing Inventory Only: No products shall be sold except such
products as are manufactured, warehoused or distributed in the normal course of
business of the principal use operated on the zoning lot in question. No
products shall be brought in from other sources for purposes of the temporary
sale.
         b.   No Outdoor Sales: Any area in which such a temporary retail use
takes place, including the sale and display of products, shall be fully
enclosed.
         c.   Number And Duration Of Sales Limited: Not more than four (4) such
temporary uses shall be conducted on the same premises in any calendar year, or
more than one such sale in any calendar quarter. In each calendar quarter, one
such sale may be for a period of not more than three (3) successive days.
      9.   Tents: In any district, in connection with any permitted, accessory,
temporary or special permit use no tent shall be allowed to remain for a period
of more than four (4) days longer than the period during which the use with
which it is associated is allowed to remain or, in the absence of any such
period, ten (10) days. Unless waived in writing by the zoning administrator,
every tent shall comply with bulk, yard and space requirements applicable to
accessory uses.
      10.   Civic Uses Of Public Property: Any civic use of any public building
or property when authorized by the governmental agency owning or controlling
such property; provided, that no such use shall impose an undue adverse effect
on neighboring streets or property.
      11.   Temporary Signs: See chapter 13 of this title.
      12.   Unique Events: In any district for a period not to exceed seven (7)
consecutive days, subject to such conditions and security requirements as the
zoning administrator determines are necessary. "Unique events" shall include
motion picture, video and television filming.
      13.   Electrical Substations: In any district; provided, however, that
any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the zoning
administrator on the basis of need and impact on surrounding properties.
      14.   Temporary Location Of Local Government Uses: The activities of
units of local government and public school districts may be temporarily
located in any nonresidential district, but only during periods of
reconstruction, renovation or expansion of existing facilities for those
activities at another location. No such temporary relocation shall be allowed
without the prior approval by the corporate authorities by resolution duly
adopted. The corporate authorities may, but shall not be required to, hold a
public hearing prior to adoption of such approval resolution. Such approval by
the corporate authorities shall be in lieu of any zoning certificate and shall
be subject to the special standards contained in subsection C of this section
and the use limitations contained in subsection F of this section, all as
determined and imposed by the corporate authorities, in its sole discretion.
   E.   Bulk, Yard And Space Regulations: Except as expressly provided
otherwise in subsection D of this section, every temporary use shall comply
with the bulk, yard, and space regulations applicable in the district in which
such temporary use is located.
   F.   Use Limitations:
      1.   General Limitations: Every temporary use shall comply with the use
limitations applicable in the district in which it is located as well as with
the limitations made applicable to specified temporary use by subsection D of
this section. No temporary use shall be permitted in any district if it would
have a significant negative impact, including aesthetic impact, on any adjacent
property or on the area as a whole.
      2.   Hours And Days Of Operation: No temporary use shall be operated
during any hours or on any days of the week except such as are designated by
the zoning administrator, in the zoning certificate required by subsection C of
this section, on the basis of the nature of the temporary use and the character
of the surrounding area.
      3.   Public Safety: No temporary use shall be permitted unless the fire
and police departments shall have first certified that such use will result in
no additional, undue on site or off site threat to public safety. No temporary
use shall be operated except in accordance with such restrictions and
conditions as said departments may require in connection with such
certification. If required by the zoning administrator, operator of the
temporary use shall employ a fire watch team and appropriate security
personnel.
      4.   Traffic: No temporary use shall be permitted if additional vehicular
traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such temporary use would have
undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses.
      5.   Conflicts With Other Temporary Uses: No temporary use shall be
permitted if such use would conflict with another previously authorized
temporary use.
      6.   Parking: Before approving any temporary use, the zoning
administrator shall make an assessment of the total number of off street
parking spaces that will be reasonably required in connection with the proposed
temporary use, on the basis of the particular use, its intensity, and the
availability of other parking facilities in the area, and shall approve such
temporary use only if such off street parking is provided. No temporary use
shall be authorized that would, in the opinion of the zoning administrator,
unreasonably reduce the amount of off street parking spaces available for use
in connection with permanent uses located on the zoning lot in question.
   G.   Additional Conditions: Every temporary use shall, in addition, comply
with, and the zoning administrator may impose, such other conditions as may
reasonably be necessary to achieve the purposes of this title or to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-4-11: STRUCTURAL AND USE ENCROACHMENTS IN YARDS:
Structural obstructions of the principal building and of accessory structures
and uses may be permitted, and special uses may be allowed in yards as follows:
  Yard In Which The Listed Use  Or Encroachment Is Permitted
                                               Yard In Which The Listed Use  Or
                                               Encroachment Is Permitted
Air conditioning equipment shelters           Rear and court
Arbors or trellises, attached                 Front, side, rear and court
Arbors or trellises, detached                 Rear and court
Awnings or canopies, attached, not more than  Front, side, rear and court
3 feet
Balconies - not more than 5 feet in depth
and not longer than 30 percent of the width
of the attached main structure; roofless      Rear and court
unless in rear of property; cannot extend in
front further than setback lot line
Bay windows, one-story - projecting not more
than 3 feet into a yard, and not more than    Front, rear and court
80 percent of the width of the room of which
it is a part
Chimneys, attached - projecting not more      Front, side, rear and court
than 18 inches
Eaves and gutters, overhanging - not more
than 3 feet into a front or rear yard and
not more than 24 inches into a side yard or
court. Eaves overhanging into a side yard     Front, side, rear and court
may be extended to 3 feet, provided the
required minimum side yard is enlarged a
distance equal to the extension of the eaves
in excess of 24 inches
Fallout shelters or other types of emergency
shelters, attached or detached to within 10   Rear
feet of a lot line
Fences, open (see chapter 10 of this title)   Side and rear
Fences, solid (see chapter 10 of this title)   
Fire escapes, open or closed in front yards
adjoining a street not more than 5 feet and   Front, side, rear and court
in interior side yards or courts not less
than 3 feet 6 inches
Flagpoles                                     Front, side, rear and court
Garages attached or detached                  Side and rear
Growing of farm and garden crops in the open  Side and rear
Lawn furniture, such as benches, sundials,    Front, side, rear and court
birdbaths and similar architectural features
Loading berths, open off street               Side and rear
Ornamental light standards                    Front, side, rear and court
Outdoor fireplaces (excluding incinerators)   Rear
Parking spaces, open off street, as allowed   Side, rear and court
in chapter 12 of this title
Playground and laundry drying equipment       Rear and court
Playhouses, pergolas, and open sided summer   Rear
houses
Porches shall be subject to same
restrictions as "balconies" in this section;  Front, side, rear and court
not over 4 feet above the average level of
the adjoining ground
Sheds and storage buildings for garden
equipment and household items as accessory
to dwellings and buildings and structures
customarily incidental to the pursuit of      Rear
agriculture, including attached greenhouses
pursuant to section
12-9-2 of this title
Signs and nameplates                          Front, side, rear and court
Sills, belt courses, cornices, and
ornamental features of the principal
building, projecting not more than 4 inches   Front, side, rear and court
to an 8 foot height from the average grade
level and not more than 12 inches above the
8 feet height
Steps, open - 4 feet or less above grade,
which are necessary for access to and from a  Front, side, rear and court
dwelling or an accessory building
Swimming pools, private, when conforming
also with other codes or ordinances of the    Rear
village
Tennis courts, private                        Rear
Terraces and patios                           Side and rear
Trees                                         Front, side, rear and court
 
(2005 Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP
SECTION:
12-5-1: Zoning Districts Established
12-5-2: Zoning District Map
12-5-3: District Boundaries
12-5-4: Annexed Land
12-5-1: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
To carry out the purposes of this title, the village is hereby divided into the
following zoning districts:
R-2  Single-family residential district
R-3  Two-family residential district
R-4  Multiple-family residential district
B-1  Local business district
B-2  Local business district
B-3  Community business district
B-4  Regional/community business district
M-1  Restricted manufacturing district
M-2  Manufacturing district
M-3  Manufacturing district
 
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-5-2: ZONING DISTRICT MAP:
The boundaries of each district are indicated upon the "Zoning Map Of The
Village Of Berkeley", hereafter referred to as the "zoning map", which is by
this reference incorporated as part of this title. All notations, references,
and other information shown on the zoning map, and all amendments thereto,
shall be as much a part of this title as if specifically set forth and
literally described herein. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-5-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   When a district boundary coincides with a right of way (street, alley,
etc.), the centerline of such right of way shall be construed to be the
district boundary.
   B.   When a district boundary does not coincide with the location of the
centerline of any right of way but does coincide with a lot line, such lot line
shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
   C.   Where a district boundary divides a lot in single ownership, the
regulations of this title for either portion of such lot may, at the owner's
discretion, apply to the entire area of the lot or thirty feet (30') beyond the
district boundary line, whichever is the lesser distance.
   D.   Questions concerning the exact location of the district boundary lines
shall be resolved by the zoning administrator. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-5-4: ANNEXED LAND:
All land hereafter annexed to the village shall be classified automatically
upon such annexation in the R-2 single-family residential district, unless
otherwise provided by the preannexation agreement. (2005 Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
12-6-1: Districts Established; Purposes
12-6-2: Bulk, Space And Yard Requirements
12-6-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; PURPOSES:
   A.   Establishment; Purposes: There are three (3) residential zoning
districts within the village. These districts provide a reasonable range of
opportunity for the development and preservation of housing types consistent
with the existing residential character of the village. The three (3) districts
are:
      1.   The R-2 single-family district, which provides for a limited range
of housing densities consistent with the village's established residential
neighborhoods.
      2.   The R-3 two-family district, which exists solely to allow the type
of housing found on the east side of the village.
      3.   The R-4 multiple-family district, which provides for lower density
multiple-family building types such as townhomes (single- family attached and
semidetached) and apartment buildings.
   B.   Service Uses Allowed: Only service uses compatible with the residential
character of each zoning district are allowed in addition to the permitted
residential uses. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-6-2: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 R-2 R-3 R-4
                                                   R-2        R-3        R-4
A. Maximum Height Of Principal Structure:
                                                   30 feet or 30 feet or See
                                                   2 stories, 2 stories, article
   1. Residential                               whichever  whichever  C of
                                                   is lower   is lower   this
                                                                         chapter
                                                   Not more   Not more
                                                   than 35    than 35
                                                   feet,      feet,
                                                   provided   provided   See
                                                   the yards  the yards  article
   2. Nonresidential                            are in     are in     C of
                                                   compliance compliance this
                                                   with       with       chapter
                                                   subsection subsection
                                                   D of this  D of this
                                                   section    section
B. Minimum Lot Area And Dimensions:
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   1. Square feet (single- family detached)        6,000   6,000C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   2. Square feet (two- family detached)           n/a     4,000C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   3. Square feet (two- family semi-detached)      n/a     4,500C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   4. Square feet (nonresidential)                 14,40   8,400C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   5. Lot feet width (residential)                 50      50   C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   6. Lot feet width (nonresidential)              100     100  C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
C. Lot Density Per Acre:
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   1. Dwelling units per acre                      7.3     n/a  C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   2. Nonresidential units per acre                n/a     n/a  C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
D. Yards, Depths And Widths (R-2g):
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   1. Front feet depth (R-2a) (R-2b) (R-2c) (R-2   30      30   C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   2. Interior side feet width (R-2e)              5       5    C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   3. Corner side feet depth                       n/a     n/a  C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                   25 feet or 25 feet or See
                                                   20 percent 20 percent article
   4. Rear feet depth (R-2f)                    of total   of total   C of
                                                   lot depth, lot depth, this
                                                   whichever  whichever  chapter
                                                   is greater is greater
   5. Interior side feet width for accessory    3                     
structures
   6. Corner side feet width for accessory      5                     
structures
E. Floor Area Ratio:
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   1. Single-family                                n/a     n/a  C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
   2. Nonresidential                               0.2     0.2  C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
F. Lot Coverage (R-2i):
                                                                         See
                                                      30      30   article
   1. Interior lot (R-3a)                       percent    percent    C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                      35      35   article
   2. Corner lot (R-3a)                         percent    percent    C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
                                                                         See
                                                      50              article
   3. Accessory use rear yard coverage          percent       n/a  C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
G. Spacing In Feet Between Principal And Accessory Structures (R-2k):
                                                                         See
                                                                         article
                                                     10      n/a  C of
                                                                         this
                                                                         chapter
 
Table Notes:
R-2 District Notes:
(R-2a) Where a lot is located at the intersection of 2 or more streets, the
required front yards shall be observed on each street; provided, however, that
the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 25 feet and
the front yard adjoining the side street shall not be less than 20 feet.
(R-2b) No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either
street.
(R-2c) Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
(R-2d) Repealed.
(R-2e) When a private garage is attached to the building, there shall be 2 side
yards each having a width of not less than 5 feet.
(R-2f) Decks shall not be required to maintain a rear yard in excess of 12
feet.
(R-2g) For buildings more than 30 feet in height, each yard, as required above,
shall be increased in width or depth by 1 foot for each 1 foot that the
building exceeds 30 feet in height.
(R-2h) Front yard adjustments - when the established setback is of a depth
other than herein required for a front yard, the setback for each undeveloped
lot shall be the average of the setbacks already established on adjacent lots.
If one of the adjacent lots is undeveloped, the setback for said lot shall be
the average of the required front yard depth and the established setback on the
adjacent lot.
(R-2i) Intensity of use - the total lot area covered by accessory uses shall
not exceed 15 percent of the square footage of the said lot. Decks shall not be
included in the amount of building coverage.
(R-2k) This limitation shall not apply to attached accessory structures, nor to
air conditioning units, antennas, or antenna support structures, nor to any
accessory structure protected by a fire separation wall approved by the village
fire inspector.
(2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 11-35, 11-15-2011)
R-3 District Notes:
(R-3a) R-3 requirements pertain to residential buildings containing two-family
detached or 2 single- family attached dwellings, together with its accessory
buildings.
(2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE A. R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6A-1: Permitted Uses
12-6A-2: Special Uses
12-6A-3: Specified Structures And Uses In Required Yards
12-6A-4: Nonconforming Lots
12-6A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Single-family detached dwellings.
Temporary buildings incidental to construction work.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above uses, not
involving the conduct of business or of a profession. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-6A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Except as specifically limited in the following paragraphs, the following uses
may be permitted in any single-family residential district, subject to the
issuance of a special use permit as provided for in this title and subject to
the additional standards hereinafter set forth:
Circulating reference and research libraries, public or private, and
governmental uses, including village hall, fire station, and police station.
Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated for recreational
use by private individuals or public agencies.
Public assembly.
Public utility stations, subject to the following standards:
   A.   All buildings and structures either shall have exteriors which give the
appearance of a structure permitted in the district where located or shall
comply with the buffer and landscape requirements applicable to nondwelling
uses abutting a residential use pursuant to chapter 4, "General Provisions", of
this title.
   B.   All such uses shall be fenced where any hazard to the safety of human
or animal life is present.
   C.   No service or storage yard or building shall be permitted except as
permitted for other uses in the district.
Schools, public or private, nonboarding nursery, daycare, prekindergarten,
elementary, middle, junior high and high, which shall, in addition to other
requirements under this title, meet all suggested, recommended, or mandatory
standards in effect by state statute, and/or state board of education,
superintendent of public instruction, state fire marshal, department of
children and family services, county or other governmental agency responsible
for the type of public and/or private school, including minimum site area,
minimum floor area to occupancy standards, building floor area/lot ratio, and
other standards applicable to such use, with the highest standard pertaining in
case of conflict, but in no event shall the site area of an elementary school
or higher be less than four (4) acres; and the building floor area/lot ratio be
more than one to four (1:4), and in addition, all school sites must adjoin a
collector or arterial roadway. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 06-24, 7-18-2006;
Ord. 06-26, 7-18-2006)
12-6A-3: SPECIFIED STRUCTURES AND USES IN REQUIRED YARDS:
The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in
any required yard:
Accessory buildings, rear and side yard.
Air conditioning equipment, not located in front yards.
Awnings, canopies, and bay windows projecting not more than three feet (3')
into the yard. Bay windows shall not be allowed in side yards, and shall not
exceed eighty percent (80%) of the width of the room it occupies.
Balconies and covered, unenclosed porches not more than five feet (5') in depth
and not longer than thirty percent (30%) of the width of the attached main
structure. Balconies shall be located in rear or court yards only.
Chimneys, flues, lintels, and ornamental features, projecting not more than
eighteen inches (18") from an exterior wall.
Driveways, subject to the regulations of this title.
Eaves and gutters projecting not more than three feet (3') from an exterior
wall.
Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to chapter 10 of this title.
Flagpoles.
Gazebos, screened in patios, playhouses, etc., rear yards only.
Nonmechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards.
Outside stairways, having a height of four feet (4') or less.
Parking spaces, except in front yards, subject to the regulations of chapter 12
of this title.
Playground equipment, rear and court yards only.
Sightline obstruction: On corner lots within that part of a yard, court or
other open area located within a radius of twenty five feet (25') from the
point of intersection of the two (2) street right of way lines forming the lot
corner, no building, structures, or shrubs adjoining a street shall be erected,
altered, or planted which will have a height exceeding twenty four inches (24")
above the surrounding area ground grade, and trees planted in such areas shall
not have branches lower than eight feet (8') above the ground grade elevation
in this area.
Statuary, arbors, trellises, and ornamental light standards having a height of
eight feet (8') or less.
Swimming pools and accessories, constructed at or below finished grade, except
in any front or corner side yard, subject to the regulations of this title.
Terraces and patios, side and rear yards only. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 11-
35, 11-15-2011)
12-6A-4: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
See chapter 14 of this title. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE B. R-3 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6B-1: Permitted Uses
12-6B-2: Special Uses
12-6B-1: PERMITTED USES:
As in the R-2 district.
Two-family detached dwellings.
Two (2) single-family semidetached dwellings. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-6B-2: SPECIAL USES:
As in the R-2 district. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE C. R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-6C-1: Permitted Uses
12-6C-2: Special Uses
12-6C-3: Lot Area And Width
12-6C-4: Floor Area Ratio
12-6C-5: Building Height
12-6C-6: Yards
12-6C-7: Spacing Between Structures
12-6C-8: Landscaping
12-6C-1: PERMITTED USES:
Multiple-family dwellings; provided, that the minimum gross area of the
development under single ownership is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
Parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned or operated for recreational
use by public agencies.
Single-family attached dwellings.
Single-family semidetached dwellings: Only when adjoined to a single-family
attached dwelling unit (townhouses), provided:
There are not more than seven (7) such units in a building, and all such units
shall have frontage on a public street.
Temporary buildings incidental to construction work, which temporary building
shall, however, be removed prior to or upon completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
Temporary signs pertaining to lease, hire, or construction of the building on
the premises, or church or public building bulletin boards, as provided by
chapter 13 of this title.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses
including storage garages for private passenger vehicles. Any such building
that is not part of the principal building shall be located not less than ten
feet (10') from the main building, and not less than sixty feet (60') from the
lot line. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-6C-2: SPECIAL USES:
As in the R-2 district.
Multi-family residences requiring more than one building on one lot.
Public assembly.
Single-family semidetached dwellings adjoining to one or more single-family
attached dwellings (townhouses) where there is to be more than one building on
one lot. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 06-24, 7-18-2006)
12-6C-3: LOT AREA AND WIDTH:
   A.   Lot Area:
      1.   Single-family semidetached dwellings having a party wall common with
a single-family attached dwelling (townhouse type buildings); single-family
attached dwellings; and multiple-family dwellings, as follows:
 
Type Of Dwelling Unit Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (Square Feet)
   1 bedroom1         2,000
   2 bedroom1         2,500
   3 bedroom1         3,000
 
Note:
1.    A "bedroom", for purposes of this article, is defined as a room furnished
with at least 1 bed and intended primarily to be used for sleeping purposes,
and specifically excluding living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, bathrooms,
laundry rooms, dens, or closets.
2.   Nonresidential uses: Not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
square feet, unless otherwise specified.
   B.   Lot Width:
      1.   Two (2) single-family semidetached dwellings and one single- family
attached dwelling (townhouse building): Not less than eighty feet (80'), plus
not less than twenty feet (20') of additional lot width for each additional
single-family attached dwelling in a building.
      2.   Multiple-family dwelling: Not less than sixty feet (60').
      3.   Nonresidential uses: Not less than sixty feet (60'). (2005 Zoning
Code)
12-6C-4: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
   A.   Single-family semidetached or attached: Not applicable.
   B.   Multiple-family dwellings, nonresidential permitted and special uses:
Not more than 0.6. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-6C-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed the
following height:
   A.   Single-family attached and semidetached dwellings, and permitted
nonresidential buildings and structures: As in the R-2 district.
   B.   All other dwelling types: Not more than three (3) stories, or not to
exceed thirty five feet (35'), whichever is lower. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-6C-6: YARDS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged, unless the following yards are
provided:
   A.   Single-family semidetached dwellings:
      1.   Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth. Where a
front yard of less than twenty five feet (25'), or more than twenty five feet
(25'), has been maintained by buildings existing on lots having a combined
frontage of forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage of any block lying
between two (2) corner lots, the front yard shall be equal to the average depth
of the front yards maintained by the aforementioned buildings, provided the
front yard shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in any case, and need not
be more than fifty feet (50').
      2.   Side Yard: One yard not less than ten feet (10') in width, except a
side yard adjoining a street shall not be less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth; provided, however, that buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced
to less than twenty feet (20').
      3.   Rear Yard: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth or twenty
percent (20%) of lot depth, whichever dimension is greater.
   B.   Single-family attached dwellings: Front and rear yards as in subsection
A of this section.
   C.   Multiple-family dwellings:
      1.   Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth. Where the
established front yard within the block varies from twenty five feet (25'),
provisions of subsection A1 of this section apply.
      2.   Side And Interior Yards: Not less than twelve feet (12').
      3.   Side Yards Adjoining A Street: Not less than twenty five feet (25').
      4.   Rear Yards 1 : Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth or not
less than twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever dimension is
greater. (2005 Zoning Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 12-4-3C of this title.
12-6C-7: SPACING BETWEEN STRUCTURES:
When two (2) or more structures which contain single-family detached dwellings,
single-family attached dwellings, single- family semidetached dwellings, or two
(2) or more multiple-family dwelling structures, or combinations thereof, are
on a lot or on contiguous lots comprising a unified development under the same
ownership or control, the distance between the structure walls shall be as
follows:
   A.   When the front wall of a structure faces the front wall or rear wall of
the nearest structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall
not be less than forty feet (40').
   B.   When the rear wall of a structure faces the rear wall of the nearest
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall not be less
than thirty feet (30').
   C.   When the side wall of a structure faces the front or rear wall of the
nearest structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall not
be less than thirty feet (30'), except when the side wall contains more than
two (2) windows on a floor that are not from bathrooms or storage rooms, such
distance between structures shall not be less than forty feet (40'), or fifty
feet (50') if a main entrance doorway is in such side wall.
   D.   When the side wall of a structure faces the side wall of the nearest
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure's walls shall not be less
than twenty feet (20'), except when the facing side walls of either of such
structures contain more than two (2) windows on a floor that are not from
bathrooms or storage rooms, such distance between the two (2) structures shall
not be less than forty feet (40'), or fifty feet (50') if a main entrance
doorway is in such side wall.
   E.   A wall of a structure forming the end of a court shall not be less than
ten feet (10') from the nearest wall of a structure forming the sides of the
court, and a structure forming the end of the court may be attached to one or
both of the structures forming the sides of the court, provided the distance
between facing walls of the structures forming the sides of the court is not
less than the applicable requirements as set forth above.
   F.   Where structures are not parallel to each other, the required spacing
shall be measured at the midpoint of the distance along which they face each
other; however, the spacing between the structures at the narrowest point shall
not be less than two- thirds (2/3) of the required distance. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-6C-8: LANDSCAPING:
All front yards shall be planted with sod and all areas not used for parking
and driveways shall be landscaped. All open off street parking areas and
driveways will be screened from adjoining residential lots as provided by
chapter 12, article A of this title regarding off street parking regulations.
(2005 Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 7
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
12-7-1: Establishment; Purposes
12-7-2: Bulk, Space And Yard Requirements
12-7-3: Scope Of Operations
12-7-4: Dwelling Units
12-7-5: Enclosure Of Operations
12-7-6: Performance Standards
12-7-7: Parking Limitations
12-7-8: Awnings And Canopies
12-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES:
There are four (4) business zoning districts within the village. These
districts are intended to govern the locations and uses of a full range of
business and commercial establishments needed to serve the citizens of the
village and its trade area. The regulations of the various business districts
are designed to provide for grouping of business and commercial establishments
that are compatible in scope of services and method of operations. The four (4)
districts are:
   A.   The B-1 local business district that is intended to provide areas and
govern uses therein for a range of shopper and personal service types of
establishments in order to serve the general shopping needs of a consumer
population that is located in the village and in areas immediately adjoining
the village.
   B.   The B-2 local business district that is intended to provide areas and
govern uses therein for a range of shopper and personal service types of
establishments, including those providing entertainment, automotive sales,
repair and services and other highway oriented services, in order to serve the
general shopping and service needs of a consumer population that is located in
the village and in areas adjoining the village.
   C.   The B-3 community business district that is intended to regulate uses
permitted in B-1 and B-2 business districts that are concentrated in areas
showing shopping center characteristics but without the benefit of unified
ownership or control of individual properties. The B-3 community business
district is designed to overcome the shortcomings resulting from absence of
such unified ownership, and provides for integrated use of common accessory
facilities such as customer parking, and the access driveways to the major
streets for the benefit of public welfare, safety, and elimination of traffic
congestion on the major streets.
   D.   The B-4 regional/community business district that is intended to
require the comprehensive, coordinated and integrated development into multiple
use retailing and limited service facilities meeting the needs of the community
and surrounding region. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-7-2: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Business District Bulk, Space And Yard Requirements (Not Including
Residential):
 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
                                                            B-1      B-2      B-3      B-4
1. Maximum Height Of Principal Structure (B4a):
                                                              35    35    35    35
2. Minimum Lot Area And Dimensions:
                                                              n/a   n/a   n/a   n/a
3. Lot Density Per Acre:
                                                              n/a   n/a   n/a   n/a
4. Minimum Yard Depths And Widths:
   a. Front (B-1a) (B-2a) (B-3a) (B-4b)                     n/a   n/a   80    n/a
   b. Side (B-1b) (B-2b) (B-3b)                             n/a   n/a   n/a   n/a
                                                            20                         20
                                                            percent                    percent
   c. Rear (B-1c) (B-1d) (B-2c) (B-3c) (B-4d) (B-4e) (B-4of total    20    20 of total
                                                            lot                        lot
                                                            depth                      depth
5. Floor Area Ratio                                            0.5   0.5   0.5   0.5
6. Lot Coverage                                                75    75    75    75
                                                            percent  percent  percent  percent
 
(2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-2006; Ord. 07-39, 12-18-2007)
Table Notes:
B-1 District Notes:
(B-1a) Except when adjacent to a residential front yard, the requirement of the
adjoining district shall apply in full; if there is an intervening alley, 50
percent of the requirement shall apply.
(B-1b) Except if a yard is provided, it shall not be less than 5 feet in depth,
and when the adjoining property is in a residential district, in which case
there shall be a side yard adjoining the said residential property which shall
be not less than 5 feet.
(B-1c) Such rear yard need not exceed 25 feet in depth.
   i.   If the compliance with the requirements of subsection A4c in the above
table is deemed to cause extreme hardship in providing the required amounts of
off street parking facilities for the occupants of the site, the planning and
zoning commission may grant a reduction of rear yard requirements, provided
such reduction will permit provision of additional parking spaces on the front
or the side of the principal building; and provided further, that all other
setback and screening requirements for front and side yards are observed.
   ii.   This reduction of the rear yard requirements shall not cause the
reduction of the total distance between the rear lines of the respective
principal buildings on the 2 properties abutting each other on their rear lot
lines to less than the distance equal to the sum of the 2 respective rear yard
requirements; and provided further, that such a reduction shall not be granted
unless a written consent by the owner of the residential property affected by
this reduction will be submitted to the planning and zoning commission.
iii Where the 2 properties are not divided by an alley on the rear, the rear
yard requirements on the commercial property shall not be reduced to less than
3 feet.
B-2 District Notes:
(B-2a) Except when adjacent to a residential front yard, the requirement of the
adjoining district shall apply in full; if there is an intervening alley, 50
percent of the requirements shall apply.
(B-2b) Except if a side yard is provided, it shall be not less than 5 feet in
width; provided further, if a side yard adjoins a residence district boundary,
a side yard not less than 20 feet shall be provided and at least a 5 foot
portion of this side yard adjoining the neighborhood property shall be
maintained as landscaped, including a densely planted, compact hedge not less
than 5 feet in height. If there is an intervening alley, 50 percent of the
requirements shall apply.
(B-2c) Except:
   i.   Adjoining Residence District: Where the rear lot line adjoins a
residence district, a rear yard not less than 30 feet in depth shall be
provided, and a 10 foot portion of such yard adjoining the residential district
shall be maintained as landscaped area, including a densely planted, compact
hedge not less than 5 feet in height.
   ii.   Adjoining An Alley: Where the rear lot line adjoins an alley, a
landscaped area 5 feet in depth shall be provided at the edge of the rear yard
along the rear property line and a screening hedge shall be provided. If access
is to be provided from the alley, there shall be a driveway not less than 14
feet in width for one-way access, and not less than 24 feet in width for two-
way access, and the distance between 2 such driveways shall be not less than 60
feet measured at the centerlines.
   iii.   Rear Yard Reduction:
      (a)   If compliance with the requirements of subsection A4c in the above
table is deemed to cause extreme hardship in providing the required amounts of
off street parking facilities for the occupant of the site, the planning and
zoning commission may grant a reduction of rear yard requirements; provided,
such reduction will permit provision of additional parking spaces on the front
or the side of the principal building; and provided further, that all other
setback and screening requirements for side and front yards are observed.
      (b)   This reduction of the rear yard requirements shall not cause the
reduction of the total distance between the rear lines of the respective
principal buildings on the 2 properties abutting each other on their rear lot
lines to less than the distance equal to the sum of the 2 respective rear yard
requirements; and provided further, that such a reduction shall not be granted
unless a written consent by the owner of the residential property affected by
this reduction will be submitted to the planning and zoning commission.
      (c)   Where the 2 properties are not divided by an alley on the rear, the
rear yard requirements on the commercial property shall not be reduced to less
than 3 feet.
B-3 District Notes:
(B-3a) Front yards shall be not less than 80 feet, except that the area
extending from the yard line to within 15 feet of the street right of way may
be occupied by drives, vehicular parking, sidewalks, landscaping, and similar
facilities. All areas between the street right of way and yard line which is
not occupied by such facilities, including the 15 feet adjoining the street,
shall be appropriately landscaped.
(B-3b) If a side yard is provided, it shall be not less than 5 feet in width;
provided further, if a side yard adjoins a residential district boundary, a
side yard not less than 20 feet shall be provided and such side yard shall be
maintained as landscaped area. If there is an intervening alley, 50 percent of
the requirement shall apply.
(B-3c) Rear Yard:
   i.   Adjoining Residence District: Except where the rear lot line adjoins a
residence district, a rear yard not less than 30 feet in depth shall be
provided, and a 10 foot portion of such yard adjoining the residential district
shall be maintained as landscaped area including a densely planted, compact
hedge not less than 5 feet in height.
   ii.   Adjoining An Alley: Where the rear lot line adjoins an alley, a
landscaped area 5 feet in depth shall be provided at the edge of the rear yard
along the rear property line and a screening hedge shall be provided. If access
is to be provided from the alley, there shall be a driveway not less than 24
feet in width and the distance between 2 such driveways shall not be less than
60 feet measured at the centerlines.
   iii.   Rear Yard Reduction:
      (a)   If compliance with the requirements of subsection A4c in the above
table is deemed to cause extreme hardship in providing the required amounts of
off street parking facilities for the occupants of the site, the planning and
zoning commission may grant a reduction of rear yard requirements; provided,
such reduction will permit provision of additional parking spaces on the front
or the side of the principal building; and provided further, that all other
setback and screening requirements for front and side yards are observed.
      (b)   This reduction of the rear yard requirements shall not cause the
reduction of the total distance between the rear lines of the respective
principal buildings on the 2 properties abutting each other on their rear lot
lines to less than the distance equal to the sum of the 2 respective rear yard
requirements; and provided further, that such a reduction shall not be granted
unless a written consent by the owner of the residential property affected by
this reduction will be submitted to the planning and zoning commission.
      (c)   Where the 2 properties are not divided by an alley on the rear, the
rear yard requirements on the commercial property shall not be reduced to less
than 3 feet.
   (2005 Zoning Code)
B-4 District Notes:
(B-4a) Special Use Permit: Except building heights may be taller through a
special use permit.
(B-4b) Front Yard: No front yard is required, except when adjacent to a
residential front yard, the requirement of the adjoining district shall apply
in full. If there is an intervening alley, 50 percent of the requirement shall
apply.
(B-4c) Side Yard: No side yard is required, except if a yard is provided, it
shall not be less than 5 feet in depth, and when the adjoining property is in a
residential district, in which case there shall be a side yard adjoining the
said residential property which shall be not less than 5 feet.
(B-4d) Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 percent of the
depth of the lot, provided, however, such rear yard need not exceed 25 feet in
depth.
(B-4e) Rear Yards May Be Reduced:
   1.   If compliance with the rear yard requirements provided in subsection
A4c in the above table is deemed to cause extreme hardship in providing the
required amounts of off street parking facilities for the occupants of the
site, the zoning board of appeals may grant a reduction of rear yard
requirements; provided, such reduction will permit provision of additional
parking spaces on the front or the side of the principal building; and provided
further, that all other setback and screening requirements for the front and
side yards are observed.
   2.   This reduction of the rear yard requirements shall not cause the
reduction of the total distance between the rear lines of the respective
principal buildings on the 2 properties abutting each other on their rear lot
lines to less than the distance equal to the sum of the 2 respective rear yard
requirements; and provided further, that such a reduction shall not be granted
unless a written consent by the owner of the residential property affected by
this reduction will be submitted to the zoning board of appeals.
   3.   Where the 2 properties are not divided by an alley on the rear, the
rear yard requirements on the commercial property shall not be reduced to less
than 3 feet.
(B-4f) Parcels Abutting A Residential District:
   1.   The rear lot line setback is 25 feet on those parcels abutting a
residential district where there is no alley or street adjacent to the rear of
a B-4 zoned property.
   2.   A 5 foot rear setback is required for those B-4 zoned parcels adjacent
to an alley or street and abutting a residential district.
(Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-2006; amd. Ord. 07-39, 12-18-2007)
   B.   B-1 Local Business District Residential Bulk, Space And Yard
Requirements:
Minimum lot area        1 acre
Floor area ratio        2.5
Building height         6 stories, or 75 feet, whichever is greater
Yard depths and widths:  
   1. Front          80 feet
   2. Rear           25 feet
   3. Side           10 feet per side
   4. Corner side    80 feet
 
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-7-3: SCOPE OF OPERATIONS:
All business establishments shall be retail trade or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers, and all goods produced on the premises shall
be sold on the premises where produced, except for specific uses in the B-
2 business district where processing, and fabricating or wholesale sales are
permitted. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-7-4: DWELLING UNITS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, dwelling units and lodging rooms
are not permitted in any business district. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-7-5: ENCLOSURE OF OPERATIONS:
All business servicing or processing and storage shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings, except:
   A.   Off street parking and loading.
   B.   Garden supply displays as provided in section
12-7B-2 of this chapter regarding garden supply stores. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-7-6: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Activities: All activities shall conform to the performance standards
established for the M-1 manufacturing district, and in every case shall be
applied at the boundaries of the lot on which such activities take place.
   B.   Lights: All outdoor lighting shall be of the diffused mercury or sodium
vapor type or equivalent and shall be so located as not to shine into or upon
adjoining residential property. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-7-7: PARKING LIMITATIONS:
Parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of a permitted use shall be
limited to vehicles having not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity,
except for pick up or delivery services during normal business hours. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-7-8: AWNINGS AND CANOPIES:
   A.   "Awning" and "canopy" are defined as roofed structures constructed of
fabric or metal placed or fixed so as to extend no more than thirty six inches
(36") outward from the building over public property, including, but not
limited to, sidewalks, supported entirely from the building, providing a
protective shield for doors, windows or other openings.
   B.   All awnings and canopies shall be permitted after approval of drawings
and specifications by the village building commissioner.
   C.   All awnings and canopies shall be so constructed as to support all wind
and snow weight loads as specified by adopted building codes or ordinances of
the village of Berkeley.
   D.   All awnings and canopies shall be so located as not to interfere with
the operation of any exterior standpipes, stairways or exits from a building.
   E.   All awnings and canopies shall be at least eight feet (8') in the clear
between the lowest point and the sidewalk below.
   F.   All awnings and canopies shall be considered as open type construction
and shall not be enclosed whatsoever, except at the point where the ceiling
and/or roof assemblies abut the building.
   G.   All awnings and canopies shall be uniformly one of the following color
options: royal blue, black, forest green, burgundy and as proposed by the
village architectural review board. The use of high intensity, metallic or
fluorescent colors is prohibited. Color schemes registered as corporate
trademarks or logos may be considered for inclusion on any awning or canopy at
the recommendation of the village administrator and approval by a majority of
the village board of trustees made during a regular legislative meeting of that
governing body.
   H.   Backlit and fiberglass awnings and canopies are prohibited in all
business districts.
   I.   Each property owner for that portion of the awning and/or canopy
extending from their property shall be responsible for all repairs and
maintenance of said awning and/or canopy.
   J.   The village administrator, and/or his(her) designee, shall have the
authority to conduct both random and regular annual inspections of all awnings
and canopies for compliance with this section.
   K.   All persons, firms, corporations or associations found in violation of
any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Each day a violation of this section exists shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ord. 07-37, 12-18-2007)
ARTICLE A. B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7A-1: Permitted Uses
12-7A-2: Special Uses
12-7A-3: Off Street Parking And Loading
12-7A-4: Signs
12-7A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Art and school supply stores.
Bakeries.
Banks.
Barbershops and beauty parlors.
Candy and ice cream stores.
Catering establishments and restaurants.
Clothes pressing establishments.
Copy shops.
Drugstores.
Dry or steam cleaning receiving and delivery stores; provided, that chemicals,
solvents or other materials used in the cleaning operation be allowed pursuant
to the terms of the building code, as amended from time to time.
Electrical shops for repair of electrical and radio or television equipment and
other similar commodities not involving the conduct of any manufacturing on the
premises.
Employment agencies.
Florist shops.
Food stores, meat and fish markets, and delicatessens.
Gift shops.
Grocery stores or supermarkets.
Haberdashery stores.
Hardware stores.
Hobby shops for retailing of items to be assembled or used away from the
premises.
Jewelry stores.
Laboratories.
Laundromats.
Locksmith shops.
Medical or dental clinics, including laboratories incidental thereto.
Messenger or telegraph service stations.
Millinery shops.
Newspaper offices, not including printing.
Offices, professional, business, public or institutional.
Photographer's, artist's, or interior decorator's studio.
Retail shops or stores that include anything that is currently a permitted use.
Sales or show rooms.
Tailor shops.
Taverns.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
Toy stores.
Upholstering shops.
Variety stores. (Ord. 11-36, 11-15-2011)
12-7A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Animal hospitals.
Banquet halls/event spaces, as accessory to a restaurant principal use.
Daycare center.
Multiple-family dwelling units, including senior citizen housing.
Pawn or resale shops.
Public assembly.
Public utility and governmental service uses. The location, width, and lot area
of each use shall be recommended by the planning and zoning commission and
approved by the village board.
Theaters, indoor.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors: On a lot not less than one
hundred twenty feet (120') in width and not less than one acre in area.
Other business uses similar to permitted uses listed above.
Accessory uses to the above special uses including, but not limited to, off
street parking, off street loading, business signs and marketing and management
offices.
(Ord. 11-36, 11-15-2011; amd. Ord. 15-20, 3-3-2015; Ord. 21-15, 4-6-2021; Ord.
24-03, 2-6-2024)
12-7A-3: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be in accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 12, articles A and B of this title. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-7A-4: SIGNS:
Signs shall be in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 13 of this
title. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE B. B-2 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7B-1: Permitted Uses
12-7B-2: Special Uses
12-7B-3: Off Street Parking And Loading
12-7B-4: Signs
12-7B-1: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the B-1 local business district.
Auction rooms.
Battery and tire service stations.
Bowling alley.
Greenhouses and garden supply stores, not including outdoor storage or display
of garden supplies.
Hotels.
Laundries employing not more than five (5) persons on the premises.
Motels.
Newspaper or periodical offices; and print shops for printing, publishing and
issuing of newspapers and periodicals.
Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating and air conditioning supply and
repair.
Print shops, or job printing, where not more than ten (10) full time shop
employees are employed on the premises, and the gross floor area not to exceed
six thousand (6,000) square feet.
Rental of equipment from an enclosed building, no outside storage.
Roofing sales and service.
Theaters, enclosed.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above listed uses.
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-7B-2: SPECIAL USES:
Any of the special uses permitted in the B-1 local business district.
Automobile sales establishments only for authorized new passenger automobile
sales agencies, provided vehicular access to public garages and service areas
is from an alley or service drive at the rear lot line.
Automobile service stations, on a lot not less than eighteen thousand (18,000)
square feet in area; provided, that no tank, pump, pipe or other equipment for
the storage and handling of gasoline or any other flammable liquids shall be
installed within three hundred feet (300') of the nearest boundary of any lot
or plot of ground used for a school, hospital, church, or theater; or within
three hundred feet (300') of the nearest boundary of any lot or plot of ground
either used for a railway passenger depot or freight depot, or improved with
buildings in which not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the total floor
space is used for warehouse or storage purposes; or within six hundred feet
(600') of the nearest boundary of any lot or plot of ground used for an
existing gasoline service station or for gasoline storage tank or tanks.
Dual uses, which may include either a permitted use or special use business
from a B-1 local business district classification under this title, with a B-
2 local business district classification. Said dual use business may not be
located within two thousand six hundred forty feet (2,640') from any other
similar dual use business within the village.
Garages, storage, or off street parking lots or structures, commercial or
municipal.
Garden supply stores with outdoor display of merchandise; provided, such
outdoor display area shall be confined within the buildable area of the lot and
shall be fenced on all sides with a five foot (5') chainlink fence; and
provided further, the area dedicated to outdoor display shall not be in excess
of thirty percent (30%) of the land area occupied by the principal structure.
Accessory uses to the above listed uses including, but not limited to, off
street parking and off street loading, drive-in facilities, and business signs.
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-7B-3: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be in accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 12, articles A and B of this title. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-7B-4: SIGNS:
Signs shall be in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 13 of this
title. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE C. B-3 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7C-1: Permitted Uses
12-7C-2: Special Uses
12-7C-3: Off Street Parking And Loading
12-7C-4: Signs
12-7C-1: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the B-1 and B-2 business districts. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-7C-2: SPECIAL USES:
Any of the special uses permitted in the B-1 local business district. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-7C-3: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be in accordance with the
regulations set forth in chapter 12, articles A and B of this title. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-7C-4: SIGNS:
Signs shall be in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 13 of this
title. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE D. B-4 REGIONAL/COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-7D-1: Purpose
12-7D-2: Permitted Uses
12-7D-3: Special Uses
12-7D-4: Conditional Uses
12-7D-5: Current Uses
12-7D-6: Off Street Parking And Loading
12-7D-7: Signs
12-7D-8: Site Plan Review
12-7D-9: Development Requirements
12-7D-10: Drive-Through Facilities
12-7D-1: PURPOSE:
The B-4 regional/community business district regulations are intended to
require the comprehensive, coordinated and integrated development into multiple
use retailing and limited service facilities meeting the needs of the community
and surrounding region. (Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-2006)
12-7D-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Retail: Minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet
required:
      Art and school supply stores.
      Audio/video computer, wireless communications, and office equipment sales
and services.
      Automobile accessory stores - without drive-in service.
      Automobile sales.
      Bakeries.
      Battery and tire service stations.
      Bicycle stores - sales, rental and repair.
      Book and stationery stores.
      Bowling alleys.
      Butcher shops.
      Camera and photographic supply stores (including photofinishing
services).
      Candy and ice cream stores.
      Carpet and rug stores.
      China and glassware stores.
      Clothing stores.
      Department stores.
      Drugstores.
      Dry cleaners (no dry cleaning facility on site).
      Dry goods stores.
      Eyeglass stores - including incidental optometrist offices.
      Fabric or upholstery stores.
      Fine antique furniture and collectibles.
      Fine art galleries.
      Florist shops.
      Food stores, meat and fish markets, and delicatessens.
      For profit professional and service offices and businesses only - second
floor and above.
      Furniture stores.
      Furrier shops - including storage and conditioning of furs.
      Garden supply stores - seasonal.
      Gift shops.
      Greenhouses and nurseries.
      Grocery stores.
      Haberdasheries.
      Hardware stores.
      Hobby stores.
      Jewelry stores.
      Leather goods and luggage stores.
      Liquor stores.
      Medical or orthopedic appliance stores.
      Music stores - sheet and record music - retail sales.
      Musical instrument retail sales - including repair service.
      Office supply stores.
      Personal physical fitness training/supervised exercise facilities that
include related retail sales.
      Pet shops.
      Picture frame shops.
      Planned unit developments.
      Shoe stores.
      Sporting goods stores.
      Theaters, enclosed.
      Tobacco shops - retail sales.
      Toy shops.
      Video rental stores.
      Accessory uses incidental to permitted uses, including off street
parking, loading, and approved signs.
   B.   Restaurants and taverns: Of not less than two thousand (2,000) square
feet. (Ord. 11-36, 11-15-2011)
12-7D-3: SPECIAL USES:
Automobile repair facilities, with or without body shops.
Automobile sales (new vehicle dealerships) and service, with or without body
shops.
Banks and automated teller machines (see section
12-2-3 of this title for definitions).
Christmas tree sales - seasonal.
Copy shops.
Daycare center.
Drive-through facilities.
Filling stations including accessory minimart or car wash.
Hotels and motels.
Laundromats.
Open air or "farmers' market" - seasonal.
Pawn or resale shops.
Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, and air conditioning supply and
repair.
Rental of equipment, enclosed.
Residential units - second floor and above.
Small appliance repair shops.
Tailor shops.
Travel agent. (Ord. 12-21, 7-17-2012; amd. Ord. 15-20, 3-3-2015)
12-7D-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
The St. Charles Road corridor plan (corridor plan), completed in 1999,
established a framework for promoting economic development within the village
and the revitalization of the St. Charles Road corridor and served as the basis
for establishing this B-4 district. Permitted uses within this district are
restricted to multiuse retailing and limited services; however, in a small
number of cases, existing properties are not well suited for those uses
enumerated in section
12-7D-3 of this article. The purpose of this section is to allow for certain
office and service uses in limited quantities within the B-4 district, without
diluting the purpose of the B-4 district established by the corridor plan,
which is to require the comprehensive, coordinated and integrated development
into multiple use retailing and limited service facility meeting the needs of
the community and surrounding region.
   A.   In existing nonresidential lots, where the intent of the B-4 zoning
district to permit multiuse retailing and limited service facilities is
restricted by the existing characteristics of the property, approval of a
conditional use permit may be granted for the following uses, provided that the
village plan commission finds that the location is appropriate and not in
conflict with the corridor plan:
      Business offices.
      Doctor or other medical offices.
      Professional, scientific, and technical services as defined in the NAICS
code (see appendix).
   B.   Uses must meet at least four (4) of the following conditions:
      1.   Lot frontage less than or equal to seventy five feet (75');
      2.   Lot size less than or equal to ten thousand (10,000) square feet;
      3.   Existing on site parking does not conform to minimum parking
requirements;
      4.   Building is one story and based on the parking, lot size, and
structural conditions of the building it has little potential to be converted
with additional stories;
      5.   Professional marketing of the property for retail uses has been
unsuccessful during a period of six (6) or more consecutive months; or is
      6.   Indicated as not a probable redevelopment site in the corridor plan.
   C.   Unless otherwise specified in this article or specified as a condition
of approval, the height limits, minimum yards, lot area, and sign requirements
shall be the same as for other uses in the B-4 district.
   D.   The privileges, obligations, and provisions of any conditionally
permitted use under this section shall be for the sole benefit of and shall be
binding on the applicant. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to allow the
applicant to transfer its privileges, obligations, or any other provision to
any person or entity without a new application for approval for any person or
entity other than the applicant. (Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-2006)
12-7D-5: CURRENT USES:
   A.   All current uses in conflict with this article will remain as legal
nonconforming uses until such time that the building is demolished, square
footage would be changed, or the building would be substantially remodeled. At
that time, the property will comply with the terms of this article.
In regard to nonconforming religious uses, to advance religious expression or
identification, but which does not substantially expand or extend the size or
useful life of the building, shall not be considered substantially remodeled
for the purposes of this article but shall be in compliance with all other
applicable ordinances.
   B.   In existing buildings, which, due to their unique size, placement,
parking, or architecture, or office and professional nature, transfer of
ownership or other replacement of a legal nonconforming use with a use of
substantially similar character, is permitted; provided, that the replacement
use is occupied within six (6) months after the discontinuation of the original
legal nonconforming use and continuous efforts are made to seek a replacement
use in the interim. (Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-2006)
12-7D-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be in accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 12, articles A and B of this title. (Ord.
2006-16, 4-18-2006)
12-7D-7: SIGNS:
Signs shall be in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 13 of this
title. (Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-2006)
12-7D-8: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
New uses that require changes to the square footage of an existing building,
substantial reconfiguration or remodeling of an existing building, or new
buildings, will require site plan review and approval. (Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-
2006)
12-7D-9: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The owner of a parcel not meeting the lot size requirements established for a
B-4 zone herein, upon proof of hardship and of a best efforts attempt over a
reasonable length of time to make the parcel part of a larger accumulation by
purchase of adjoining property or sale to adjoining landowners, may request a
variance to the square footage development requirements set forth herein as a
part of the special use process. (Ord. 2006-16, 4-18-2006)
12-7D-10: DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
   A.   Location On Same Zoning Lot: Drive-through facilities shall be
considered accessory uses and shall be located on the same zoning lot as the
principal use.
   B.   Bulk, Stacking, And Parking Requirements: Notwithstanding any bulk or
parking regulations in this article to the contrary, and unless otherwise
waived by the plan commission, the following bulk, automobile stacking, and
parking requirements shall apply to uses with accessory drive-through
facilities:
 
1. Setback from adjacent residential  Minimum of 5 feet (measured between
   property                            property line to nearest curb)
  Width of lane                      Minimum of 12 feet
 
      2.   Drive-through lanes and stacking spaces shall not cross off street
parking areas or pedestrian walkways.
      3.   All drive-through lanes and stacking spaces shall be separated from
the site access (public street, neighboring lots, etc.) and parking.
      4.   All drive-through lanes shall be sized to hold the minimum stacking
spaces as required by the village's off street parking and loading
requirements.
      5.   Site specific buffering and/or screening is required. (Ord. 2006-16,
4-18-2006)
CHAPTER 8
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
12-8-1: Establishment; Purposes
12-8-2: Bulk, Space And Yard Requirements
12-8-3: Operation Within Enclosed Buildings
12-8-4: Landscaping Of Premises
12-8-5: Performance Standards
12-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES:
There are three (3) manufacturing districts. The regulations for manufacturing
districts are designed to provide for the establishment of a limited range of
industrial and allied activities and to govern their operations in a manner
that will not have a deleterious effect on residential or business areas. It is
essential that adequate industrial sites are provided to attract new industry
compatible with the present quality of the village. Adequate sites and
industrial expansion will create growth and development of the village economic
and tax base and provide a variety of employment for its labor force. The three
(3) districts are:
   A.   The M-1 manufacturing district which is designed to provide an
environment suitable for industrial activities that requires a pleasant and
nuisance free environment and will be compatible with adjacent residential and
business uses.
   B.   The M-2 manufacturing district that fully encompasses the Proviso
freight yard, since it is a use of unique characteristics, and it is necessary
to provide special provisions for this use in order to maintain the general
characteristics of the northern neighborhoods in Berkeley and also to encourage
the future conversion of these yards into some uses more compatible with the
general area characteristics.
   C.   The M-3 manufacturing district shall have as its purpose and function
to allow construction and development of village garage and motor vehicle
facilities, billboard advertising signs, and television, telecommunication and
similar nonoccupancy type structures. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-8-2: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 M-1 M-2 M-3
               M-1           M-2           M-3
A. Maximum Height Of Principal Structure:
                  35         35         n/a
B. Minimum Lot Area And Dimensions:
                  n/a        n/a        n/a
C. Lot Density Per Acre:
                  n/a        n/a        n/a
D. Minimum Yard Depths And Widths For Properties Adjoining Or Across Street
From Residential District (M-1c):
1. Front (M-1a)    50         50         n/a
2. Side (M-1b)     35         35         n/a
3. Rear            50         50         n/a
E. Minimum Yard Depths And Widths For Properties Wholly Surrounded By M-
1 Zoned Properties:
1. Front (M-1d)    35         35         n/a
2. Side            25         25         n/a
3. Rear            25         25         n/a
F. Lot Coverage    60 perce   60 perce   n/a
 
Table Notes:
M-1 District Notes:
(M-1a) Exclusive of the width of private streets or driveways running parallel
to the dedicated or platted street upon which said property fronts.
(M-1b) Except that in the case of a corner lot, a yard of not less than 50 feet
shall be required on all sides which are directly across from a residential
district.
(M-1c) Buildings adjacent to only 1 residential street must front on the
residential or dedicated street.
(M-1d) Exclusive of the width of private streets or driveways running parallel
to the dedicated or platted street upon which said property fronts.
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-8-3: OPERATION WITHIN ENCLOSED BUILDINGS:
All activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly,
repairing, cleaning, servicing and testing materials, products and goods shall
be within completely enclosed buildings. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-8-4: LANDSCAPING OF PREMISES:
Landscaping in general shall be parklike in effect, blending into and enhancing
the adjoining properties. Vertical and horizontal elements must be in good
balance and of good design. Plant groupings shall be of good composition.
Specifically, landscaping must provide for the following:
   A.   Boundary Plantings: Effective and attractive boundary plantings to
screen the parking area from adjoining residential properties.
   B.   Evergreen Hedging: Low to medium (below 5 feet) evergreen hedging
between street boundaries and the surfaced parking area. (Hedging may be
clipped formally or free flowing with periodic trimming to ensure density and
uniformity.)
   C.   Intermittent Screen Planting: Intermittent screen planting between
street boundaries and surfaced parking area, designed to break the view of the
parking lot and to provide visual attraction to the foreground.
   D.   Species Allowed: Only those species and varieties of trees, small
trees, shrubs, evergreens and ground cover plants which are professionally
rated as the choice of their kind shall be used. Selection should be predicated
on beauty that endures and increases with age, and minimum care and maintenance
requirements.
   E.   Prohibited Uses:
      1.   No unfabricated or unfinished raw materials shall be processed into
any of the following basic products: metals of any kind, glass, plastics,
textiles, leather or paper.
      2.   No lot, parcel or tract of land shall be used, and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered, or remodeled for any of the following
uses: abattoirs; acid manufacture; arsenals; crematories; creosote treatment or
manufacture; fat rendering; fertilizer manufacture; fireworks or explosive
manufacture or storage; dumping or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal or
refuse; ore reduction, petroleum processing or refining; pyroxylin manufacture,
gutta percha manufacture or treatment; saltworks, sauerkraut smelters, or
slaughter of animals or fowl; tallow grease, or lard manufacture or treatment;
tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides, or skins; tar distillation or
manufacture; or junkyards and batch asphaltic concrete, cement, concrete, and
mortar mixing plants. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-8-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use established in the manufacturing districts after the effective date
hereof shall be operated in such a manner as to comply with applicable
performance standards as hereinafter set forth governing: a) noise; b)
vibration; c) air pollution; d) fire and explosive hazards; e) glare or heat;
and f) radiation hazards; and no use already established on the effective date
hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with such applicable
performance standards. Prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy, the zoning
administrator may, at his discretion, require certification from a testing
laboratory or professional engineer, approved by the corporate authorities,
that the proposed use is capable of complying with the applicable performance
standards.
   A.   Noise:
      1.   Instrumentation: Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter,
octave band analyzer meeting the applicable standards of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1971 and ANSI S1.11-1966). The instruments shall
be set to the flat response weighing scale and the meter to the response.
      2.   Maximum Permitted Sound Levels:
         a.   Table designates the maximum permitted sound levels that apply on
or beyond appropriate district boundaries. Where more than one set of sound
levels apply, the most restrictive shall govern. Readings are to be made at
points of maximum noise intensity. In all instances in which a manufacturing
district does not adjoin a residence or business district, the performance
standards governing noise shall apply at or beyond the nearest residential or
business district boundary line.
         b.   At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district
shall the sound pressure level of any individual operation or plant (other than
background noises produced by sources not under control of this title such as
the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the
decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown in table I of this section.
TABLE I
Octave Band                  Maximum Permitted
                             Sound Level (Decibels)
Frequency, Cycles Per Second Along Residence     Along Business
                             District Boundaries District Boundaries
Octave Band                  Maximum Permitted
                             Sound Level (Decibels)
Frequency, Cycles Per Second Along Residence     Along Business
                             District Boundaries District Boundaries
                                                
31.5                         72                  75
63                           72                  75
125                          67                  70
250                          59                  63
500                          52                  57
1,000                        46                  52
2,000                        40                  45
8,000                        32                  38
 
         c.   For impact noise levels, the values in table II of this section
shall apply. For purposes of this title, "impact noises" shall be considered to
be those noises whose peak values are more than three (3) dB higher than the
values indicated on the sound level meter.
TABLE II
IMPACT NOISE LIMITS
 
Maximum Permitted Peak Pressure (dB)
Along Residence     Along Business
District Boundaries District Boundaries
                    
85                  88
 
   B.   Vibration:
      1.   Instrumentation: Ground transmitted vibration shall be measured with
a seismograph or complement of instruments capable of recording vibration
displacement, particle velocity, or acceleration and frequency simultaneously
in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions.
      2.   Maximum Permitted Vibration Levels:
         a.   Table I of this section designates the maximum vibration limits
that apply on or beyond adjacent lines within the zone, and on or beyond
appropriate district boundaries. Vibration shall not exceed the maximum
permitted particle velocities listed in table I of this section. Where more
than one set of vibration levels apply, the most restrictive shall govern.
Readings may be made at points of maximum vibration intensity.
         b.   The maximum particle velocity shall be the maximum vector sum of
three (3) mutually perpendicular components recorded simultaneously. Particle
velocity may also be expressed as 6.28 times the displacement in inches
multiplied by the frequency in hertz (cycles per second).
         c.   For purposes of this title, steady state vibrations which are
continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than sixty (60)
per minute, shall be considered impact vibrations.
TABLE III
STEADY STATE VIBRATION LIMITS
 
Measurement Location                      Peak Particle Velocity
                                          (Inches Per Second)
                                         Daytime Nighttime
                                                 
Nearest residential district boundary     0.04    0.02
                                                 
Nearest M-1 or business district boundary 0.08    0.20
 
Nighttime limits shall be considered to prevail from nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
The values presented in table III of this section may be doubled for impact
vibrations.
   C.   Air Pollution: In all districts, any activity, operation, or device
which causes or tends to cause air pollution shall comply with the Illinois air
pollution regulations.
      1.   Smoke: The emission of smoke from all stacks, chimneys, processes,
and devices shall not exceed the limitations described below:
 
District Smoke Emission Permitted
         No visible smoke from any source of air pollution except once during
M-1      an 8 hour period when smoke up to Ringelmann no. 2 may be permitted
         for an aggregate of 3 minutes.
         Smoke emissions shall not exceed Ringelmann no. 1 or an equivalent
M-2      opacity of 20 percent. However, smoke up to Ringelmann no. 2 will be
         permitted for an aggregate of 3 minutes in any 8 hour period.
 
      2.   Steam: The emission of visible steam (condensed water vapor) from
all stacks, chimneys, processes, and devices shall not be allowed within five
hundred feet (500') of a residential district boundary. For the purpose of this
regulation, "visible steam" is defined as a plume of condensed water vapor
droplets having an equivalent opacity of sixty percent (60%) or greater.
      3.   Particulate Matter:
         a.   Source Emissions: The emission of particulate matter from all
stacks, vents, chimneys, flues and openings of all sources of air pollution on
a lot shall not exceed the following limitations:
 
District  Total Particulate Matter Emission Limit, Pounds Per Hour Per Acre Of
           Lot Area
          
M-1       1.0
M-2       5.0
 
         b.   Windborne Emissions (Suspended Particulate Matter): The emission
of suspended particulate matter from all stacks, vents, chimneys, flues,
openings, storage piles, fugitive sources, and open sources on a lot shall not
exceed the following limitations measured across lot lines or district
boundaries as indicated below. Suspended particulate matter is measured at
ground level or habitable elevations, whichever is more restrictive. The
limitations apply to the contribution by the sources on a lot, over and above
background levels.
 
                               Suspended Particulate Matter Limitation, Above
District  Measured Across    Background, Micrograms Per Cubic Meter, 24 Hour
                               Sample
                            
M-1       Lot line           50
M-2       District boundary  100
 
      4.   Toxic Matter: The emission of toxic matter from all stacks, vents,
chimneys, flues, openings, storage piles, fugitive sources and open sources on
a lot shall not exceed the following limitations measured across lot lines or
district boundary lines, as indicated below. Measurement shall be at ground
level or habitable elevation and shall be an eight (8) hour sample. Threshold
limit values (TLV) for toxic materials adopted by the American Conference Of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists shall be employed, except when air quality
standards for such toxic materials have been adopted by the state of Illinois,
in which case the latter shall apply. If a toxic material is not listed, the
applicant shall satisfy the zoning administrator that the proposed levels will
be safe to the general population.
 
District  Measured Across    Percent Of TLV
                            
M-1       Lot lines          2.5
M-2       District boundary  2.5
 
      5.   Odorous Matter: The emission of odorous matter from all sources on a
lot shall not exceed the following limitations across lot lines or district
boundaries, as indicated below. Measurement shall be at ground level or
habitable elevation, whichever is more restrictive.
 
District    Measured Across               Maximum Odor Intensity Odor Units Per
                                          Cubic Foot
                                         
M-1         Lot lines                     4
M-2         District boundary             4
M-1 and M-2 Residential district boundary 1
 
   D.   Fire And Explosion Hazards: In all districts, any activity involving
the manufacture, utilization, or storage of flammable, combustible and/or
explosive materials shall be conducted in accordance with the regulations
promulgated by the village and the standards of the National Fire Protection
Association.
      1.   Detonable Materials: Activities involving the storage, utilization,
or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation are
regulated by this title. Such materials shall include, but are not limited to:
all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and
tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDS, MX, PETN, and picric acid;
propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron
hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as
magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives
such as dynamite and nitroglycerin, unstable organic compounds such as
acetylides, tetrazoles and ozonides; strong unstable oxidizing agents such as
perchloric acid, perchlocates, chlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in
concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products and reactor elements such as Uranium 235 and
Plutonium 239.
      2.   M-1 Districts:
         a.   Uses involving the storage, manufacture or utilization of
materials and products which decompose by detonation are permitted up to one
pound inventory of such materials. The storage, utilization, and manufacture of
materials and products which decompose by detonation in excess of one pound is
not permitted.
         b.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
         c.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from active burning to intense burning is permitted; provided,
that said materials or products are stored, manufactured, or utilized in fire
resistant and fire protected buildings or spaces. Said materials or products
may not be stored within forty feet (40') of any lot line, unless it is stored
in a building which is protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing
system installed in accordance with the standards and regulations of the
village and the National Fire Protection Association.
         d.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or
gases shall be permitted a maximum inventory in accordance with table I of this
section, except that the storage of finished products in original sealed
container of fifty five (55) gallons or less shall be unrestricted. Spacing and
location of storage tanks shall conform with the current flammable and
combustible liquids code of the National Fire Protection Association code NFPA
no. 30.
         e.   A dike or drainage area shall be provided for all aboveground
tanks in conformance with code NFPA no. 30. The diked area or drainage area
must be no less than the following specified distance from the nearest
residential district. That distance shall be two (2) times the largest
dimension of the diked area or drainage area. For belowground tanks, the
specified distance shall be two (2) times the largest lateral tank dimension.
For example, for a rectangular dike or tank, the largest dimension is measured
along the diagonal.
TABLE I
TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIAL PERMITTED, GALLONS1
 
Flashpoint, Closed Cup Tester  Above- ground  Below- ground
                                             
140°F or higher               50,000         100,000
Above 73°F but below 140°F   25,000         100,000
Below 73°F                    5,000          100,000
 
Note:
1.    When flammable gases are stored, utilized, or manufactured and measured
in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure
permitted shall not exceed 30 times the quantities listed above. Tank spacing
and diking shall conform with the applicable NFPA code.
      3.   M-2 Districts:
         a.   Uses involving the storage, manufacture or utilization of
materials and products which decompose by detonation are permitted up to five
(5) pounds' inventory of such materials. The storage and/or utilization (but
not manufacture) of materials and products which decompose by detonation may be
allowed an inventory in excess of five (5) pounds only as special exception.
         b.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
         c.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted;
provided, that said materials or products are stored, manufactured, or utilized
in fire resistant and fire protected buildings or spaces. Said materials or
products may be stored outdoors, provided such storage is set back at least
fifty feet (50') from all district boundary lines and one hundred feet (100')
from all residential district boundary lines.
         d.   The inventory of flammable liquids or gases in conjunction with
their storage, utilization or manufacture shall be unrestricted in capacity,
except that aboveground storage shall be limited to fifty thousand (50,000)
gallons. Spacing and location of storage tanks shall conform with the current
flammable liquids code of the National Fire Protection Association code NFPA
no. 30. A dike or drainage area shall be provided for all aboveground tanks, in
conformance with code NFPA no. 30. The diked area or drainage must be no less
than the following specified distance from the nearest residential district.
That distance shall be two (2) times the maximum dimension of the diked area or
drainage area. For flammable gases, the appropriate NFPA code shall be applied
in place of NFPA 30. However, minimum distances from district boundaries, as
described above, shall still apply. For belowground tanks, the specified
distance shall be two (2) times the largest lateral tank dimension.
   E.   Glare Or Heat:
      1.   All operations, activities, and uses shall be conducted so as to
comply with the performance standards governing glare prescribed below.
      2.   Illumination levels shall be measured with a photoelectric
photometer, having a spectral response similar to that of the human eye,
following the standard spectral luminous efficiency curve adopted by the
international commission on illumination.
      3.   Uses in all business and manufacturing districts shall not produce
glare so as to cause illumination in residential districts in excess of 0.5
foot-candle. Flickering or intrinsically bright sources of illumination shall
be controlled so as not to be a nuisance in residential districts.
      4.   No source of light shall cause a hazard to traffic along public
rights of way.
      5.   Uses subject to the performance standards shall limit the use of
light sources and illuminated surfaces within five hundred feet (500') of, and
visible in, a residential district to comply with the light intensities
indicated below:
MAXIMUM INTENSITY OF LIGHT SOURCES
 
Source                        M-1 Districts         M-2 Districts
Bare incandescent bulbs       15 watts              40 watts
Illuminated buildings         15 foot-candles       30 foot-candles
Backlighted or luminous       150 foot-lamberts     250 foot-lamberts
background signs
Outdoor illuminated signs and 25 foot-candles       50 foot-candles
poster panels
Any other unshielded sources, 50 candles per square 50 candles per square
intrinsic brightness          centimeter            centimeter
 
   F.   Radiation Hazards: In all manufacturing districts:
      1.   Airborne radioactive materials shall not exceed, at any point on or
beyond the lot line, the lowest concentration permitted for the general
population by applicable federal and state laws and regulations. Applicable
federal and state laws and regulations shall be those in effect on the day of
the application for the zoning certificate.
      2.   No activity involving radiation hazards shall be permitted which
cause to any individual who may be continuously at any point on or beyond the
lot line, radiation in excess of the smallest amount permitted in the
applicable federal and state laws and regulations on the day of the application
for the zoning certificate.
      3.   Unsealed radioactive materials shall not be manufactured, utilized,
or stored in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) (105) times the quantity
of radioactive materials listed in paragraph b, section 3 of the radiation
installation registration law, department of public health, state of Illinois
(July, 1957). (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE A. M-1 RESTRICTED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8A-1: Uses
12-8A-2: Off Street Parking And Loading
12-8A-3: Signs
12-8A-4: Compliance With Performance Standards
12-8A-5: Switch Tracks, Location
12-8A-1: USES:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      Any use permitted in the B-2 local business district.
      Any establishment the principal use of which is manufacturing,
fabricating, processing, assembling, disassembling, repairing, cleaning,
servicing, testing and storing of materials, products, and goods, provided
operations conform with the performance standards and other general
requirements applicable to an M-1 district.
      Adult uses, pursuant to chapter 11, article B of this title.
      Building material sales and storage, including milling, planing,
jointing, or manufacturing of millwork.
      Contractors' offices and shops.
      Greenhouses, including retail and wholesale sales.
      Offices, general.
      Parking lots and storage garages.
      Printing and publishing establishments.
      Public open space.
      Public utility, governmental service, and similar uses as follows:
         A.   Bus transit facilities, including shelters, passenger stations,
parking areas, and service buildings.
         B.   Electric distribution centers and substations.
         C.   Compressor stations, wellhead stations, well separators, and
other similar above the ground facilities customarily used for the distribution
of natural gas as a part of the operations of a natural gas company or
nonexempt operations of a public utility company.
         D.   Gas regulator stations.
         E.   Public utility and governmental service establishments including
offices, storing, testing, repairing, and servicing.
         F.   Railroad rights of way and passenger stations.
         G.   Telephone exchanges, and telephone transmission equipment and
other such service buildings.
         H.   Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, wells, and
sewage treatment plants and lift stations - public or community.
      Research laboratories, administrative and general office buildings.
      Schools, commercial or trade.
      Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed
the duration of such construction.
      Training centers, engineering or sales.
      Warehouses.
      Wholesale establishments. (2005 Zoning Code)
   B.   Special Uses:
      Automotive sales.
      Cultivation centers and medical cannabis dispensing organizations in
compliance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act 1
provided that the distance requirements set forth in that Act are also required
for public parks and religious institutions for such use and no drive-through
is allowed. (Ord. 14-11, 7-1-2014; amd. Ord. 18-08, 2-6-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
12-8A-2: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be in accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 12, articles A and B of this title. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-8A-3: SIGNS:
Signs shall be in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 13 of this
title. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-8A-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
An application for a building permit pertaining to the use of land or
structures which requires compliance with provisions of this title respecting
performance standards shall be accompanied by a signed certificate from a
recognized testing laboratory selected from a list approved by the Village,
certifying that the proposed structure and use can and will be in compliance
with the applicable performance standards. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-8A-5: SWITCH TRACKS, LOCATION:
No switch track (nor any point thereon) located on any parcel or lot sold or
subdivided for industrial purposes shall be closer than three hundred feet
(300') from the nearest lot line of any property zoned for residential
purposes. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE B. M-2 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8B-1: Permitted Uses
12-8B-2: Off Street Parking And Loading
12-8B-3: Signs
12-8B-1: PERMITTED USES:
Railroad freight yards, except, if a change in use is desired, the provisions
of the M-1 restricted manufacturing district shall govern. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-8B-2: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and off street loading shall be in accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 12, articles A and B of this title. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-8B-3: SIGNS:
Signs shall be in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 13 of this
title. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE C. M-3 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-8C-1: Criteria
12-8C-2: Multiple Uses Per Lot
12-8C-3: Billboards
12-8C-4: Telecommunications Towers
12-8C-5: Hold Harmless Agreement Required
12-8C-1: CRITERIA:
   A.   Limited To Village Owned Real Estate: An M-3 district zoning
classification shall be limited to village owned real estate.
   B.   Structures: An M-3 district zoning classification shall only include
those kinds, sizes and forms of structures preapproved by the village board and
for nonvillage owned facilities covered or to be covered by a lease, license,
or franchise agreement from and with the village.
   C.   Facilities Not Owned By Village; Approval:
      1.   In the M-3 district zoning classification, the installation and
construction of any facility not village owned shall be preceded by a written
request of the applicant to the village board for determination of
appropriateness.
      2.   Any decision to deny request for approval for the installation or
construction of a facility within the M-3 district shall be in writing and
supported by substantial documentation contained in a written record.
      3.   The village board may require that any hearing held on the
application for approval pursuant to this article be transcribed by a certified
court reporter. The applicant shall reimburse the village for costs incurred as
a result of the court reporting and the preparation of any transcript. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-8C-2: MULTIPLE USES PER LOT:
More than one use may be located within one zoning lot pursuant to approval of
the village board within the M-3 district zoning classification. (2005 Zoning
Code)
12-8C-3: BILLBOARDS:
In regard to billboards, the village reserves the right to regulate and limit
the size, height, location and number of billboards erected within any property
located within an M-3 district zoning classification consistent with the
highway advertising control act of 1971, other pertinent statutes, the
provisions generally applicable to billboards under the general provisions and
the other manufacturing district provisions of this title, as amended (but in
case of conflict, this provision or the next most specifically applicable
provision to a manufacturing district shall prevail), and other applicable
ordinances of the village. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-8C-4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS:
   A.   Telecommunications antenna and towers shall be subject to the
regulations set forth in chapter 11, article A of this title.
   B.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in subsection A of this
section, in regard to telecommunications towers (which shall include television
towers, personal wireless personal service facilities and other towers
connected to any form of communication), the tower shall not be located in any
fashion that would diminish or obstruct the existing communication ability of
an operating tower already located within the M-3 district and shall not be any
higher than can be safely constructed given the winds and other conditions
affecting the stability of such structure. The village board shall not
unreasonably discriminate among applicants for telecommunications towers that
provide such services or functionally equivalent services. The
telecommunications towers within the M-3 district shall conform to the
applicable federal statutes and to the village ordinance establishing standards
for telecommunications antennas and towers. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-8C-5: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
All leases, licenses and franchise agreements by which billboards and
telecommunications towers are installed and constructed within an M-3 district
zoning classification shall provide a hold harmless to, and indemnification of,
the village for any injury resulting from the construction, operation,
maintenance, defect and removal of the billboard(s) or telecommunications tower
(s) executed by the owner and operator of said billboard(s) or
telecommunications tower(s). (2005 Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 9
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
12-9-1: Authorization
12-9-2: Definition
12-9-3: Requirements And Restrictions
12-9-4: Permit Required; Fee; Application
12-9-1: AUTHORIZATION:
Subject to the limitations of this chapter, accessory structures and uses are
permitted in any zoning district in connection with any principal use lawfully
existing within such district. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-9-2: DEFINITION:
An "accessory structure or use" is a structure or use that:
   A.   Is subordinate in extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal
structure or use; and
   B.   Is customarily found as an incident to such principal structure or use;
and
   C.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of those
occupying, working at, or being served by, such principal structure or use; and
   D.   Except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this
title, is located on the same lot as such principal structure or use; and
   E.   Is under the same ownership and control as such principal structure or
use. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-9-3: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Size, Height And Location:
      1.   No detached accessory building(s) or structure(s) shall occupy more
than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the required rear yard, be constructed
closer than ten feet (10') from the nearest point of the primary structure or
be in excess of seven hundred (700) square feet in area. In residential
districts, a second detached accessory building or structure may be built,
provided that the area occupied by such accessory building or structure does
not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in the area; and no more than two (2)
accessory buildings or structures are permitted on any residential lot.
      2.   A detached accessory building or structure shall not exceed fifteen
feet (15') in maximum height measured from the top of the surface slab to the
peak of the roof, if applicable, nor have side walls in excess of nine feet
(9') measured from the top of the surface slab to the top of the side wall. In
the M-1 manufacturing district, an accessory building or structure shall not
exceed thirty five feet (35') or the height of the primary structure at its
lowest point, whichever is less. (Ord. 11-23, 7-19-2011)
      3.   Location requirements for accessory buildings and structures are as
established within the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 11-35, 11-15-2011)
   B.   Use Limited: Any accessory building, buildings or structures shall be
limited in use to storage and shall specifically prohibit the use thereof for
living space, affiliated residential purposes or commercial purposes.
   C.   Compliance With Applicable District Regulations:
      1.   Except as expressly provided otherwise in this title, every
accessory structure and use shall comply with the use, bulk, space, and yard
regulations made applicable to them by the regulations of the district in which
they are located.
      2.   When the district regulations of this title require compliance with
any procedures or standards with respect to a specific use, such use shall not
be established as an accessory use, except in compliance with those procedures
and standards.
   D.   Construction Of Principal Structure: No accessory structure or use
shall be constructed, established, or maintained on any lot prior to the
substantial completion of construction of the principal structure to which it
is accessory.
   E.   Residential Recreational Facilities; Lighting Limitation: Residential
recreational facilities shall be limited to use by the occupants of the
principal residential use and their guests and shall not be illuminated by
lighting fixtures exceeding fifteen feet (15') in height.
   F.   Lighting Fixtures; Glare Restricted: Any permitted accessory lighting
fixtures shall be so designed, arranged, and operated as to prevent glare and
direct rays of light from being cast onto any adjacent public or private
property or street and so as not to produce excessive sky reflected glare.
Except for streetlights, no exterior light in or adjacent to any residential
district shall be so designed, arranged, or operated to produce an intensity of
light exceeding one-half (1/2) foot-candle at any residential lot line.
   G.   View Obstruction At Intersections: On corner lots within that part of a
yard, court, or other open area located within a radius of twenty five feet
(25') from the point of intersection of the two (2) street right of way lines
forming the lot corner, no building, structures, or shrubs as herein permitted
as obstructions in front yards or side yards adjoining a street shall be
erected, altered, or planted which have a height more than twenty four inches
(24") above the ground grade in this area; and trees planted in such areas
shall not have branches lower than eight feet (8') above the ground grade
elevation in this area.
   H.   Other Similar Accessory Structures And Uses: Other similar accessory
buildings, structures, and uses as herein permitted in district regulations as
accessory to a specific permitted use. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-9-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit; Fee: No person shall build, install, erect, or enlarge an
accessory building or structure, or part thereof, without obtaining, in
advance, a permit therefor and paying the fee provided in the village fee
schedule.
   B.   Application: An application under this chapter shall be made to the
building commissioner and shall include a sketch plan describing the proposed
accessory building or structure and showing, to the extent necessary to
establish compliance with the requirements of this chapter, its location in
relation to:
      1.   The lot lines of the lot on which the accessory buildings or
structures are located.
      2.   Any other buildings or structures on said lot. (Ord. 11-23, 7-19-
2011)
CHAPTER 10
FENCES
SECTION:
12-10-1: Definitions
12-10-2: Compliance Required; Removal For Noncompliance
12-10-3: Permit Required; Fee; Application
12-10-4: Construction Standards
12-10-5: Clear Sight Area
12-10-6: Measurement Of Height
12-10-7: Maintenance
12-10-8: Swimming Pool Enclosures
12-10-9: Prohibited Fences
12-10-10: Nonconforming Fences
12-10-11: Exemptions
12-10-12: Violation; Penalty
12-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions of terms contained in section
12-2-3 of this title shall apply to those terms as used in this chapter. Other
terms are hereby defined as follows:
FENCE: Any structure, other than an enclosed building, forming a barrier or
boundary between lots, between a lot and any street or alley, or between
portions of a lot or lots, including a recreational fence.
RECREATIONAL FENCE: A fence used principally as a backstop, shield, or
enclosure for a sport or recreational activity. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-10-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; REMOVAL FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
   A.   Compliance: No fence shall be built, installed, erected, enlarged,
extended, maintained, or allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Removal: Any fence so built, installed, erected, enlarged, extended, or
maintained, except as provided in section
12-10-10 of this chapter, shall be removed by the owner thereof. (2005 Zoning
Code)
12-10-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit; Fee: No person shall build, install, erect, enlarge, or extend
a fence or part thereof without obtaining, in advance, a permit therefor and
paying the fee provided in the village fee schedule.
   B.   Application: An application under this chapter shall be made to the
building commissioner and shall include a sketch plan describing the proposed
fence and showing, to the extent necessary to establish compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, its location in relation to:
      1.   The lot lines of the lot on which the fence is placed.
      2.   Any structures on said lot.
      3.   Any structures on adjacent properties, and depicting any proposed
grade changes in said area. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-10-4: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   All fences shall be built, installed, erected, reconstructed,
restored, replaced, or extended in a good and workmanlike manner.
      2.   No structural components of a fence, other than the structural
components of a brick or stone fence, shall exceed six inches (6") in width.
      3.   All fences shall be securely anchored to the ground.
      4.   All fences shall be built, installed, erected, reconstructed,
restored, replaced, or extended so that all posts and any other structural
components, and the unfinished side of the fence, if any, shall face into the
lot on which the fence is placed.
   B.   Height: No fence or part thereof shall be permitted in excess of the
following height limits:
      1.   Residential districts and lots used for residential purposes:
         a.   Corner side yard, except for subsections B1c and B1d of this
section: Four feet (4').
         b.   Fences are prohibited in any front yard. Any other yard, except
for subsections B1c and B1d of this section: Six feet (6').
         c.   Within ten feet (10') of, and parallel to, a lot line of any lot
used for nonresidential purposes: Eight feet (8').
         d.   Within ten feet (10') of, and parallel to, a lot line abutting
the Illinois tristate toll road: Eight feet (8'). (2005 Zoning Code)
         e.   Six foot (6') high solid fences on corner lots not necessarily
adjacent to commercial or industrial zones will be allowed only in
circumstances where the fence does not impede any clear sight area or otherwise
create a hazard to pedestrians crossing driveways, persons using crosswalks and
drivers of vehicles at any intersection or driveway. Safety determination will
be made by the building commissioner with the advice of the fire chief and
police chief.
      2.   In nonresidential districts and lots used for nonresidential
purposes, the front, corner side yard, and any other yard, height limit shall
be: Eight feet (8').
      The eight foot (8') limit provided for in this subsection B2 shall be
reduced to a maximum height of not less than four feet (4') along any lot line
abutting a lot used for residential purposes, if determined by the building
commissioner to be necessary for purposes of promoting pedestrian and vehicular
traffic safety.
      3.   Exceptions to subsections B1 and B2 of this section: (2005 Zoning
Code)
         a.   Chainlink fences, wherever located: Six feet (6'). Chainlink
fences in manufacturing districts are permitted up to eight feet (8') in height
if the zoning administrator determines that the height is for security purposes
and the height will not negatively affect the adjacent properties.
         b.   Any post or other principal vertical support component: Six
inches (6") above maximum height.
(2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 05-07, 2-15-2005; Ord. 11-24, 7-19-2011; Ord. 24-
52, 9-17-2024)
12-10-5: CLEAR SIGHT AREA:
   A.   Maximum Height Of Shrubs, Fences, Other Structures: Shrubs, bushes and
plantings within the clear sight area shall be trimmed or limited to a maximum
height of forty five inches (45"). Solid fences and other solid structures
(excluding existing buildings) within the clear sight area shall be limited to
a maximum height of twenty four inches (24"). Measurements shall be from the
ground to the top of the object. In any event, a lesser height must be
maintained if necessary to comply with the minimum horizontal sight distance
across such clear sight area specified in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Minimum Horizontal Sight Distance: In no case may overhanging branches,
shrubs, bushes, plantings, solid fences or other solid structures (excluding
existing buildings) in a clear sight area be of a height which obstructs
horizontal sightlines across such clear sight area measured from points forty
five inches (45") above the centerlines of the intersecting streets along such
centerlines for a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the center of the
intersection. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-10-6: MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHT:
The height of all fences shall be measured from the existing natural grade on
which the fence is located, as determined by the building commissioner, to the
top of the fence. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-10-7: MAINTENANCE:
All fences shall be maintained in good condition. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-10-8: SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES:
All swimming pools shall be enclosed with an effective barrier or fence, or be
inaccessible to small children. A private swimming pool, or the lot or premises
on which it is located, shall be enclosed with a fence or other structure not
less than four feet (4') in height with no openings therein other than doors
opening through such enclosure which shall have self-closing latches located
not less than four feet (4') from the bottom of such door or gate. Doors of
buildings forming a part of the required enclosure need not be so equipped with
self-closure. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-10-9: PROHIBITED FENCES:
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following
prohibitions apply to all fences in the village:
   A.   Chainlink Or Cinder Block: No chainlink, stockade, or cinder block
fence shall be permitted in any front yard or any corner side yard.
   B.   Solid Wood: No "solid wood fence", as defined in this subsection, shall
be permitted in any front yard or any corner side yard. A "solid wood fence" is
a fence made of wood in which the open spaces, when viewed at a right angle to
the vertical fence plane, constitute less than one-third (1/3) of the total
fence contour. The "total fence contour" is the entire square foot area within
and between the outside vertical outline of the fence. The open spaces are
areas within the total fence contour, which, when viewed at right angles to the
vertical fence plane, allow clear visibility through said fence plane. (2005
Zoning Code)
   C.   Strips Or Slats: A chainlink fence in any district within the Village
may contain strips or slats of any kind between or among the links.
   D.   Barbed Wire: No barbed wire fences shall be permitted; provided,
however, that no more than three (3) strands of barbed wire may be used on the
top of fences enclosing public utility facilities.
   E.   Electrically Charged: No electrically charged fences shall be
permitted.
(2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 11-24, 7-19-2011; Ord. 24-65, 11-5-2024)
12-10-10: NONCONFORMING FENCES:
All fences heretofore lawfully constructed and not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed nonconforming fences and may exist
and may be maintained, reconstructed, restored, or replaced; provided, however,
that no such maintenance, reconstruction, restoration or replacement shall
expand any existing nonconformity or create any new nonconformity. No
nonconforming fence shall be enlarged or extended in any manner, except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-10-11: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to fences owned or maintained by
the village or to fences constructed and maintained by any other governmental
body or agency for the principal purpose of reducing noise. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-10-12: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon failure to
cure said violation within thirty (30) days after written notice thereof from
the zoning administrator, be subject to fines listed in section
12-3-6 of this title. (2005 Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 11
SPECIFIED REGULATIONS FOR PARTICULAR LAND USES
ARTICLE A. TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS
SECTION:
12-11A-1: Definitions
12-11A-2: Application Of Provisions
12-11A-3: General Guidelines And Requirements
12-11A-4: Permitted Uses
12-11A-5: Administrative Approvals
12-11A-6: Special Use Permits
12-11A-7: Removal Of Abandoned Antennas And Towers
12-11A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light
poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or
conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The corporate authorities.
HEIGHT: Shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS: Shall have the meaning set forth in subsection
12-11A-2D of this article.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. (2005 Zoning
Code)
12-11A-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   District Height Limitations: The requirements set forth in this article
shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are
installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for each
zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures
shall not apply to towers and antennas.
   B.   Public Property: Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased,
or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the
requirements of this article, provided a license or lease authorizing such
antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority.
   C.   Amateur Radio; Receive Only Antennas: This article shall not govern any
tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy feet (70') in
height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas.
   D.   Preexisting Towers And Antennas: Any tower or antenna for which a
permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date hereof shall not be
required to meet the requirements of this article, other than the requirements
of subsections 12-11A-3E and F of this article. Any such towers or antennas
shall be referred to in this article as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting
antennas". (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11A-3: GENERAL GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose And Goals: The purpose of this article is to establish general
guideline for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this article are
to:
      1.   Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and
minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
      2.   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites;
      3.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
      4.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and
      5.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently.
   B.   Principal Or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or
tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including, but
not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers
that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the
provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
   C.   Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the zoning administrator an inventory of its existing towers
that are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within
one-fourth (1/4) mile of the border thereof, including specific information
about the location, height, and design of each tower. The zoning administrator
may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or special use permits under this article or other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority;
provided, however, that the zoning administrator is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
   D.   Aesthetics And Lighting: The guidelines set forth in this subsection
shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas
governed by this article; provided, however, that the governing authority may
waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this article are
better served thereby.
      1.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject
to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      2.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and
built environment.
      3.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
      4.   Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA
or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority
may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that
would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
   E.   Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current standards
and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal
government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such
standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and
antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to
bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
   F.   Building Codes And Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable village building codes and
the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the
governing authority concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice
being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days
to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to
bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the governing
authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11A-4: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   General: The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall not require administrative review or a special use permit.
Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with subsections 12-11A-3D, E and F of
this article and all other applicable ordinances.
   B.   Specific Permitted Uses: The following uses are specifically permitted:
      1.   Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or
antenna, in the village manufacturing districts; provided, however, that such
tower shall be set back from any existing off site residence a distance equal
to the height of the tower;
      2.   Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding
nonresidential structure) that is fifty feet (50') in height or greater, so
long as said additional antenna adds no more than twenty feet (20') to the
height of said existing structure; and
      3.   Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long
as the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty feet (20') to the
height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a preexisting
tower; provided, however, that such specific permitted use shall not include
the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said antenna. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11A-5: ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS:
   A.   General:
      1.   The planning and zoning commission may administratively approve the
uses listed in this section.
      2.   Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the zoning
administrator, providing the information set forth in subsections 12-11A-6B and
D of this article.
      3.   In connection with any such administrative approval, the planning
and zoning commission may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively
waive any zoning district setback requirements by up to fifty percent (50%).
      4.   If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal
said denial in accordance with the provisions of this title concerning appeals
of administrative decisions.
   B.   Specific Administratively Approved Uses: The following uses may be
approved by the planning and zoning commission after conducting an
administrative review:
      1.   Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower
(such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding
nonresidential structure) that is less than fifty feet (50') in height, so long
as such addition does not add more than twenty feet (20') to the height of the
existing structure.
      2.   Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including
a preexisting tower and further including the placement of additional buildings
or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as
the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty feet (20') to the height
of said existing tower.
      3.   Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other
than the village manufacturing district that, in the judgment of the planning
and zoning commission, is in conformity with the goals set forth in subsection
12-11A-3A of this article.
      4.   Locating any tower in a zoning district other than the village
manufacturing districts, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies
the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by
the applicant; the planning and zoning commission concludes the tower is in
conformity with the goals set forth in subsection 12-11A-3A of this article and
the requirements of subsections 12-11A-3D, E and F of this article; the tower
is to be set back from any existing off site residence a distance equal to the
height of the tower; and that the tower meets the following height and usage
criteria:
         a.   For a single user, up to ninety feet (90') in height;
         b.   For two (2) users, up to one hundred twenty feet (120') in
height; and
         c.   For three (3) or more users, up to one hundred fifty feet (150')
in height. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11A-6: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special
use permits:
      1.   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section
12-11A-4 of this article or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant
to section
12-11A-5 of this article, then a special use permit shall be required for the
construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
      2.   In granting a special use permit, the governing authority may impose
conditions to the extent the governing authority concludes such conditions are
necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining
properties.
      3.   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
   B.   Information Required: Each applicant requesting a special use permit
under this article shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view
and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed
and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and
dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography,
radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking,
fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the
governing authority to be necessary to assess compliance with this article.
   C.   Factors Considered In Granting Special Use Permits: The governing
authority shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue
a special use permit, although the governing authority may waive or reduce the
burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the governing
authority concludes that the goals of this article are better served thereby:
      1.   Height of the proposed tower;
      2.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
      3.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
      4.   Surrounding topography;
      5.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
      6.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
      7.   Proposed ingress and egress; and
      8.   Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as
discussed in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers Or Other Structures: No new
tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing tower or structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate
that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna may consist of any of the following:
      1.   No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
      2.   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
the applicant's engineering requirements.
      3.   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
      4.   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
      5.   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
      6.   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
   E.   Setbacks And Separation: The following setbacks and separation
requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special use
permit is required; provided, however, that the governing authority may reduce
the standard setbacks and separation requirements if the goals of this article
would be better served thereby:
      1.   Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower
from any off site residential structure.
      2.   Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
      3.   In zoning districts other than industrial or heavy commercial zoning
districts, towers over ninety feet (90') in height shall not be located within
one-fourth (1/4) of a mile from any existing tower that is over ninety feet
(90') in height.
   F.   Security Fencing: Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less
than six feet (6') in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anticlimbing device; provided, however, that the governing authority may waive
such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
   G.   Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the governing authority may waive such requirements if the goals
of this article would be better served thereby:
      1.   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent
residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip
at least four feet (4') wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
      2.   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether.
      3.   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers
sited on large wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be
a sufficient buffer. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11A-7: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six (6)
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower
shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the
governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or
tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may
remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective
until all users cease using the tower. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE B. ADULT USES
SECTION:
12-11B-1: Definitions; Prohibited Acts
12-11B-2: Permitted Uses
12-11B-3: Conditions And Regulations
12-11B-4: Nonconforming Adult Uses; Elimination
12-11B-5: Separability
12-11B-6: Violations; Penalty
12-11B-1: DEFINITIONS; PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Definitions:
    ADULT USES: This term shall be defined as "adult bookstores and adult film/
video stores", "adult motion picture theaters", and "adult minimotion picture
theaters" as defined below, or other similar establishments.
      Adult Bookstore Or Adult Film/Video Store: An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines,
films or videos for rental, sale or viewing on premises by use of motion
picture devices or any other coin operated means, and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified
anatomical areas", or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.
      Adult Entertainment Cabaret: A public or private establishment which is
licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features dancers,
strippers, models or similar entertainers which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas.
      Adult Minimotion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity
for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by
patrons therein.
      Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of
fifty (50) or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting material
having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: In connection with adult uses, means:
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered: a) human genitals, pubic
region; b) buttocks; and c) female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: In connection with adult uses, means:
      1.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
      2.   Acts or representation of acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy.
      3.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breasts.
   B.   Prohibition: No use hereinabove defined as an "adult use" shall be
permitted in any residence district (R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4) or in any business
district (B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4). (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11B-2: PERMITTED USES:
A use defined in subsection 12-11B-1A of this article as an "adult use" shall
be allowed as a permitted use in the M-1 or M-2 manufacturing districts,
provided there is compliance with all general requirements and district
requirements applicable to manufacturing districts generally (chapter 8 of this
title); and further provided, that there is compliance with the conditions set
forth in section
12-11B-3 of this article. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11B-3:. CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   License: A license must be obtained for all adult uses, and such
establishment must comply will all village ordinances.
   B.   Minors: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be
allowed on the premises where an adult use is conducted.
   C.   Manager: During the hours or operation of an adult use, there shall be
present a manager or other employee responsible for the operation of the
premises who shall not be under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   D.   Alcoholic Beverages: No adult use shall be located on premises for
which any license to sell alcoholic liquor has been issued.
   E.   Uses Separated: All adult uses shall be separated from one another by a
distance of at least five hundred feet (500').
   F.   Location Near Schools, Churches, Playgrounds:
      1.   No adult use shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any property on which a preexisting public or private school, place of worship,
park or public playground is located, or within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any property zoned for any residence district (R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4), or for
any business district (B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4).
      2.   Such distances shall be measured along a straight line without
regard to intervening structures or uses from the nearest property line of the
adult use to the nearest property line of such preexisting use or property
zoned as residential district or business district.
   G.   Location On Main Thoroughfares: No adult use shall be located on a main
thoroughfare where there are businesses or offices in which the public
frequents on a regular basis and where minor children may also frequent.
   H.   Booths: Any adult use establishment which contains booths for
individual viewing of books, magazines, pictures, videos, motion pictures, or
the like shall have at least one side of the booth open for view to an adjacent
public room. Partitions comprising the other walls of the booths shall be solid
with no apertures. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11B-4: NONCONFORMING ADULT USES; ELIMINATION:
Any use of property, defined in section
12-11B-1 of this article as an "adult use" as of the effective date hereof
which shall become nonconforming under the terms, provisions, and regulations
hereof may be continued for four (4) months after the effective date hereof
whether said use is contained in a residence district, business or
manufacturing district. Thereafter, the adult use shall be eliminated. Any
request for an extension not to exceed two (2) months shall be made before the
planning and zoning commission and shall be granted only upon a showing of good
cause and financial hardship. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11B-5: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the president and board of
trustees that the several provisions of this article are separable, in
accordance with the following:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this article to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this article not specifically included in said judgment.
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provisions of this article to a particular property,
building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically
included in said judgment. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-11B-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating an
adult use within the village to fail to comply with the conditions and
regulations set forth in this article, or to suffer or permit noncompliance
with such provisions.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of this
article shall be subject to a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each violation. Each day that a violation exists shall be deemed a separate
violation. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE C. RECREATIONAL CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
12-11C-1: Definitions
12-11C-2: Recreational Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
12-11C-3: Public Nuisance Declared
12-11C-1: DEFINITIONS:
PERSON:        Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization,
               including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or agent.
RECREATIONAL   A recreational cannabis craft grower, recreational cannabis cultivation center,
CANNABIS       recreational cannabis dispensary, recreational cannabis infuser, recreational
BUSINESS       cannabis processor and / or recreational cannabis transporter.
ESTABLISHMENT:
RECREATIONAL   A “craft grower,” as defined in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
CANNABIS CRAFT ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
GROWER:
RECREATIONAL
CANNABIS       A “cultivation center,” as defined in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
CULTIVATION    (410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.), as amended.
CENTER:
RECREATIONAL   A “dispensary,” as defined in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
CANNABIS       ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
DISPENSARY:
RECREATIONAL   An “infused’ as defined in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
CANNABIS       705/1, et seq.), as amended.
INFUSER:
RECREATIONAL   A “processor,” as defined in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
CANNABIS       ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
PROCESSOR:
RECREATIONAL   A “transporter,” as defined in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
CANNABIS       ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended. (Ord. 19-63, 11-5-2019)
TRANSPORTER:
 
12-11C-2: RECREATIONAL CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aide,
abet or assist in the operation of any recreational cannabis business
establishment within the Village, and the following recreational cannabis
business establishments are prohibited within the Village:
   Recreational Cannabis Craft Grower Recreational Cannabis Cultivation Center
   Recreational Cannabis Dispensary
   Recreational Cannabis Infuser
   Recreational Cannabis Processor
   Recreational Cannabis Transporter (Ord. 19-63, 11-5-2019)
12-11C-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
The location or operation of any prohibited recreational cannabis business
establishment within the Village in violation of the provisions of this Article
is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all
available remedies. (Ord. 19-63, 11-5-2019)
CHAPTER 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
ARTICLE A. OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
12-12A-1: Authorization
12-12A-2: Applicability To Existing, New And Expanded Uses
12-12A-3: Location Of Required Parking Spaces
12-12A-4: Design And Maintenance
12-12A-5: Computation Of Required Spaces
12-12A-6: Use Of Lots Or Garages Restricted
12-12A-7: Accessory Parking In Single-Family Residential Districts
12-12A-8: Parking Regulations In Residential Districts
12-12A-9: Storage Of Inoperable Vehicles
12-12A-10: Buffers And Landscaping
12-12A-11: Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities
12-12A-12: Required Parking Spaces
12-12A-13: Parking Spaces At Automotive Repair Shops
12-12A-1: AUTHORIZATION:
Subject to the limitations of this article, off street parking is permitted as
an accessory use in all districts. Off street parking as a principal use is
permitted only when expressly authorized by the regulations applicable to the
district in question. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the
right of any person to provide off street parking in excess of the requirements
herein established but all such parking shall comply with the standards of this
article. All parking area design shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning
administrator. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12A-2: APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING, NEW AND EXPANDED USES:
   A.   General Applicability: Except as provided otherwise in this section,
the provisions of this article shall apply to, and off street parking spaces
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this article shall be provided for,
all existing and new uses.
   B.   Change In Existing Use: Whenever a use existing on the effective date
hereof is changed thereafter to a new use, parking facilities shall be provided
as required herein for such new use; provided, however, that when any such
existing use was deficient in required parking spaces on such effective date,
such new use may be established with a deficiency in required parking spaces
equal in number to not more than such preexisting deficiency.
   C.   Increase In Use Intensity: Whenever the intensity of use of any
structure or use is increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor
area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for
required parking spaces, parking spaces as required herein shall be provided
for such increase in intensity of use.
   D.   Minor Additions: Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
section, no building or use lawfully existing on the effective date hereof, or
any amendment hereto establishing parking requirements with respect to such
structure or use, shall be required to provide any additional parking spaces
pursuant to this section unless and until the aggregate increase in the units
of measurement by which the parking requirement is calculated shall equal ten
percent (10%) or more of the units of measurement required upon such effective
date, in which event parking spaces as required herein shall be provided for
the total aggregate increase.
   E.   Accessory Use: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the continued utilization of any parking space as an accessory use to any
structure or use for parking of a vehicle that may be lawfully parked in such
space solely because such space does not satisfy the locational or design
requirements of this title, or any amendment hereto, if such space was validly
in use as an accessory use to such structure or use on the effective date of
this title or such amendment. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12A-3: LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES:
   A.   General Rule:
      1.   Except as provided in subsections B and C of this section, parking
spaces required by this article shall be located on the same zoning lot as the
use to which they are accessory.
      2.   Off street parking spaces may be provided on surface lots,
underground, under a building, or in parking structures. Parking lots, areas,
and garages shall comply with the yard requirements made applicable to them by
the regulations of the district in which they are located.
   B.   Parking For Townhouses: Not more than two (2) parking spaces located in
a garage, driveway, or other area reserved for the exclusive use of the
residents of an individual dwelling unit shall be counted toward the parking
spaces required pursuant to subsection 12-12A-12A1 of this article. Not more
than two (2) spaces required by said subsection may, and at least one such
space shall, be located in an area or areas available for use in common by at
least three (3) such individual units. Such areas may include parking spaces
located in parking areas or lots within the development in which such units are
located, whether located on or off the lot on which such units are located;
provided, however, that no such required space shall be located farther than
three hundred feet (300'), measured along an established pedestrian circulation
route, from the unit it is required to serve.
   C.   Deficiency Spaces: When proposed to eliminate a parking deficiency or
when required because of a change in use or an increase in use intensity
pursuant to subsection 12-12A-2B or C of this article, parking spaces may be
located within any district adjacent to the district in which the principal use
in question is a permitted use, or within the same zoning district as, and
within one thousand feet (1,000') of, the zoning lot on which the use to be
served is located; provided, however, that such remote parking spaces may be
allowed only when such remote site is covenanted to remain as parking for so
long as said parking spaces are required to meet the standards of this title.
   D.   Parking In Yards: Off street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be
located in required interior side yards and rear yards. In all business
districts, the required off street parking spaces may be located in a front
yard adjoining a street, not less than ten feet (10') from a lot line or may be
located in a side yard adjoining a street, not less than five feet (5') from a
lot line. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12A-4: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Design:
      1.   Space Dimensions:
         a.   Each off street parking space, excluding its associated
circulation aisle, shall have the following minimum dimensions, in feet and
inches:
 
Parking Angle Stall Width     Stall Length     Stall Height
Parallel      8 feet 0 inches 20 feet 0 inches 6 feet 8 inches
45 degrees    9 feet 0 inches 17 feet 6 inches 6 feet 8 inches
60 degrees    9 feet 0 inches 19 feet 0 inches 6 feet 8 inches
90 degrees    9 feet 0 inches 18 feet 0 inches 6 feet 8 inches
 
         b.   The stall width dimensions shall be increased to sixteen feet
(16') for required handicapped parking spaces or to the width required under
applicable state law, whichever is greater.
         c.   The stall dimensions shall be reduced by one-half foot (1/2') in
length and one-half foot (1/2') in width for commuter parking lots and
structures.
         d.   Except for parallel parking spaces, the stall dimensions may be
reduced by one-half foot (1/2') in length and width in parking lots and
structures accessory to office and institutional uses where the planning and
zoning commission finds that the typical parking space in such lot or structure
will not be occupied by more than two (2) different vehicles during the course
of the business day.
      2.   Access To Street:
         a.   Least Interference: All parking lots, areas, and garages shall be
so located and designed as to provide access to adjacent streets with the least
interference with through traffic movements.
         b.   Driveways:
            (1)   Driveways shall have return radii of twenty feet (20') at the
point of access to the street.
            (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, driveways
serving single-family dwellings and driveways providing direct access from a
parking lot to a street (and not serving as a circulation aisle) may traverse
any required yard. The surface area of any such driveway from a parking lot to
a street shall not exceed an area calculated by multiplying the width of the
driveway times the depth of the required yard times a factor of 1.5.
         c.   Curb Cut Width: No curb cut across public property shall exceed
thirty feet (30') without the written approval of the zoning administrator.
         d.   Access Across Separate Zoning Lot: No access to an adjacent
street shall be provided through a zoning lot, other than the zoning lot on
which the parking lot is located, except across a permanent, recorded access
easement in form and substance satisfactory to the village attorney.
      3.   Turnaround Area: Every parking lot or garage, other than a parking
lot or garage accessory to a single-family dwelling, shall be provided with a
turnaround area or other means to permit cars to exit the parking lot or garage
without backing onto any street or sidewalk.
      4.   Surface, Drainage And Markings:
         a.   Every off street parking lot and garage shall be surfaced with a
bituminous or portland cement concrete pavement providing all weather, durable,
and dustless surface. Unless otherwise approved by the village engineer, such
construction shall meet the following minimum standards for structural
materials derived from the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Manual",
current edition:
            (1)   For parking areas designed and intended principally for
passenger automobiles, a minimum coefficient rating of 2.25.
            (2)   For parking areas designed and intended for vehicles other
than the above, a minimum coefficient rating of 2.40.
         b.   All parking surfaces shall be graded and drained to dispose of
surface water accumulation by means of a positive stormwater drainage system
connected to a public stormwater sewer system. Individual stalls shall be
clearly identified by painted markings four inches (4") to six inches (6") in
width.
      5.   Car Stops: Every parking lot and garage, except that accessory to a
single-family dwelling, shall be provided with curbs, car wheel stops,
guardrails, barrier fences, or other suitable devices designed and located to
protect required screening devices, landscaping, and structures from damage by
vehicles using such lot or garage. This provision shall not be construed to
require car wheel stops for every parking space, but only in those cases where
the zoning administrator determines that such stops are necessary or desirable
to achieve the purposes of this subsection B5.
      6.   Circulation Aisles: Each parking space, except spaces accessory to a
single-family dwelling, shall be accessed by a circulation aisle of a width, in
feet and inches, as specified below:
 
Parking Angle One-Way Aisle Width Two-Way Aisle Width
Parallel      12 feet 0 inches    24 feet 0 inches
45 degrees    12 feet 6 inches    24 feet 0 inches
60 degrees    14 feet 6 inches    24 feet 0 inches
90 degrees    22 feet 6 inches    24 feet 0 inches
 
      7.   Tandem Spaces: No parking spaces shall be designed in tandem so that
ingress to or egress from one space is blocked by a second space, except for
spaces accessory to single-family or multiple-family dwelling units.
      8.   Back Up Area: Each parking space, except spaces accessory to a
single-family dwelling, shall be provided with a sufficient back up area to
permit egress in one maneuver, consisting of one backward and one forward
movement, and shall be designed so that no vehicle is required to back up onto
any street.
      9.   Lighting: Fixed lighting shall be provided for all parking lots and
garages accommodating more than ten (10) vehicles. Such lighting shall be so
arranged as to prevent direct glare of beams onto any public or private
property or streets by the use of luminare cutoffs. All lighting shall be
reduced to security levels at all times of nonuse.
      10.   Tree Planting Areas And Islands: Trees located within planting
islands in paved areas shall have a minimum landscaped area of at least thirty
six (36) square feet of surface area and a depth sufficient to allow the bottom
of the tree ball to be planted with a washed gravel layer at the bottom of the
tree planting area to allow proper drainage. If the soil is impervious, then a
drainage pipe shall connect the tree planting area to a drainage structure.
   B.   Maintenance: All tree planting areas, parking lots, garages, and areas
shall be properly maintained at all times so as to be free of potholes, broken
curbs, and other damaged or neglected features. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12A-5: COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED SPACES:
   A.   Fractional Spaces: When determination of the number of required parking
spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall
require one additional parking space.
   B.   Capacity Calculations: When parking spaces are required on the basis of
capacity, capacity shall be determined based on the occupancy standards
established by the village building code.
   C.   Bench Seating: In houses of worship and other places of assembly in
which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating
facilities, each eighteen inches (18") of such seating facility shall be
counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for off
street parking facilities under this title.
   D.   Population Calculations: When parking spaces are required on the basis
of the number of customers, students, or similar measure, the maximum number
for which the structure is designed shall govern, except that when the
structure has no design capacity, the maximum number present at any one time
shall govern. When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of
employees, the number of employees working during the largest shift shall
govern. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12A-6: USE OF LOTS OR GARAGES RESTRICTED:
No off street parking lot or garage shall be used for any purpose other than
the temporary storage of motor vehicles related to the premises. The storage of
merchandise and the sale or commercial repair of vehicles are prohibited. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-12A-7: ACCESSORY PARKING IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Except when approved as part of a special use permit application, parking lots
shall not be permitted as an accessory use in any single-family residential
district. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12A-8: PARKING REGULATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Commercial Vehicle Parking: Parking of commercial vehicles in
residential districts is not permitted, except under the conditions stated
below in this section. A commercial vehicle is any vehicle operated for the
transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or
industrial enterprise, for hire or not for hire, but not including a commuter
van used in a ridesharing arrangement. A commercial vehicle shall include a
vehicle with signs, advertisements or business identification on the vehicle.
      1.   No more than two (2) commercial vehicles, as permitted herein, shall
be parked on a single-family residentially zoned lot unless said vehicle can be
placed completely within an enclosed garage.
      2.   No more than one commercial vehicle per residential unit shall be
permitted in a multiple-family residential development unless said vehicles can
be placed completely within an enclosed garage.
      3.   No commercial vehicle, having a gross weight in pounds, including
vehicle and maximum load, in excess of eight thousand one (8,001) pounds and
bearing a class designation other than B under the provisions of the Illinois
vehicle code shall be parked or stored on any residential premises in a
residential district, except when making a delivery or rendering a service at
such premises or as permitted in subsection A4 of this section.
      4.   a. No commercial vehicle having a gross weight when fully loaded of
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or less, including those within such weight
bearing a classification of D under the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code
and displaying a current Illinois state inspection sticker, shall be parked or
stored on any residential premises in a residential district unless the vehicle
shall not exceed twenty four feet (24') in length or nine feet (9') in height
as measured from the surface at ground level nearest the vehicle, except when
making a delivery or rendering a service at such premises.
         b.   Not more than two (2) taxis or limousines, only one of which may
have a stretched body, may be parked on a residentially zoned lot, except when
making a delivery or rendering a service at such premises.
         c.   Not more than one tow truck of not more than twenty four feet
(24') in length may be parked on a residentially zoned lot, except when
rendering a service at such premises.
         d.   Snowplows shall be permitted on the front of commercial vehicles
during the winter season and shall be removed and properly stored not in public
view or inside a building by April 15.
      5.   The use of plywood or other materials that are not commercial grade
original manufactured equipment as a bed riser, height extender, or equipment
enclosure on a permitted commercial vehicle is prohibited.
      6.   No commercial trailer shall be parked or stored on any residential
premises in a residential district.
      7.   All commercial vehicles permitted by this section to be parked in a
residential zoning classification shall display plate classification on the
front and rear of the vehicle at all times and be parked on a permanent paved
surface as otherwise required by this code.
   B.   Off Site Parking: All proposals to provide required parking on a site
other than the zoning lot of which the proposed use is to be established shall
be a special use subject to the provisions provided herein for special uses.
   C.   Use Of Parking And Loading Facilities:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or place goods
or materials upon any nonresidential off street parking or loading area for the
purpose of displaying it for sale except where such vehicle, goods or materials
are on property where their sale or storage is a lawfully permitted use.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle except upon an off street
parking space or loading area in compliance with requirements herein.
      3.   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of subsection C1 or C2
of this section the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be
prima facie responsible for such violation.
   D.   General Regulations And Standards: The following standards and
regulations shall apply to the parking of vehicles in a residential district:
      1.   Distance From Lot Line And Public Sidewalk: No vehicle shall be
stored within three feet (3') of any lot line or any vehicular or pedestrian
right of way.
      2.   Surface: Vehicular off street parking and loading on or across
grassy areas, lawns, open space or landscaped areas shall be expressly
prohibited. All vehicular off street parking, loading, access driveways and
access aisles shall be comprised of and constructed of dustless, all weather
material of either asphalt, concrete, brick, paving block or similar impervious
surfaces.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, driveways serving single-
family dwellings and driveways providing direct access from a parking lot to a
street (and not serving as a circulation aisle), may traverse any required
yard. Impervious surface area for driveways, walks and patios shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the required front yard of residential properties. The
surface area of any driveway from a parking lot to a street shall not exceed an
area calculated by multiplying the width of the driveway times the depth of the
required yard times a factor of one and one-half (1.5).
      3.   Permanent Location Prohibited: No vehicle shall have its wheels
removed or be affixed to the ground so as to prevent its ready removal.
      4.   Residential Use Prohibited: No vehicle shall be used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping purposes.
      5.   Utility Hookups: No vehicle shall be connected to any public
utility, except for required servicing.
      6.   Unsafe Conditions: No vehicle shall be parked or stored so as to
create a dangerous or unsafe condition. The ground under or surrounding the
location wherein a vehicle is stored shall be free of noxious weeds, debris,
and combustible material. (Ord. 14-8, 7-1-2014)
12-12A-9: STORAGE OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
No vehicle incapable of being driven or used for the purpose or use for which
it was designed, other than a vehicle awaiting timely repair at an automotive
repair shop, gasoline service station, or new or used car dealer, shall be
stored in any parking lot or parking area in the village. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12A-10: BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Parking Lot Screening: Every parking lot shall be buffered and screened
by a perimeter landscaped open space having a width of at least ten feet (10')
or the width of the required yard, whichever is less.
   B.   Parking Lot Interior Landscaping:
      1.   In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection A of this
section, every parking lot shall contain at least one tree of three inches (3")
or greater in diameter for each thirty (30) parking spaces constructed after
the effective date hereof. Such trees may be provided by the preservation of
existing trees or the planting of new trees. Each tree shall be surrounded by a
landscaped area of at least thirty six (36) square feet. No existing or new
tree located more than five feet (5') outside the perimeter of the paved
parking area shall be counted in meeting the requirements of this subsection.
All islands in excess of fifty (50) square feet created by curbs or other
traffic flow regulators shall be landscaped.
      2.   Planting islands located within the interior of a parking lot shall
be at least six feet (6') in width.
   C.   Parking Garage Design: Every parking garage constructed after the
effective date hereof, other than garages accessory to single-family dwellings,
shall comply with the following design standards:
      1.   The exterior walls of the garage shall be such as to shield all
parked vehicles from view from the exterior of the garage; and
      2.   The exterior surface of the garage shall be constructed of the same
materials as, or materials architecturally and aesthetically compatible with,
the principal building to which it is accessory. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12A-11: CONTROL OF OFF SITE PARKING FACILITIES:
   A.   Lot Ownership Requirements: In cases where parking facilities are
permitted on a lot other than the lot on which the structure or use served is
located, the owner of record of such lot shall be the same as the owner of
record of the lot occupied by the structure or use in which the parking
facilities are accessory. A covenant running with the land must be recorded in
the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, on the lot upon which the
accessory off street parking is located which prohibits any other use on that
lot, and a copy of the recorded covenant certified by the recorder of deeds of
Cook County must be deposited with the zoning administrator. The covenant shall
not be released until such time as either one of the following conditions
occurs:
      1.   The structure on the lot containing the principal use is removed and
the principal use terminated; or
      2.   Another lot of the required size within the required distance is
properly developed and used for the required accessory off street parking in
place of and in lieu of the initial lot used for accessory off street parking
with the same requirements, covenants, and conditions attaching to such
substitute accessory use lot as approved by the same authority as required for
approval of such initial lot.
   B.   Parking Plan or Lease Agreement: As an alternate, the required off site
parking spaces may be provided either through:
      1.   A parking plan approved by the Zoning, Administrator, which the
Zoning Administrator may approve, condition, modify and revoke from time to
time; or
      2.   A five (5) year lease, with an option to renew for another five (5)
years if the business is still in operation, which lease shall be reviewed by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and must be approved by the corporate
authorities.
   C.   Maximum Distance Between Principal Use And Off Site Parking: In no
event shall off site parking be more than three hundred (300) linear feet, as
measured along: 1) the common street frontage; or 2) as measured from the
nearest property line on each lot between the principal use served and the off
site parking lot property. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 21-19, 4-6-2021; Ord.
21-28, 5-18-2021)
12-12A-12: REQUIRED PARKING SPACES:
   A.   Specified Uses: For the following uses, the following minimum number of
off street parking spaces or stacking spaces shall be provided:
Use Required Spaces
Use                                                              Required
                                                                 Spaces
1. Residential:                                                   
                                                                 1 for each
                                                                 efficiency
                                                                 dwelling unit,
                                                                 plus 2 for
                                                                 each 1 or 2
                                                                 bedroom
                                                                 dwelling unit,
   Multiple-family dwellings                                  plus 3 for
                                                                 each 3 or more
                                                                 bedroom
                                                                 dwelling unit,
                                                                 plus 1 for
                                                                 each 20 spaces
                                                                 required by
                                                                 this
                                                                 subsection A1
   Multiple-family dwellings, senior citizen                  1 for each 2
                                                                 dwelling units
                                                                 1 for each
                                                                 dwelling unit,
   Senior citizen housing                                     plus 1 for
                                                                 each 2
                                                                 employees
   Single-family dwellings                                    3 for each
                                                                 dwelling unit
   Staff dwellings                                            1 for each 2
                                                                 rooming units
                                                                 1 for each 3
                                                                 beds, plus 1
                                                                 for each
                                                                 licensed
                                                                 practitioner,
   Transitional service facilities                            not including
                                                                 nurses and
                                                                 assistants,
                                                                 plus 1 for
                                                                 each
                                                                 additional 2
                                                                 employees
2. Retail Trade:                                                  
                                                                 1 for each 200
   All retail trade uses not otherwise listed                 square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 5 stacking
                                                                 spaces leading
                                                                 to each
   Car washes                                                 washing rack
                                                                 or bay, plus 1
                                                                 for each
                                                                 employee
                                                                 6 stacking
   Drive-in facilities                                        spaces leading
                                                                 to each drive-
                                                                 in window
                                                                 1 for each 2
                                                                 employees,
                                                                 plus 1 for
   Eating and drinking places                                 each 3 persons
                                                                 of
                                                                 establishment
                                                                 design
                                                                 capacity
                                                                 3 for each
   Gasoline service stations, not including minimarts         service bay,
                                                                 plus 1 for
                                                                 each employee
                                                                 1 for each 250
3. Finance, Insurance And Real Estate                            square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
4. Business And Professional Offices:                             
   All uses except as otherwise listed in this subsection, as  
follows:
      Gross square footage:                                 
                                                                 1 for each 250
         0 to 10,000                                    square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 1 for each 275
         10,001 to 50,000                               square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 1 for each 300
         50,001 to 100,000                              square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 1 for each 335
         100,001 or more                                square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
5. Services:                                                      
                                                                 1 for each 250
   All services not otherwise listed                          square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 5 for each
   Bowling and billiard establishments                        lane, plus 2
                                                                 for each table
                                                                 1 for each
                                                                 employee, plus
                                                                 1 for each 10
                                                                 children or 3
   Child daycare services                                     for each 1,000
                                                                 net floor
                                                                 area,
                                                                 whichever is
                                                                 greater
   Golf courses, including all related facilities             80 for each 9
                                                                 holes
                                                                 1 for each 175
   Health service offices                                     square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 1 for each 2
                                                                 beds, plus 1
                                                                 for each
                                                                 active
                                                                 practitioner,
   Hospitals                                                  not including
                                                                 nurses and
                                                                 assistants,
                                                                 plus 1 for
                                                                 each
                                                                 additional 2
                                                                 employees
                                                                 1 for each
                                                                 lodging room,
                                                                 plus 1 for
                                                                 each 200
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 devoted to
                                                                 affiliated
                                                                 meeting,
                                                                 lobby,
   Hotels and other lodging places                            recreational,
                                                                 and
                                                                 administrative
                                                                 uses, plus
                                                                 parking for
                                                                 affiliated
                                                                 eating and
                                                                 drinking
                                                                 places as
                                                                 herein
                                                                 specified
                                                                 1 for each 250
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 public area,
   Libraries and information centers                          plus 1 for
                                                                 each 3 persons
                                                                 of auditorium
                                                                 design
                                                                 capacity
                                                                 1 for each 250
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 or 1 for each
   Membership organizations                                   4 persons of
                                                                 auditorium
                                                                 design
                                                                 capacity,
                                                                 whichever is
                                                                 greater
                                                                 1 for each 3
   Membership sports and recreation clubs                     persons of
                                                                 club design
                                                                 capacity
                                                                 1 for each 3
   Motion picture theaters                                    persons of
                                                                 theater design
                                                                 capacity
                                                                 1 for each 250
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 public area,
   Museums and art galleries                                  plus 1 for
                                                                 each 3 persons
                                                                 of auditorium
                                                                 design
                                                                 capacity
                                                                 1 for each 3
                                                                 beds, plus 1
                                                                 for each
                                                                 licensed
                                                                 practitioner,
   Nursing and personal care facilities                       not including
                                                                 nurses and
                                                                 assistants,
                                                                 plus 1 for
                                                                 each
                                                                 additional 2
                                                                 employees
                                                                 1 for each 3
                                                                 persons of
   Physical fitness facilities                                facility
                                                                 design
                                                                 capacity
                                                                 None for the
                                                                 first acre; 5
                                                                 for each
                                                                 additional
                                                                 acre up to 5
                                                                 acres, plus 5
                                                                 for each acre
                                                                 in excess of 5
   Public parks                                               acres, plus 1
                                                                 for each 5
                                                                 persons of
                                                                 design
                                                                 capacity of
                                                                 any structure
                                                                 or facility
                                                                 located in the
                                                                 park
   Schools:                                                    
                                                                 1 for each 2
                                                                 employees or 1
      Elementary schools                                   for each 15
                                                                 students,
                                                                 whichever is
                                                                 greater
                                                                 1 for each 5
                                                                 students or 1
                                                                 for each 3
                                                                 persons of
                                                                 auditorium
      Secondary schools                                    design
                                                                 capacity,
                                                                 whichever is
                                                                 greater, plus
                                                                 1 for each
                                                                 employee
                                                                 1 for each 200
      Vocational schools, except correspondence schools    square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 25 for first
                                                                 chapel or
                                                                 parlor, plus
   Undertaking and funeral establishments                     10 for each
                                                                 additional
                                                                 chapel or
                                                                 parlor
                                                                 1 for each 250
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 net floor area
                                                                 or 1 for each
6. Public Administration                                         3 persons of
                                                                 building
                                                                 design
                                                                 capacity,
                                                                 whichever is
                                                                 greater
7. Uses Conducted Outside Structures:                             
                                                                 1 space for
                                                                 each 1,500
                                                                 square feet of
                                                                 outdoor area
                                                                 devoted to
                                                                 such use, plus
   All uses, except as otherwise specifically listed          spaces as
                                                                 above required
                                                                 for any aspect
                                                                 of the use
                                                                 conducted
                                                                 within a
                                                                 structure
                                                                 1 space for
                                                                 each employee
                                                                 plus 1 space
                                                                 for each
                                                                 company
                                                                 vehicle
                                                                 registered,
                                                                 principally
                                                                 garaged or
                                                                 dispatched
8. Manufacturing - Industrial                                    from the
                                                                 property.
                                                                 There shall
                                                                 also be 0.5
                                                                 truck parking
                                                                 space, the
                                                                 same size as a
                                                                 loading space,
                                                                 for each
                                                                 loading space/
                                                                 dock
 
   B.   Unspecified Uses: When the ultimate use of a structure is not known,
the maximum number of spaces that might be required for any use to which the
structure might reasonably be devoted shall be provided.
(2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 14-9, 7-1-2014; Ord. 21-19, 4-6-2021; Ord. 21-28,
5-18-2021; Ord. 24-03, 2-6-2024)
12-12A-13: PARKING SPACES AT AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SHOPS:
   Notwithstanding any minimum number of required parking spaces set forth in
this Title, an automotive repair shop is limited to no more than one parking
space per employee and two (2) parking spaces per service bay. Parking spaces
at automotive repair shops are not subject to the benefits of the legal
nonconformity provisions of Chapter 12-14, and such spaces legally in existence
as of , 2024. and not conforming with an regulations and requirements of the
village's Zoning Code, must be brought into compliance with the Zoning Code not
later than , 202 .
(Ord. 24-51, 9-17-2024)
ARTICLE B. OFF STREET LOADING
SECTION:
12-12B-1: Authorization
12-12B-2: Applicability To Existing, New And Expanded Uses
12-12B-3: Location, Design And Maintenance
12-12B-4: Required Loading Spaces
12-12B-1: AUTHORIZATION:
Subject to the limitations of this article, off street loading is permitted as
an accessory use in all districts other than the single-family residential
district. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any person to
provide off street loading in excess of the requirements herein established,
but all such loading shall comply with the standards of this article. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-12B-2: APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING, NEW AND EXPANDED USES:
   A.   General Applicability: Except as provided otherwise in this section,
the provisions of this article shall apply to, and off street loading spaces
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this article shall be provided for,
all existing and new uses, in accordance with the provisions of this title.
   B.   Change In Existing Use: Whenever a use existing on the effective date
hereof is changed thereafter to a new use, loading facilities shall be provided
as required herein for such new use.
   C.   Increase In Use Intensity: Whenever the intensity of use of any
structure or use is increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor
area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for
required loading spaces, loading spaces as required herein shall be provided.
   D.   Exception: Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, no
building or use lawfully existing on the effective date hereof, or any
amendment hereto, establishing loading requirements with respect to such
structure or use, shall be required to provide any additional loading spaces
unless and until the aggregate increase in units of measurement shall equal the
full number of units for which one additional loading space would be required
pursuant to section
12-12B-4 of this article, in which event loading spaces as required herein
shall be provided for the total aggregate increase. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12B-3: LOCATION, DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
Every loading space shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the standards and requirements herein set forth:
   A.   Location:
      1.   Loading spaces shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use
they serve.
      2.   All loading spaces shall comply with the yard requirements
applicable to principal uses in the district in which they are located, except
that open loading spaces may be located in a required rear yard.
      3.   No loading space shall be located within fifty feet (50') of the
nearest point of intersection of any two (2) public or private streets.
      4.   No loading space shall be located closer to any public right of way
than the facade of the building facing such right of way. No loading space
shall open onto any building facade facing a public right of way. All loading
spaces shall be located and arranged to provide logical and convenient access
thereto from the use they serve.
   B.   Access To Street: Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to
provide access to a street or alley in a manner that will create the least
possible interference with through traffic movements. No curb cut across public
property shall exceed thirty feet (30') in width without the written approval
of the zoning administrator.
   C.   Maneuvering Space: Every loading space shall be provided with
sufficient maneuvering space on the zoning lot where it is located to allow
vehicles to access and exit the space without having to make any backing
movement on or into any public or private street.
   D.   Surface, Drainage And Markings:
      1.   Every loading space shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or portland
cement pavement providing an all weather, durable, and dustless surface.
      2.   Unless otherwise approved by the village engineer, such construction
shall have a coefficient rating of 2.5 for structural materials as derived from
the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Design Manual", current edition.
      3.   All loading space surfaces shall be graded and drained to dispose of
surface water accumulation by means of a positive stormwater drainage system
connected to a public sewer system.
      4.   Individual stalls shall be clearly identified by markings four
inches (4") to six inches (6") in width.
   E.   Lighting: Fixed lighting shall be so arranged as to prevent direct
glare of beams onto any public or private property or streets by the use of
luminaire cutoffs. All lighting shall be reduced to security levels at all
times of nonuse.
   F.   Dimensions And Size Of Spaces:
      1.   Dimensions: Each loading space, excluding required maneuvering
areas, shall have the following minimum dimensions, in feet:
 
Tractor trailer  12W x 50L x 15H
Standard         10W x 25L x 14H
 
      2.   Size: Unless waived by the zoning administrator, the first space
required for any building having in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet
shall be sized to accommodate a tractor trailer and, unless otherwise required
by the zoning administrator, all other spaces may be standard size. The
decision of the zoning administrator shall be based upon the anticipated needs
of each particular building. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-12B-4: REQUIRED LOADING SPACES:
   A.   General Requirement: Loading spaces or receiving areas shall be
provided in sufficient number, of sufficient size, and so located that no
loading and unloading operations infringe upon any street or sidewalk.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: For the following uses, the following minimum
number of loading spaces shall be provided:
 
   Use                   Required Spaces
                            1 for first 50,000 square feet of gross floor area
Food stores                or any fraction thereof, plus 1 for each additional
                            100,000 square feet of gross floor area or any
                            fraction thereof
                            1 for 10,000 to 150,000 square feet of gross floor
Hotels                     area, plus 1 for each additional 200,000 square
                            feet of floor area or fraction thereof
Multiple-family dwellings  1 for each building having in excess of 20,000 feet
                            of gross floor area
                            1 for first 10,000 to 140,000 square feet of gross
                            floor area, plus 1 for each additional 100,000
Office uses                square feet of gross floor area up to total of
                            500,000 square feet, plus 1 for each additional
                            500,000 square feet of gross floor area or any
                            fraction thereof
                            1 for the first 150,000 square feet of gross floor
Other uses                 area or fraction thereof, plus 1 for each
                            additional 200,000 square feet of floor area or
                            fraction thereof
 
(2005 Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 13
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-13-1: Purpose
12-13-2: Definitions
12-13-3: Exceptions From Application
12-13-4: Measurement Determinations
12-13-5: Construction And Maintenance
12-13-6: Locations Prohibited
12-13-7: Zoning Districts Prohibitions
12-13-8: Zoning Districts Regulations
12-13-9: Business Districts Regulations
12-13-10: Industrial Districts Regulations
12-13-11: Single-Family And Two-Family Residential Districts Regulations
12-13-12: Multiple-Family Residential Districts Regulations
12-13-13: Summary Sign Provisions Table (Rep. by Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
12-13-14: Administration
12-13-15: Nonconforming Signs
12-13-16: Violations
12-13-17: Fees
12-13-18: Relocating Signs
12-13-19: Alterations
12-13-20: Illumination Standards
12-13-21: Removal Of Certain Signs
12-13-22: Master Or Common Signage Plan
12-13-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of signs visible from the public rights of way, as set forth in
this chapter, are established to promote and protect the public health, safety
and welfare. To accomplish this, the following specific purposes are given:
   A.   To regulate outdoor advertising and signs of all types, in an effort to
reduce visual confusion and restrict signs which increase the probability of
traffic accidents, obstruct vision, or otherwise adversely affect the public
good, while enhancing the physical appearance of the village.
   B.   To maintain the inherent right of businesses to communicate and
identify their products and services by promoting the reasonable, orderly and
effective display of signs and outdoor advertising.
   C.   To maintain the inherent right of residents and organizations to
communicate effectively through signage in a reasonable and orderly fashion.
   D.   To protect the public from damage and injury which might be caused by
the faulty and uncontrolled construction and use of signs within the village.
   E.   To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility
of signs with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
The regulatory provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted using the terms
defined as follows. Defined terms shall also include the plural of the term.
Other terms shall be interpreted according to the definitions provided
elsewhere in the village's ordinances or according to their ordinary English
usage.
   A.   Sign Defined: For purpose of this chapter, the term "sign" shall mean
any visual communication device or system, fixture, placard, painting or
structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, emblem,
numerals or writing for the purpose of conveying a message or advertising or
identifying any individual, establishment, product, goods or service, or
otherwise communicating information of any kind to the public, and visible from
a public right of way. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
   B.   Signs By Use Type: For the purpose of identifying permitted signs, all
signs are classified by type and defined as follows:
    BILLBOARD: A sign directing attention to a specific business, product,
service, entertainment or other commercial activity sold, offered or conducted
at a location other than the zoning lot where the sign is located. These signs
may also display noncommercial messages.
   ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign displaying information concerning the zoning lot on
which it is located. On premises signs may be either permanent or temporary.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign not designed for permanent installation at one
location. Such signs are not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure or building and may not be illuminated.
   C.   Signs By Structural Type: For purposes of this chapter, signs shall be
defined by structure or type, as follows:
    A-FRAME SIGN: A temporary sign, hinged at the top so as to resemble an "A"
when open and constructed of a durable rigid material such as wood or metal.
   ADVERTISING FLAG: Any fabric or material attached to a frame or pole which
is temporarily suspended and is not intended to be permanently mounted. This
includes, but is not limited to, pennants, feather flags, swoop flags, teardrop
flags, and message flags but does not include a series or string of pennants.
   AWNING: A building mounted fabric or other nonrigid or semirigid protective
covering that extends from the exterior wall of a building and is supported by
or attached to a frame. Awning sign is any sign that is part of or attached to
an awning. See definitions of Canopy and Marquee.
   BANNER SIGN: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole or a building by a frame at more than one edge, excluding
flags and "pennants", as defined herein.
   BUILDING MOUNTED PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign affixed at an angle to the
outside of a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends
more than twelve inches (12") beyond the surface of such building or wall.
   BUILDING MOUNTED SIGN: Any sign, other than a ground mounted sign, attached
to, erected on, or supported by any building, including an awning sign, canopy
sign, marquee sign, building mounted projecting/perpendicular sign, roof sign,
wall sign, window sign, or any similar sign that is attached to a building.
   CANOPY: A building mounted or freestanding permanent structure consisting of
a rigid roof, generally supported by poles, posts or direct attachment to a
building; a canopy typically has little vertical or wall space on it and is
only as thick as necessary to create a functional roof. A canopy sign is any
sign that is part of or attached to a canopy. See definitions of Awning and
Marquee.
   FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting attached to a permanent frame at one
edge and designed to react to the wind, however, a series or string of pennants
are not a flag.
   GROUND MOUNTED SIGN: A freestanding sign that is not attached to a building
or other structure, and which is either attached directly to the ground, placed
directly on the ground, displayed on a natural or manmade object (other than a
building), or elevated on a supporting structure attached to the ground. There
are two (2) types of ground mounted, freestanding signs: monument signs and
pole signs.
    Monument Sign: A ground sign with a solid mass below the sign to the
ground.
    Pole Sign: A ground sign attached to one or more poles or other supporting
structures.
   MARQUEE: Any building mounted, permanent rooflike structure projecting
beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the
building without additional supports, generally designed and constructed to
provide protection from the weather. A marquee sign is any sign attached to in
any manner, or made a part of a marquee. See definitions of Awning and Canopy.
   MULTIPLE FACED SIGN: Any sign containing two (2) or more faces.
   PENNANTS: Pieces or cut shapes of fabric, plastic, or similar lightweight
material arranged in a series or string, with said pieces or cut shapes only
attached at one edge and designed to react to the wind.
   ROOF SIGN: A sign affixed, mounted, or painted on the roof of a building, or
that is wholly dependent on a building for support and that projects above the
highest point of the vertical exterior walls of a building or structure.
   WALL SIGN: Any sign attached parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of
an exterior wall, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall
of any building or structure, and supported by such wall or building, and which
displays only one sign surface.
   WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to
communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or
service that is placed inside a window, upon the window panes or glass, or
within twenty four inches (24") of the window or glass and is visible from the
exterior of the window. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
   D.   Other Definitions Relevant To Regulations: In this chapter, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
    ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign that pertains to a business activity that has been
discontinued for a period of sixty (60) days.
   CHANNEL LETTER SIGN: An illuminated wall sign composed solely of individual
letters or symbols not physically attached or linked together, and whose
components are created from a U-shaped channel base with a semitransparent
face. An exposed electrical raceway or raceways shall not be permitted in a
channel letter sign.
   CODE: This chapter.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER: A sign having a face or faces that allow the
message on the sign to be readily changed by means of light banks.
   FLASHING SIGN: Any sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in
intensity at all times when in use.
   HALO-LIT LETTER SIGN: An illuminated wall sign composed solely of individual
letters or symbols not physically attached or linked together, whose components
are created from a U-shaped channel face, said face constructed from metal and
which is opaque, and whose components have no or a clear backing. A halo- lit
letter sign shall have the individual letters or symbols mounted away from the
wall to allow their illumination to project on the wall behind them and create
a "halo-lit" effect. An exposed electrical raceway or raceways shall not be
permitted in a halo-lit letter sign.
   ILLEGAL SIGN: Any sign placed without proper approval or permits as required
by this chapter at the time of sign placement. Illegal sign shall also mean any
sign that remains in place contrary to the time limits of any permit or the
time limits set forth in this chapter.
   MAXIMUM SIGN AREA: The aggregate square footage of allowable sign area on a
zoning lot.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign which was legally installed in conformance with
the sign regulations and applicable zoning laws and ordinances in effect at the
time of its installation, but which is now in conflict with one or more
subsequently enacted provisions of this chapter, or any other applicable
provisions of this title.
   PARKING LOT SIGNS: Signs appurtenant to and within parking areas, and
involving traffic direction and/or regulation. (Examples of parking lot signs
include "Handicapped Parking" signs, "No Parking" signs, signs as required by
Illinois state law governing the towing of cars, and "Enter" and "Exit" signs.)
   SETBACK: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in section
12-2-3 of this title.
   SIGN AREA: The entire surface area of a sign upon which copy, including
text, numerals, graphics, symbols, emblems and borders, may be placed.
   VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley, Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD: The board of trustees for the village.
   WARNING SIGN: A sign with a sole message of warning, caution or danger and
limited to four (4) square feet.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in section
12-3-2 of this title.
   ZONING BOARD: The village's planning and zoning commission.
   ZONING DISTRICT: Any of the various zoning districts set forth in this
title.
   ZONING LOT: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in section
12-2-3 of this title. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-3: EXCEPTIONS FROM APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the zoning lot upon which
they are situated.
   B.   Any official traffic signs authorized from time to time by the Illinois
Compiled Statutes and the ordinances of the village.
   C.   Signs of noncommercial nature and in the public interest erected by, or
on the order of, a public official.
   D.   Flags.
   E.   Warning signs. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-4: MEASUREMENT DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   Sign Area: The sign area of an individual sign shall be measured to
include the entire area, including all visible sides or faces within any two-
dimensional continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of lettering,
representations, logos, or other figures or messages, together with any
material or color forming an integral part of the display or which is used to
differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed. The area
to be measured does not include the supporting framework, bracing, or wall when
such wall otherwise meets applicable regulations and is clearly incidental to
the display itself.
   B.   Monument Sign Area: For a double sided monument sign, only the sign
area of one of the two (2) sign faces shall be included in the calculation of
the maximum sign area.
   C.   Channel Letter Or Halo-Lit Signs: Special considerations concerning
measurement of a channel letter sign or a halo-lit sign. When computing the
size of the sign area of a channel letter sign or a halo-lit sign each letter
or symbol may be measured separately using a two-dimensional rectangle
enclosing the letter or symbol.
   D.   Awnings And Canopies: For awning signs and canopy signs, only the
portion of the awning or canopy displaying a message or symbol is included in
the total signage area calculation and shall be limited to the exterior of the
awning or canopy.
   E.   Sign Height: The height of a ground mounted sign shall be computed as
the distance from the base of the sign at its point of attachment to the ground
to its topmost element. However, if the support of a ground mounted sign is
attached to a wall or other manmade base, including a graded earth mound or
berm, the sign height shall be measured from the grade of the nearest street,
drive or parking area, as determined by the zoning administrator.
   F.   Sign Location, Placement And Clearance Standards: In determining the
location of signs in relation to parcel or lot lines (including setback,
district and street right of way lines), distances shall be measured on a right
angle from the lot or parcel line to the closest point on the sign. (Ord. 06-
31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-5: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   All signs shall comply with the requirements of the village's building
code and other applicable ordinances and all components integrated into signs
shall be certified and approved by Underwriters Laboratories, if applicable.
   B.   All signs in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used
shall comply with the village's electrical code.
   C.   All signs shall be kept and maintained in a safe, neat and orderly
condition and shall be repainted or otherwise maintained periodically to
prevent corrosion or deterioration caused by weather, age or other conditions.
The owner of the zoning lot on which the sign is located shall be responsible
for providing such maintenance.
   D.   Maintenance of all ground mounted signs shall further require that area
surrounding the sign, for a distance of not less than ten feet (10') in all
directions, be kept free of weeds, trash and other debris. The owner of the
zoning lot upon which such sign is located shall be responsible for providing
such maintenance.
   E.   Any flat glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass.
   F.   No internally illuminated sign shall be allowed to operate when it is
damaged or portions of the face are missing, allowing the light source to be
seen directly. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-6: LOCATIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No sign, other than signs owned by the village, shall be allowed on
public rights of way or public property.
   B.   No sign shall be permitted in any zoning district except in conformity
with the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   No sign shall be erected, relocated, maintained or otherwise permitted
to obstruct or prevent free ingress or egress from any door, fire escape,
stairway, or window of any building or structure.
   D.   No sign shall be attached to a utility pole, tree, standpipe, gutter
drain, or fire escape, nor shall any sign be erected so as to impair access to
a roof.
   E.   No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained where, by reason of
its position, shape, color, or wording, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal device, nor
shall it otherwise cause a safety hazard.
   F.   No sign shall be permitted in the applicable setback. (Ord. 06-31, 8-
15-2006)
12-13-7: ZONING DISTRICTS PROHIBITIONS:
The following signs are prohibited:
   A.   Abandoned signs.
   B.   Signs that move in part or in total, except flags, including, but not
limited to, signs that rotate or signs that in total or have a portion or
appendage that moves up and down or back and forth, whether such movement is
accomplished by mechanical means or by wind power.
   C.   Marquee signs.
   D.   Signs using reflective paint or tape, or fluorescent paint or ink.
   E.   Signs containing matter the average person applying contemporary
community standards would find appeals solely to the prurient interest, depicts
in a patently offensive way sexual conduct and lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
   F.   Flashing signs.
   G.   Bench signs.
   H.   Building mounted projecting signs.
   I.   Roof signs.
   J.   Pennants.
   K.   Signs, which are in part or in total, inflatable.
   L.   Searchlights.
   M.   Vehicle sign. A sign placed on or affixed to a vehicle and/or trailer
which is parked in a manner and location on a public right of way, public
property or private property so as to be visible from a public right of way
where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or service or direct
people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property.
Evidence of a sign being a vehicle sign shall include, but not be limited to, a
sign on a vehicle or trailer that has not been moved for twenty four (24)
hours, parked in a manner and at a location so that it is more visible from the
village right of way such as adjacent to the right of way, and a vehicle or
trailer not used for the normal business operation of the business advertised.
A vehicle sign shall not include required lettering or owner identification on
motor vehicles where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle
or trailer or when the vehicle or trailer is receiving or delivering
merchandise or rendering a service.
   N.   Signs, which by color, location, or design resemble or conflict with
traffic control signs or signals. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
12-13-8: ZONING DISTRICTS REGULATIONS:
   A.   Any wall sign above a public walkway or pedestrian right of way shall
be at least eight feet (8') above the public walkway or pedestrian right of
way.
   B.   Signs shall not be painted directly on a wall or fence.
   C.   Signs accessory to the outdoor display of commercial merchandise shall
be subject to the respective regulations of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, area, construction, time limits, and setbacks.
   D.   Pole signs shall be allowed as parking lot signs only. (Ord. 06-31, 8-
15-2006)
12-13-9: BUSINESS DISTRICTS REGULATIONS:
The following regulations are applicable to all signs in the business districts
as established in this title, specifically B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4:
   A.   Prohibited Signs: In addition to the signs prohibited in all zoning
districts, billboards are prohibited in the business districts. (Ord. 06-31, 8-
15-2006)
   B.   Wall Signs: In business districts wall signs shall comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   Wall signs are permitted not exceeding the total area allowed in the
table below:
 
Building Setback From Property Line (Feet) Maximum Sign Area Per Linear Foot Of
                                           Building Frontage
0 - 100                                    1.00 sq. ft. to 1 ft.
101 - 200                                  1.25 sq. ft. to 1 ft.
201 - 300                                  1.50 sq. ft. to 1 ft.
301 - 400                                  1.75 sq. ft. to 1 ft.
401 - 500                                  2.00 sq. ft. to 1 ft.
Over 500                                   2.25 sq. ft. to 1 ft.
 
      2.   No wall sign shall extend above or beyond the wall to which it is
attached.
      3.   No wall sign shall project more than twelve inches (12") beyond the
plane of the wall to which it is attached, excluding permitted awning signs.
      4.   All mounting brackets and other hardware used to affix the sign to
the wall shall be concealed by the sign or integrated into the design of the
sign.
      5.   Wall signs shall not be permitted on any building wall facing a
residential district except that the name and address of the business may be
painted on the rear door for emergency purposes, and may not exceed one hundred
fifty (150) square inches.
      6.   One wall sign shall be permitted on each building frontage. One
additional wall sign shall be permitted on a wall not on a building frontage if
the total sign area of all wall signs on the building does not exceed the total
sign area permitted in the table above.
      7.   Businesses permitted two (2) wall signs by the provisions of this
chapter shall be permitted one wall sign at the maximum sign area permitted by
the table above. The second wall sign shall be permitted fifty percent (50%) of
the maximum sign area permitted for the first sign, plus the difference, if
any, between the actual square footage of the first sign and the maximum square
footage permitted by the table above for the first sign. The maximum sign area
for both signs shall not exceed one and one- half (11/2) times the sign area
permitted by the table above for the first sign.
      8.   In no instance shall wall signs be permitted on more than two (2)
building faces.
      9.   All roof signs are prohibited, except signs affixed to mansard roofs
consisting of nonilluminated freestanding or cut out letters, with no ground
supports except the roof. (Ord. 14-10, 7-1-2014)
   C.   Window Signs: In the business districts, the total sign area of all
window signs shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the
windows in which they are located. The total sign area of illuminated window
signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the windows in
which they are located. A series of windows separated by frames or supporting
material less than six inches (6") in width shall be considered a single window
for purposes of this computation. The location of window signs, however, shall
not impede safety concerns as conveyed, in writing, by the village's personnel.
There shall be no time restriction placed on any window sign that is maintained
in a safe and presentable manner. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
   D.   Awning And Canopy Signs: In the business districts, any awning sign or
canopy sign shall be placed on the vertical surface of the awning or canopy.
The height of letters, numbers, or logos on an awning sign or canopy sign shall
not exceed thirty two inches (32") and must be completely contained within the
confines of the awning or canopy fascia. A minimum of six inches (6") of border
must exist on all four (4) sides of all canopy signs.
   E.   Monument Signs: In the business districts, a monument sign shall be
permitted on a zoning lot under the following conditions:
      1.   Only one monument sign shall be allowed per zoning lot. (Ord. 06-31,
8-15-2006)
      2.   Each monument sign shall have a masonry base at least as wide as
seventy five percent (75%) of the width of the sign face, a minimum of one foot
(1.0') in height and composed of a natural masonry finish such as brick, stone
or masonry material and matching the principal building. Alternative materials
consistent with the principal building may be approved by the village. (Ord.
14-10, 7-1-2014)
      3.   As part of applying for a sign permit for a monument sign, the owner
of the zoning lot on which the monument sign will be located shall submit a
study, certified by a licensed engineer, concerning the impact the monument
sign will have on sightlines of drivers and pedestrians near the proposed
monument sign and ensuring no sightline obstruction will occur.
      4.   A setback of five feet (5') shall apply to a monument sign, subject
to subsection E3 of this section. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
      5.   If the building on the lot has less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of first floor ground space and the building on the zoning lot is
located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the public right of way; then the
zoning lot shall be permitted one 2-faced monument sign with each face not
exceeding sixty four (64) square feet. If masonry component is at least two
feet (2'), then the maximum total height shall be eleven feet (11'). If the
masonry component is less than two feet (2'), then the maximum total height
shall be nine feet (9'). The masonry component shall not be less than one foot
(1') in height. (Ord. 08-11, 3-18-2008)
      6.   If the building on the zoning lot has more than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of first floor ground space, the building on the zoning
lot is located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the public right of way, and
the building on the zoning lot contains four (4) or more distinct business
establishments connected by a series of common walls; then the zoning lot shall
be permitted one 2-faced monument sign with each face providing space for a ten
(10) square foot sign per distinct business establishment in the building,
provided each distinct business establishment shall have access to use the
monument sign and one 10-foot square sign for the building containing four (4)
or more distinct business establishments itself. The maximum height of the
monument sign for such sign shall be twenty feet (20') and shall be located as
near the center of the zoning lot, as measured along the adjacent right of way,
as practical.
      7.   If the building on the zoning lot has more than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of first floor ground space, the building on the zoning
lot is located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the public right of way, but
the building on the zoning lot contains only one business establishment; then
the zoning lot shall be permitted one 2-faced monument sign with each face not
exceeding sixty four (64) square feet. The maximum height of the monument sign
for such sign shall be twenty feet (20') and shall be located as near the
center of the zoning lot, as measured along the adjacent right of way, as
practical.
      8.   The monument sign shall be an on premises sign. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-
2006)
   F.   Temporary Signs: In the business districts, the following provisions
shall apply to temporary signs:
      1.   No more than one temporary sign with two (2) sign faces shall be
displayed by or on behalf of an individually licensed business at any one time.
      2.   The maximum height of a temporary sign shall be four feet (4'),
except the maximum height of an advertising flag shall be twelve feet (12').
      3.   In addition to the maximum sign area for the zoning lot set forth
above, the maximum total sign area for a temporary sign for or on behalf of an
individually licensed business at any one time shall not exceed six (6) square
feet, except the maximum total sign area for a banner sign shall be sixteen
(16) square feet and the maximum total sign area for an advertising flag shall
be forty eight (48) square feet.
      4.   Temporary signs shall be removed at the earlier of:
         a.   Five (5) days after completion of the event for which the sign
was placed, or
         b.   Thirty (30) days after the temporary sign is first displayed.
      5.   An individually licensed business shall be entitled to employ no
more than three (3) temporary signs within a calendar year. One additional sign
shall be permitted during the first year of operation for a new business not
previously located on the property.
      6.   Despite subsections F2, F3, F4, and F5 of this section, but
recognizing subsection F1 of this section remains applicable, each individually
licensed business shall be entitled to display, as its one temporary sign, an
A-frame sign subject to the following provisions:
         a.   The A-frame sign, when in its open position, shall not exceed a
height of thirty six inches (36") and shall be no more than thirty inches (30")
wide.
         b.   The A-frame sign may be displayed any day the business on the
zoning lot is open and conducting business.
         c.   The A-frame sign may be displayed only those hours during which
the business is open.
         d.   The A-frame sign shall not be positioned in a space where it can
be a safety hazard.
   G.   Real Estate Signs: Nonilluminated real estate signs that are six (6)
square feet or less in area and do not exceed four feet (4') in height, do not
require a permit. There shall be not more than one real estate sign per lot,
which shall be in addition to other permitted temporary signs. Real estate
signs advertising a property for sale or lease shall not be subject to a time
limit but shall be removed no later than seven (7) days following the sale or
lease of the property. All other real estate signs shall be subject to the
following square feet and height restrictions:
      1.   For lots one acre and under: Thirty two (32) square feet of surface
area. Signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height.
      2.   For lots more than one acre: Sixty four (64) square feet of surface
area. Signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
   H.   Parking Lot Signs: In the business districts, the following provisions
shall apply to parking lot signs:
      1.   No more than four (4) parking lot signs with six (6) sign faces on a
zoning lot at any one time.
      2.   In addition to the maximum sign area for the zoning lot set forth
above, the maximum total sign area for all parking lot signs on a zoning lot at
any one time shall not exceed ten (10) square feet.
   I.   Electronic Message Centers: In the business districts, the message on
electronic message centers shall not be allowed to change more than once per
sixty (60) seconds. Flashing and scrolling of the images displayed is
prohibited.
   J.   Variance For The Use Of A Halo-Lit Letter Sign: In the business
districts, the owner of a zoning lot shall be allowed to seek a variance from
the maximum sign area if a halo-lit letter sign is employed. The owner of the
zoning lot shall be subject to the provisions for seeking a variance as set
forth elsewhere in this title. For purposes of the variance, decreased
visibility shall be deemed a hardship not created by the applicant, but the
applicant shall have the burden of establishing decreased visibility. The
variance that can be granted is a "bonus" of fifteen percent (15%) in size;
computed by multiplying the sign area of the halo-lit sign by eighty five
hundredths (0.85) before determining compliance with the zoning lot's maximum
sign area. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-10: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS REGULATIONS:
The following regulations are applicable to all signs in the industrial
districts as established in this title, specifically M-1, M-2, and M-3.
   A.   Wall Signs: In the industrial districts wall signs shall comply with
the following requirements:
      1.   No wall sign shall extend above or beyond the wall to which it is
attached.
      2.   No wall sign shall project more than twelve inches (12") beyond the
plane of the wall to which it is attached.
      3.   All mounting brackets and other hardware used to affix the sign to
the wall shall be concealed by the sign or integrated into the design of the
sign.
      4.   Reserved. (Ord. 18-03, 1-16-2018)
      5.   One wall sign shall be permitted per building frontage, except that
wall signs shall not be permitted on more than two (2) building faces.
      6.   Wall sign area shall not exceed 1.50 square feet per linear foot of
building frontage.
   B.   Window Signs: In the industrial districts, the total sign area of all
window signs shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total area of the
windows in which they are located. The total sign area of illuminated window
signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the windows in
which they are located. A series of windows separated by frames or supporting
material less than six inches (6") in width shall be considered a single window
for purposes of this computation. The location of window signs, however, shall
not impede safety concerns as conveyed, in writing, by the Village's personnel.
There shall be no time restriction placed on any window sign that is maintained
in a safe and presentable manner.
   C.   Awning And Canopy Signs: In the industrial districts, any awning sign
or canopy sign shall be placed on the vertical surface of the awning or canopy.
The height of letters, numbers, or logos on an awning sign or canopy sign shall
not exceed thirty two inches (32") and must be completely contained within the
confines of the awning or canopy fascia. A minimum of six inches (6") of border
must exist on all four (4) sides of all canopy signs.
   D.   Monument Signs: In the industrial districts, a monument sign shall be
permitted on a zoning lot if the building on the zoning lot is located a
minimum of fifty feet (50') away from the public street and the building has at
least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of first floor ground space. In
addition, the following provisions shall apply to the monument signs:
      1.   Only one monument sign shall be allowed per zoning lot.
      2.   Each monument sign shall have a masonry base component at least as
wide as seventy five percent (75%) of the width of the sign face, a minimum of
one foot (1.0') in height and composed of a natural masonry finish such as
brick, stone or masonry material and matching the principal building.
Alternative materials consistent with the principal building may be approved by
the Village.
      3.   As part of applying for a sign permit for a monument sign, the owner
of the zoning lot on which the monument sign will be located shall submit a
study, certified by a licensed engineer, concerning the impact the monument
sign will have on sightlines of drivers and pedestrians near the proposed
monument sign and ensuring no sightline obstruction will occur.
      4.   A setback of five feet (5') shall apply to a monument sign.
      5.   The maximum sign height of the monument sign shall be the same as
the height of the principal building on the zoning lot or fifteen feet (15'),
whichever is less.
      6.   The zoning lot shall be permitted one 2-faced monument sign with
each face not exceeding sixty four (64) square feet.
      7.   The monument sign shall be an on premises sign. If the zoning lot
contains more than one distinct business establishment, the sign face of the
monument sign may be divided among the business establishments. Division of the
sign face will not increase the permitted size of the monument sign faces.
   E.   Temporary Signs: In the industrial districts, the following provisions
shall apply to temporary signs:
      1.   No more than one temporary sign with two (2) sign faces shall be
displayed by or on behalf of an individually licensed business at any one time.
      2.   The maximum height of a temporary sign shall be four feet (4'),
except the maximum height of an advertising flag shall be twelve feet (12').
      3.   In addition to the maximum sign area for the zoning lot set forth
above, the maximum total sign area for a temporary sign for or on behalf of an
individually licensed business at any one time shall not exceed six (6) square
feet; except the maximum total sign area for a banner sign shall be sixteen
(16) square feet and the maximum total sign area for an advertising flag shall
be forty eight (48) square feet.
      4.   Temporary signs shall be removed at the earlier of:
         a.   Five (5) days after completion of the event for which the sign
was placed, or
         b.   Thirty (30) days after the temporary sign is first displayed.
      5.   An individually licensed business shall be entitled to employ no
more than three (3) temporary signs within a calendar year. One additional sign
shall be permitted during the first year of operation for a new business not
previously located on the property.
      6.   Despite subsections E2, E3, E4, and E5 of this section, but
recognizing subsection E1 of this section remains applicable, each individually
licensed business shall be entitled to display, as its one temporary sign, an
A-frame sign subject to the following provisions:
         a.   The A-frame sign, when in its open position, shall not exceed a
height of thirty six inches (36") and shall be no more than thirty inches (30")
wide.
         b.   The A-frame sign may be displayed any day the business on the
zoning lot is open and conducting business.
         c.   The A-frame sign may be displayed only those hours during which
the business is open.
         d.   The A-frame sign shall not be positioned in a space where it can
be a safety hazard.
   F.   Real Estate Signs: Nonilluminated real estate signs that are six (6)
square feet or less in area and do not exceed four feet (4') in height, do not
require a permit. There shall be not more than one real estate sign per lot,
which shall be in addition to other permitted temporary signs. Real estate
signs advertising a property for sale or lease shall not be subject to a time
limit but shall be removed no later than seven (7) days following the sale or
lease of the property. All other real estate signs shall be subject to the
following square feet and height restrictions:
      1.   For lots one acre and under: Thirty two (32) square feet of surface
area. Signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height.
      2.   For lots more than one acre: Sixty four (64) square feet of surface
area. Signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height.
   G.   Parking Lot Signs: In the industrial districts, the following
provisions shall apply to parking lot signs:
      1.   No more than six (6) parking lot signs with eight (8) sign faces on
a zoning lot at any one time.
      2.   In addition to the maximum sign area for the zoning lot set forth
above, the maximum total sign area for all parking lot signs on a zoning lot at
any one time shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
   H.   Electronic Message Centers: In the industrial districts, the message on
electronic message centers shall not be allowed to change more than once per
sixty (60) seconds. Flashing and scrolling of the images displayed is
prohibited.
   I.   Billboards: Billboards shall be permitted in the M-3 manufacturing
district so long as said sign is located west of Interstate 294 and not nearer
than three hundred feet (300') to the nearest residential district as set forth
in this title.
(Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006; amd. Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013; Ord. 14-10, 7-1-2014; Ord.
24-11, 3-5-2024)
12-13-11: SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS REGULATIONS:
The following regulations are applicable to all signs in the single-family and
two-family residential districts as established in this title, specifically R-
2 and R-3.
   A.   Prohibited Signs: In addition to the signs prohibited in all zoning
districts, the following signs are prohibited in the single-family and two-
family residential districts:
      1.   Awning signs.
      2.   Billboards.
      3.   Canopy signs.
      4.   Electronic message centers.
      5.   Monument signs.
      6.   Parking lot signs.
   B.   Maximum Sign Area: In the single- and two-family residential districts,
the maximum sign area shall be three (3) square feet. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
   C.   Window Signs: In the single- and two-family residential districts, the
total sign area of all window signs shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%)
of the total area of the windows in which they are located. The total sign area
of illuminated window signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total
area of the windows in which they are located. A series of windows separated by
frames or supporting material less than six inches (6") in width shall be
considered a single window for purposes of this computation. The location of
the window signs, however, shall not impede safety concerns as conveyed, in
writing, by the village's personnel. There shall be no time restriction placed
on any window sign that is maintained in a safe and presentable manner. (Ord.
13-26, 7-16-2013)
   D.   Temporary Signs: In the single- and two-family residential districts,
the following provisions shall apply to temporary signs:
      1.   No more than one temporary sign with two (2) sign faces on a zoning
lot at any one time.
      2.   The maximum sign height of a temporary sign shall be four feet (4').
      3.   In addition to the maximum sign area for the zoning lot set forth
above, the maximum total sign area for all temporary signs on a zoning lot at
any one time shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face.
      4.   Temporary signs shall be removed at the earlier of:
         a.   Five (5) days after the completion of the event for which the
sign was placed, or
         b.   Sixty (60) days after the temporary sign is first displayed.
      5.   A zoning lot shall be entitled to employ no more than two (2)
temporary signs with a commercial message within the calendar year.
      6.   A-frame signs are subject to the same regulations as every other
temporary sign in the single-family and two-family residential districts.
   E.   Banner Signs: In the single- and two-family residential districts, the
following provisions shall apply to banner signs:
      1.   Unlike in commercial or industrial districts, the owner of a zoning
lot need not obtain a permit for the installation, erection, or hanging of a
banner sign.
      2.   Only one banner sign shall be allowed per zoning lot at any one
time.
      3.   Banner signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet.
      4.   A banner sign shall be permitted to be displayed for a period not
exceeding four (4) days. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
   F.   Real Estate Signs: Nonilluminated real estate signs that are six (6)
square feet or less in area and do not exceed four feet (4') in height are
permitted and do not require a permit. There shall be not more than one real
estate sign per lot, except as permitted for open houses, which shall be in
addition to other permitted temporary signs. One additional open house sign six
(6) square feet or less in area shall be permitted for a time period not to
exceed seventy two (72) consecutive hours. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
12-13-12: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS REGULATIONS:
The following regulations are applicable to all signs in the multiple-family
residential districts as established in this title, specifically R-4.
   A.   Prohibited Signs: In addition to the signs prohibited in all zoning
districts, the following signs are prohibited in the multiple-family
residential districts:
      1.   Awning signs.
      2.   Billboards.
      3.   Canopy signs.
      4.   Electronic message centers.
      5.   Monument signs.
   B.   Maximum Sign Area: In the multiple-family residential districts, the
maximum sign area shall be three (3) square feet. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
   C.   Window Signs: In the multiple-family residential districts, the total
sign area of all window signs shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
total area of the windows in which they are located. The total sign area of
illuminated window signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total
area of the windows in which they are located. A series of windows separated by
frames or supporting material less than six inches (6") in width shall be
considered a single window for purposes of this computation. The location of
the window signs, however, shall not impede safety concerns as conveyed, in
writing, by the village's personnel. There shall be no time restriction placed
on any window sign that is maintained in a safe and presentable manner. (Ord.
13-26, 7-16-2013)
   D.   Temporary Signs: In the multiple-family residential districts, the
following provisions shall apply to temporary signs:
      1.   No more than one temporary sign with two (2) sign faces on a zoning
lot at any one time.
      2.   The maximum sign height of a temporary sign shall be four feet (4').
      3.   In addition to the maximum sign area for the zoning lot set forth
above, the maximum total sign area for all temporary signs on a zoning lot at
any one time shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face.
      4.   Temporary signs shall be removed at the earlier of:
         a.   Five (5) days after the completion of the event for which the
sign was placed, or
         b.   Sixty (60) days after the temporary sign is first displayed.
      5.   A zoning lot shall be entitled to employ two (2) temporary signs
with a commercial message within a calendar year.
      6.   A-frame signs are subject to the same regulations as every other
temporary sign in the multiple-family residential districts.
   E.   Banner Signs: In the multiple-family residential districts, the
following provisions shall apply to banner signs:
      1.   Unlike in commercial or industrial districts, the owner of a zoning
lot need not obtain a permit for the installation, erection, or hanging of a
banner sign.
      2.   Only one banner sign shall be allowed per zoning lot at any one
time.
      3.   Banner signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet.
      4.   A banner sign shall be permitted to be displayed for a period not
exceeding four (4) days.
   F.   Parking Lot Signs: In the multiple-family residential districts, the
following provisions shall apply to parking lot signs:
      1.   No more than two (2) parking lot signs with four (4) sign faces on a
zoning lot at any one time.
      2.   In addition to the maximum sign area for the zoning lot set forth
above, the maximum total sign area for all parking lot signs on a zoning lot at
any one time shall not exceed four (4) square feet per face. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-
2006)
   G.   Real Estate Signs: Nonilluminated real estate signs that are six (6)
square feet or less in area and do not exceed four feet (4') in height are
permitted and do not require a permit. There shall be not more than one real
estate sign per lot, except as permitted for open houses, which shall be in
addition to other permitted temporary signs. One additional open house sign six
(6) square feet or less in area shall be permitted for a time period not to
exceed seventy two (72) consecutive hours. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
12-13-13: SUMMARY SIGN PROVISIONS TABLE:
(Rep. by Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
12-13-14: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Signs Not Subject To A Permit: Temporary signs in the single- family,
two-family and multiple-family residential districts may be installed, erected,
relocated, altered or converted without first obtaining a permit. Signs
installed, erected, relocated, altered, or converted without need of a permit,
pursuant to this section, shall be subject to all other provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
   B.   Permit Required: Except as set forth in subsection A of this section,
no sign shall be installed, erected, constructed, enlarged, relocated, altered,
converted, or maintained unless a permit shall have been issued for each such
sign. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, construct,
enlarge, relocate, alter, convert, or maintain any sign without first obtaining
a permit and paying any required fee by the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Application For Permit: All applications for a permit to install,
erect, construct, enlarge, relocate, alter, convert or maintain a sign shall be
made to the village zoning administrator upon a form provided by the village
clerk. All applications for such a permit shall include plans and
specifications showing the dimensions, materials, and required details of
construction including loads, stresses and anchorage of the sign or proposed
sign and any such other information as the zoning administrator may reasonably
require to assure compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to,
whether staging of the proposed work will be located on public property. All
such applications for a permit shall be executed by the owner of the zoning lot
upon which the sign is to be installed, constructed, enlarged, relocated,
altered, converted, or maintained. All such applications for a permit shall
include payment of the fee as set forth in this title.
   D.   Issuance Or Denial: It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator,
upon the filing of an application for a permit, to examine the permit and its
supporting plans, specification, and other data related to the sign and sign
structure. If it appears that the sign and sign structure are in compliance
with all the requirements of this chapter and the proper fee has been paid, and
if there are no violations of any other ordinances of the village, then the
zoning administrator shall issue a permit. The zoning administrator is
obligated to either grant or deny an application for a permit within a
reasonable time after receiving a complete application. If the application is
denied, the zoning administrator shall state, in writing, the reasons therefor.
   E.   Void If Work Not Commenced: A permit issued by the zoning administrator
becomes null and void if work is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180)
days of issuance.
   F.   Inspection: The owner of a zoning lot erecting, altering, relocating or
maintaining a sign for which a permit is required above shall notify the zoning
administrator upon completion of the work so that an inspection for compliance
can be performed.
   G.   Maintenance: Every sign, including those signs for which no permit or
permit fee is required, shall be maintained in good condition at all times. The
zoning administrator shall have the authority to order the painting, repair,
alteration or removal of signs which become dilapidated or are abandoned, or
which constitute a physical hazard to the public safety.
   H.   Signs Declared Unlawful: The zoning administrator may declare any sign
unlawful if it endangers public safety by reasons of inadequate maintenance; or
if it has been abandoned. Prior to declaring any sign unlawful the zoning
administrator shall first send a written notice to the owner of the zoning lot
upon which the sign is located informing said person that the sign endangers
the public safety or that appears to be abandoned. The owner of the property on
which the sign is located, or someone in their stead, shall then have ten (10)
days to cure any specified problems before a citation under this section can be
issued. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-15: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Discontinuance: Whenever use of a nonconforming sign has been
discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days, or whenever there is a clear
intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming sign, such sign
shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished. Any use of
such sign thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of this
chapter.
   B.   Maintenance: Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign is permitted,
including necessary nonstructural repairs which do not extend or intensify the
nonconformity.
   C.   Alterations: No structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall
be made to a nonconforming sign, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law; or
      2.   When the alteration will actually result in the elimination of the
nonconformity.
   D.   Damage Or Destruction: If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed
by any means, to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement
value at that time, the sign can be rebuilt or used thereafter only in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event the damage or
destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, based
upon prevailing costs, the sign may then be restored to its original condition
and its use may continue until the nonconforming sign is otherwise abated. In
either event, restoration or repair of this sign must be started within a
period of three (3) months from the date of damage or destruction and
diligently pursued to completion. In every case, the reconstructed sign shall
conform to the building and electrical codes in force at the time of its
reconstruction.
   E.   Abatement Of Nonconforming Signs: All signs legally in existence as of
September 1, 1995, and not conforming with all regulations and requirements of
the village's sign code passed as amended in September of 1995, pursuant to
ordinance 95-23, shall be brought into compliance with the 1995 sign code not
later than January 20, 2007. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-16: VIOLATIONS:
Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject
to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this chapter, by this
title, or by the laws of the state of Illinois:
   A.   Installation, creation, construction, erection, or maintenance of any
sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plans or permit governing such sign
or the zoning lot on which the sign is located.
   B.   Installation, creation, erection, or maintenance of any sign requiring
a permit without first obtaining such permit.
   C.   Failing to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which the permit has lapsed.
   D.   Continuation of any violation listed immediately above. Each such day
of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying
the penalty portions of this chapter.
   E.   Any owner of a zoning lot displaying a temporary sign that violates
this chapter, or any person erecting a temporary sign that violates this
chapter, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in this code, as amended
from time to time, for each and every day or portion thereof that the violation
exists, each said day or portion thereof constituting a complete and separate
offense. In addition, the village may seek other civil and equitable remedies
it may deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of any permit or of this
chapter. Any person violating said terms and conditions shall also be subject,
in addition to the foregoing, to the payment of court costs and any reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the village.
   F.   Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of
this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty
portions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-17: FEES:
A fee shall be paid to the village at the time the application for a permit is
filed with the zoning administrator. The amount of such fee shall be as set
forth in this code, as amended from time to time, but in no event more than
necessary to recoup actual administrative costs incurred by the village in
reviewing an application for a sign permit. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-18: RELOCATING SIGNS:
Any sign that is moved to another location either on the zoning lot or to
another zoning lot shall be considered a new sign and a permit shall be secured
for any work performed in connection therewith when required by this chapter.
(Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-19: ALTERATIONS:
No sign shall be enlarged or relocated except in conformity to the provisions
of this chapter for new signs, nor until a proper permit has been secured.
(Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-20: ILLUMINATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Location And Design Of Light Source: For all signs employing an
external artificial light source for illumination, the light source shall be
located, shielded and directed so it is not directly visible from any public
street or private residence. No receptacle or device housing an external
artificial light source shall protrude more than eighteen inches (18") from the
face of the sign or building to which it is attached. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
   B.   Level Of Illumination: The illumination resulting from any external or
internal light source shall not exceed fifty (50) foot-candles when measured
with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face at a distance
equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign face. All artificial illumination
shall be designed, located, shielded and directed to illuminate only the sign
face(s), and to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent
property or streets.
      1.   Luminance: The luminance for any outdoor display shall not exceed
five thousand (5,000) nits during daylight hours or one hundred fifty (150)
nits at all other times. Brightness must be measured from the brightest element
of the sign's face. The applicant shall provide written certification from the
sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory preset so that it
will not exceed the luminance levels for day and night. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
   C.   Signs Adjacent To Residential Areas: Any illuminated sign located on a
lot abutting or across a street from, and visible from, any zoning lot in a
residential district area shall not be illuminated between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. except the sign may remain
illuminated during the time the business is open as long as the sign is not a
public or private nuisance. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
   D.   Exterior Exposed Gas Tubes: Exterior signs employing exposed gas tubes
are prohibited. (Ord. 13-26, 7-16-2013)
   E.   Transparent Backgrounds: No internally illuminated sign shall have a
transparent background, allowing direct view of the light source. (Ord. 06-31,
8-15-2006)
12-13-21: REMOVAL OF CERTAIN SIGNS:
   A.   Removal Of Abandoned Sign Upon Notice: Any abandoned sign shall be
taken down and removed by the owner of the zoning lot upon which such sign is
located within ten (10) days after written notification from the zoning
administrator, and upon any failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified in such order, may cause removal of such sign and any expense
incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the zoning lot upon which such
sign was located.
   B.   Reconstructing Signs: No signs heretofore approved and erected shall be
repaired, altered or moved; nor shall any sign, or any substantial part
thereof, which is blown down, destroyed or removed, be reerected,
reconstructed, rebuilt or relocated unless it is in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Repair Of Unsafe Signs: This section shall not be construed to prevent
the repair or restoration of any entire or part of an existing sign to a safe
condition as directed by the zoning administrator, if said sign or part thereof
is damaged by storm or other accident. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-2006)
12-13-22: MASTER OR COMMON SIGNAGE PLAN:
   A.   Required: No permit shall be issued for any individual sign requiring a
permit unless and until a master signage plan or a common signage plan for the
zoning lot on which the sign will be erected has been submitted to the zoning
administrator and approved by the zoning administrator as conforming with this
section.
   B.   Master Signage Plan: For any zoning lot on which the owner proposes to
erect one or more signs requiring a permit, the owner shall submit to the
zoning administrator a master signage plan containing the following:
      1.   An accurate plat of the zoning lot, at such scale as the zoning
administrator may reasonably require depicting the location of building(s),
parking lots, driveways, landscaped areas, and the location of each existing
and proposed sign on such zoning lot, whether the sign requires a permit or
not.
      2.   A report providing a computation of the maximum sign area, the sign
area for each proposed individual sign, the total of the sign area for all of
the proposed signs on the zoning lot, the height and dimensions of all proposed
signs on the zoning lot.
   C.   Common Signage Plan: If the owner(s) of two (2) or more contiguous
zoning lots (disregarding intervening streets and alleys) or if the owner of a
single lot with more than one building (not including any accessory building)
file with the zoning administrator for such zoning lots a common signage plan
conforming with the provisions of this section, a twenty percent (20%) increase
in the maximum sign area shall be allowed within each zoning lot as the owner
elects. A common signage plan shall contain all of the information required for
a master signage plan and shall also specify standards for consistency among
all signs on the zoning lots affected by the common signage plan with regard
to:
      1.   Color scheme;
      2.   Lettering or graphic style;
      3.   Lighting;
      4.   Location of each sign on the buildings;
      5.   Material; and
      6.   Sign proportions.
   D.   Showing Window Signs On Master Signage Plan Or Common Signage Plan: A
master signage plan or common signage plan including window signs may simply
indicate the areas of the windows to be covered by window signs and the general
type of the window signs (e.g., paper affixed to window, painted, etched on
glass, or some other material hung inside window). A master signage plan or
common signage plan must include, however, exact dimensions of enduring window
signs, but need not specify the exact dimension or nature of every transitory
window sign.
   E.   Limit Of Number Of Freestanding Signs Under Common Signage Plan: A
common signage plan for zoning lots with multiple uses or multiple users shall
limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one for each street on
which the zoning lots included in the common signage plan have frontage and
shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs.
   F.   Other Provisions Of Master Or Common Signage Plans: The master signage
plan or common signage plan may contain such other restrictions as the owner(s)
of the zoning lots may reasonably determine.
   G.   Consent: The master signage plan or common signage plan shall be
executed by all owners of record and persons with legal possession of the
zoning lot(s) involved (or their authorized agents) in such form as the zoning
administrator shall require.
   H.   Procedures: A master signage plan or common signage plan shall be
included in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or
other official plan required by the village for the proposed development of
land and shall be processed simultaneously with any other such plan.
   I.   Amendment: A master signage plan or common signage plan may be amended
by filing a new master signage plan or common signage plan that conforms with
all requirements of this chapter then in effect.
   J.   Existing Signs Not Conforming To Common Signage Plan: If any new or
amended common signage plan is filed for a zoning lot upon which existing signs
are located, the common signage plan shall include a schedule for bringing into
conformance, within six (6) months, all signs not conforming to the proposed
amended common signage plan and to the requirements of this chapter on the date
of submission.
   K.   Binding Effect: After approval of a master signage plan or common
signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except
in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as
any provision of this chapter. In case of any conflict between the provisions
of such a master signage plan or a common signage plan and any provision of
this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (Ord. 06-31, 8-15-
2006)
CHAPTER 14
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
12-14-1: Purposes
12-14-2: Exception For Repairs Pursuant To Public Order
12-14-3: Nonconforming Accessory Uses And Structures
12-14-4: Authority To Continue Nonconformities
12-14-5: Repairs And Alterations
12-14-6: Additions And Enlargements
12-14-7: Moving Structures
12-14-8: Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures
12-14-9: Termination By Abandonment Or Sale
12-14-10: Change In Use
12-14-11: Nonconforming Use Of Conforming Buildings Or Structures
12-14-12: Nonconforming Use Of Land
12-14-13: Special Uses
12-14-1: PURPOSES:
   A.   Generally: This chapter regulates and limits the continued existence of
uses, structures, and lots established prior to the effective date of this
title that do not conform to the regulations of this title applicable in the
zoning districts in which such uses, structures, and lots are located.
   B.   Zoning Districts:
      1.   The zoning districts established by this title are designed to guide
the future use of land within the village by encouraging the development or
maintenance of desirable residential, business, and manufacturing areas with
appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses and thus to promote and
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      2.   The continued existence of nonconformities is frequently
inconsistent with the purposes for which such districts are established and
thus the gradual elimination of such nonconformities is generally desirable.
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-2: EXCEPTION FOR REPAIRS PURSUANT TO PUBLIC ORDER:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoration to a safe condition of a structure in accordance with an order of a
public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who
declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe
condition, provided such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the
various provisions of this chapter prohibiting the repair or restoration of
partially damaged or destroyed structures. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-3: NONCONFORMING ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
No use or structure that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or
structure shall continue after such principal use or structure is terminated,
unless it shall thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-4: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMITIES:
Any building, structure, or use which existed lawfully on the effective date of
this title, and which becomes nonconforming upon the adoption of this title or
of any subsequent amendment hereto, may be continued only in accordance with
the regulations of this chapter. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-5: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
Unless otherwise provided by this title, ordinary repairs and alterations may
be made to a nonconforming building or structure; provided, that no structural
alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, except those required by law, or except to
make the building or structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located. Ordinary repairs and alterations shall be
determined by the zoning administrator. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-6: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
   A.   A nonconforming building or structure all or substantially all of which
is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions
and enlargements thereof are made to conform to all the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   B.   A building or structure which is nonconforming only as to bulk may be
added to or enlarged, provided such addition or enlargement conforms to all
regulations of the district in which it is located. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-7: MOVING STRUCTURES:
   No structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not
designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such
structure is located shall be moved, in whole or in part, for any distance
whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the
entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved,
except, notwithstanding any provision in this Title to the contrary, a legal
nonconforming billboard in the M-2 Manufacturing Zoning District in the
vicinity of Interstate 294 removed by the use of eminent domain may be re-
erected on the same lot, in the vicinity of the billboard prior to its removal,
no later than one year following completion of the Interstate 294 expansion
project, even though the re-erected billboard may not conform to all
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 24-53, 9-17-2024)
12-14-8: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
A nonconforming building or structure, or portion thereof, which is destroyed
or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost
of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of reconstructing the entire
building or structure, shall not be restored unless said building or structure
and the use thereof shall conform to all regulations of the district in which
it is located. In the event that such damage or destruction is less than fifty
percent (50%) of the cost of reconstructing the entire building or structure,
no repairs or construction for restoration shall be made unless such work is
started within three (3) months from the date of the partial destruction and is
diligently completed. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-9: TERMINATION BY ABANDONMENT OR SALE:
A nonconforming building, structure or land use, or portion thereof, in which
the use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive
months, regardless of any intent to resume or not to abandon such use, such use
shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent use or
occupancy of such structure or land shall comply with the use regulations of
the zoning district in which such land or structure is located. Any sale of a
nonconforming building, structure, or land use for a use other than the
nonconforming use shall terminate any right to the nonconformity upon closing.
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-10: CHANGE IN USE:
The nonconforming use of a building, structure, or land, or portion thereof,
may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which the building,
structure, or land is located. However, once a use is changed to a conforming
use, such building, structure, or land shall not be used for a nonconforming
use or purpose. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-11: NONCONFORMING USE OF CONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
The existing nonconforming use of a part or all of a conforming building or
structure may be continued, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   The nonconforming use of a part of such building or structure shall not
be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or structure,
nor changed to any other nonconforming use.
   B.   If a nonconforming use of such a building or structure is discontinued
or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, regardless of any
intent to resume or not to abandon such use, such use shall not thereafter be
reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such structure or
land shall comply with the use regulations of the zoning district in which such
land or structure is located. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-14-12: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure or in
connection with any building or structure thereon which is incidental or
accessory to the principal use of land may be continued, subject to the
following provisions:
   A.   Such nonconforming use shall not be extended or expanded beyond the
area it occupies.
   B.   No nonconforming use of land shall be changed to another nonconforming
use.
   C.   Where the nonconforming use of land is accessory to the nonconforming
use of a building or structure, it shall be discontinued on the same date on
which the nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-14-13: SPECIAL USES:
Any assembly use that was established by any prior enactment of the village as
a nonconforming use shall be deemed a special use, even if no special use
permit was previously granted to any such assembly use. Any such assembly shall
be required to obtain a special use permit for the repair, alteration,
enlargement, construction, reconstruction, or restoration to the assembly use
building or structure. (Ord. 06-26, 7-18-2006)
CHAPTER 15
VARIATIONS
SECTION:
12-15-1: Authority
12-15-2: Initiation
12-15-3: Application For Variation; Notice Of Hearing
12-15-4: Standards For Variations
12-15-5: Authorized Variations
12-15-1: AUTHORITY:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and make recommendations to the
corporate authorities and the corporate authorities shall decide. all
applications for variations of the provisions of this title in harmony with its
general purpose and intent. Only in specific instances hereinafter set forth,
and only after a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
the corporate authorities make their decisions which shall after a finding is
made specify the reasons for such action, which shall be based upon the
standards prescribed in section
12-15-4 of this chapter. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 20-17, 3-17-2020)
12-15-2: INITIATION:
An application for a variation may be made by any person, firm or corporation
having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an
option to purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest applicable to the land
or land and improvements described in the application for a variation. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-15-3: APPLICATION FOR VARIATION; NOTICE OF HEARING:
   A.   Filing Of Application: An application for variation shall be filed with
the planning and zoning commission at the office of the zoning administrator.
The zoning administrator shall notify the planning and zoning commission. The
application shall contain such information as the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Zoning Administrator may from time to time, by rule, provide.
   B.   Hearing And Recommendation: No more than ninety (90) days after the
filing of such application, a hearing shall be held before the Planning and
Zoning Commission on the application. After holding a hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall approve a recommendation and report, which
recommendation and report shall address whether or not the standards for
variations in this chapter have been met.
   C.   Notice: Notice of such a hearing shall be published at least once, but
not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing,
in one or more newspapers of general circulation in Berkeley. The published
notice shall be supplemented by sending copies of same to the property owners,
as recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds and as appears from
the tax records of this county of all property within two hundred fifty feet
(250') in each direction of the location for which the variation is requested,
and the number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys, and other
public ways shall be excluded in determining the two hundred fifty foot (250')
requirement. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 20-17, 3-17-2020)
12-15-4: STANDARDS FOR VARIATIONS:
   A.   Findings And Considerations: The corporate authorities, upon report of
the Planning and Zoning Commission and without further public hearing, may
grant or deny a variation of the regulations of this chapter. The corporate
authorities shall not grant a variation of the regulations of this title as
authorized herein unless they shall have made findings of fact based upon the
evidence presented to them in each specific case that:
      1.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
the district in which it is located; and/or
      2.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
      3.   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality; and
      4.   For the purpose of implementing the above rules, the corporate
authorities shall also, in making its determination whether there are practical
difficulties or particular hardships, take into consideration the extent to
which the following facts favorable to the applicant have been established by
the evidence:
         a.   The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
condition of the specific property involved would result in a particular
hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations were carried out;
         b.   The condition upon which the petition for a variation is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification;
         c.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         d.   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person having an interest in the property;
         e.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; and
         f.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in
the public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public
safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
   B.   Imposition Of Conditions And Restrictions: The corporate authorities
may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a
variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards set out in this
section, and reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon
other property in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the general intent
of this title. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 20-17, 3-17-2020)
12-15-5: AUTHORIZED VARIATIONS:
   A.   Instances For Allowing Of Variations: Variations from the regulations
of this title shall be granted by the corporate authorities only in accordance
with the standards set out in section
12-15-4 of this chapter, and may be granted in the following instances and any
other reasonable instances necessary to relieve hardship:
      1.   To permit a variation to height requirements.
      2.   To allow for variations for residential front porch sizes so long as
the hardship criteria, building to lot density and setback requirements of
existing ordinances are met.
      3.   To permit any front, side or rear yard or setbacks from the lot line
or primary structure less than that required by the applicable regulations.
      4.   To permit the use of a lot or lots of record on the effective date
of this title for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient
area of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the respective area and width of
the lot or lots be less than seventy five percent (75%) of the required lot
area and width; and provided that, the corporate authorities in considering any
request for permission to build upon an undersized tract, including an
undersized platted lot or combination of undersized platted lots, shall
whenever such combination is possible require that two (2) or more undersized
lots be combined, or subdivided into building sites of at least or
substantially the same size as required by section
12-6-2 of this title. The corporate authorities shall have the power to permit
the use of building sites smaller than required where such combination and
subdivision cannot be done without substantial hardship to the owner or owners
of the lots in question. Where a number of undersized lots is owned as a tract,
the corporate authorities shall limit variations to permit as little divergence
as possible from the tract size required by this title. In its consideration,
both of the possible combination of undersized lots into proper building sites,
and the division of large lots into building sites not of the sizes herein
required, the board shall consider both the hardship to the property owner and
the type of building sites already used in the immediate neighborhood.
      5.   To permit the same off street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two (2) or more uses; provided, that substantial use of
such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours
of the same days of the week.
      6.   To reduce the applicable off street parking or loading facilities by
fifty percent (50%).
      7.   To allow parking lots in residence districts and municipal or
governmental uses in any district.
      8.   To grant additional time for, or permit extension of, a
nonconforming use.
      9.   To increase the number of accessory uses permitted on a residential
lot.
   B.   Time Limit: No order of the corporate authorities granting a variation
shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months from the date of such
order unless a building permit is obtained within such period and the erection
or alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced within such
period. (2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 07-16, 7-17-2007; Ord. 11-25, 7-19-2011;
Ord. 20-17, 3-17-2020)
CHAPTER 16
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
12-16-1: Authority
12-16-2: Limitation Of Amendments
12-16-3: Application; Hearing
12-16-4: Decisions
12-16-5: Standards
12-16-1: AUTHORITY:
The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this
title may be amended, from time to time, by ordinance in accordance with
applicable Illinois statutes. An amendment shall be granted or denied by the
corporate authorities only after a public hearing before the planning and
zoning commission, and a report of its findings and recommendations has
thereafter been submitted to the corporate authorities. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-16-2: LIMITATION OF AMENDMENTS:
   Amendments may be proposed by the corporate authorities, planning and zoning
commission, Village staff, and by any person, firm or corporation having a
freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a
contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to
purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest which is specifically
enforceable on the land which is described in the application for an amendment.
(2005 Zoning Code; amd. Ord. 24-03, 2-6-2024)
12-16-3: APPLICATION; HEARING:
   A.   Filing Of Application: An application for an amendment shall be filed
with the village clerk, and thereafter entered into the records of the first
meeting thereafter of the corporate authorities.
   B.   Hearing And Notice Requirements:
      1.   A copy of such application shall thereafter be forwarded by the
village clerk to the planning and zoning commission with a request to hold a
public hearing and submit to the corporate authorities a report of its findings
and recommendations.
      2.   Upon being advised of the date of hearing, the village clerk shall
cause notice of the hearing to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty
(30) days prior to said hearing.
      3.   The published report shall be supplemented by sending copies of the
same to the property owners, as recorded in the office of the county recorder
of deeds and as appears from the tax records of this county of all property
within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location for
which the amendment is requested, and the number of feet occupied by all public
roads, streets, alleys, and other public ways shall be excluded in determining
the two hundred fifty foot (250') requirement.
      4.   In case an amendment does not affect the zoning district boundaries
but only changes the text of this title, unless such change directly affects
any particular property, publication of the notice of the hearing as required
in subsection B2 of this section shall suffice, and notification of individual
property owners shall not be required.
      5.   The planning and zoning commission shall hold a hearing on such
application for an amendment at such time and place as determined by the
planning and zoning commission, and as advertised by the village clerk. The
hearing shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings shall be preserved
in such manner and according to such procedures as the planning and zoning
commission, by rule, prescribes from time to time. Findings and recommendations
of the planning and zoning commission shall be submitted to the corporate
authorities not later than sixty (60) days following the public hearing. (2005
Zoning Code)
12-16-4: DECISIONS:
   A.   Rendering Of Decision: The corporate authorities, upon report of the
planning and zoning commission and without further public hearing, may grant or
deny any proposed amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes, or
may refer it back to the planning and zoning commission for further
consideration.
   B.   Written Protest By Property Owners: In the event a written protest
against the proposed amendment signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley
therefrom, or by owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk,
an amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of all the village trustees elected. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-16-5: STANDARDS:
The wisdom of amending the zoning map or the text of this title is a matter
committed to the legislative discretion of the corporate authorities and is not
dictated by any set standards. However, in determining whether a proposed
amendment should be granted or denied, the corporate authorities should be
guided by the principle that its power to amend this title is not an arbitrary
one but one that may be exercised only when the public good demands or requires
the amendment to be made. In considering whether that principle is satisfied in
any particular case, the corporate authorities should weigh the following
factors:
   A.   Existing uses and zoning classifications of properties in the vicinity
of the subject property;
   B.   Trend of development in the vicinity of the subject property;
   C.   Extent to which the value of the subject property is diminished by the
existing comprehensive plan designation or zoning classification;
   D.   Extent to which such diminution in value is offset by an increase in
the public health, safety, and welfare;
   E.   Extent, if any, to which the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties
would be affected by the proposed amendment;
   F.   Extent, if any, to which the value of adjacent properties would be
affected by the proposed amendment;
   G.   Extent, if any, to which future orderly development and redevelopment
of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment;
   H.   Suitability of the subject property for uses permitted or permissible
under its present comprehensive plan designation or zoning classification;
   I.   Availability of adequate ingress and egress from the subject property
and the extent to which traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity of the
subject property would be affected by the proposed amendment;
   J.   Availability of adequate public utilities and essential public services
to the subject property to accommodate the uses permitted or permissible under
the present comprehensive plan designation or zoning classification;
   K.   Length of time that the subject property has been vacant or
underutilized, in consideration of the context of the pace of development and
redevelopment in the vicinity of the subject property; and
   L.   Community's need for the proposed map amendment and for the uses and
development that it would allow. (2005 Zoning Code)
CHAPTER 17
SPECIAL USES
ARTICLE A. SPECIAL USES, GENERALLY
SECTION:
12-17A-1: Purpose
12-17A-2: Initiation
12-17A-3: Application; Hearing
12-17A-4: Decisions
12-17A-5: Standards
12-17A-1: PURPOSE:
The formulation and enactment of a comprehensive ordinance is based on the
division of the entire village into districts, within each of which are
permitted specified uses that are mutually compatible. In addition to such
permitted, compatible uses, however, it is recognized that there are other uses
which it may be necessary or desirable to allow in a given district but which
on account of their potential influence upon neighboring uses or public
facilities need to be carefully regulated with respect to location or operation
for the protection of the community. Such uses are classified in this title as
special uses and fall into two (2) categories:
   A.   Public: Uses either municipally operated or operated by publicly
regulated utilities, or uses traditionally affected by public interest.
   B.   Private: Uses entirely private in character which, on account of their
peculiar locational need, the nature of the service they offer to the public,
and their possible damaging influence on the neighborhood, may have to be
established in a district or districts in which they cannot reasonably be
allowed as an unrestricted permitted use under this title. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-17A-2: INITIATION:
Special uses may be proposed by the board of trustees, planning and zoning
commission, and by any person, firm or corporation having a freehold interest,
a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest
which may become a freehold interest, an option to purchase, or any exclusive
possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land which is
described in the application for special use. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-17A-3: APPLICATION; HEARING:
   A.   Filing Of Application: An application for a special use shall be filed
with the village clerk and thereafter entered into the records of the first
meeting thereafter of the board of trustees.
   B.   Hearing And Notice Requirements:
      1.   A copy of such application shall thereafter be forwarded, by the
village clerk, to the planning and zoning commission with a request to hold a
public hearing and submit to the board of trustees a report of its findings and
recommendations.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission shall fix a reasonable time, not
to exceed sixty (60) days, for the hearing of the request for special use
permit and give due notice to the parties in the same manner as provided in
subsection 12-16-3B of this title.
      3.   Such public hearing shall be held upon such notice, and findings and
recommendations of the planning and zoning commission shall be submitted to the
village board not later than sixty (60) days following the public hearing.
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-17A-4: DECISIONS:
   A.   Rendering Of Decision: The board of trustees, upon report of the
planning and zoning commission and without further public hearing, may grant or
deny any proposed special use in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes,
or may refer it back to the planning and zoning commission for further
consideration.
   B.   Written Protest By Property Owners: In case a written protest against
any proposed special use signed and acknowledged by owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across the alley
therefrom, or by owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage to be altered, is filed with the village clerk, the
special use cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of two- thirds (2/3)
of all members of the board of trustees elected. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-17A-5: STANDARDS:
No special use permit shall be recommended or granted unless the applicant
shall establish that:
   A.   The proposed use and development will be in harmony with the general
and specific purposes of this title and for the regulations of the district in
question and with the purposes and intent of the comprehensive plan;
   B.   The proposed use, drainage, and development will not have a substantial
undue adverse effect upon adjacent properties, the character of the area, or
adversely impact the public health, safety and welfare;
   C.   The proposed use and development will be constructed, arranged, and
operated so as not to dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the
use and development of neighboring properties in accordance with the applicable
district regulations;
   D.   The proposed use will be adequately served by essential public
facilities and services, such as streets, public utilities, drainage
structures, police and fire protection, refuse disposal, parks, libraries, and
schools, or the applicant will provide adequately for such services;
   E.   The proposed use and development will not cause undue traffic
congestion nor draw significant amounts of traffic through residential streets;
and
   F.   The proposed use and development will comply with all additional
standards imposed on it by the provisions of this title or any special
conditions imposed by the corporate authorities. (2005 Zoning Code)
ARTICLE B. PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
12-17B-1: Authority
12-17B-2: Purpose
12-17B-3: Scope; Parties Entitled To Seek Planned Development Approval
12-17B-4: Preliminary Consideration
12-17B-5: Development Concept Plan
12-17B-6: Optional Submission Of Final Plan
12-17B-7: Final Plan
12-17B-8: Standards For Planned Developments
12-17B-9: Controlling Provisions
12-17B-10: Inspections During Development
12-17B-11: Adjustments To Final Plan During Development
12-17B-12: Final Plan Amendments
12-17B-13: Application Fee; Requirements
12-17B-1: AUTHORITY:
The corporate authorities may, in accordance with the procedures and standards
set forth in article A of this chapter, by ordinance duly adopted, grant
special use permits authorizing the development of planned developments in any
district of the village. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Planned developments are a distinct category of a special use and are
authorized for the same general purposes as all other special uses. Planned
developments may include uses or combinations of uses allowed by right or by a
special use permit within the underlying district, or any use prohibited within
the underlying zoning district; provided, however, that any use otherwise
prohibited within the underlying zoning district meets, in the sole and
absolute discretion of the corporate authorities, the conditions, procedures,
and standards of this article.
   B.   A planned development is granted through a special use permit and is
intended to allow the relaxation of otherwise applicable zoning district
regulations based upon a thorough review of a development proposal for larger
parcels. A planned development encourages developers to creatively develop
property to promote the following planning objectives:
      1.   Creation of a more desirable environment than would otherwise be
possible through strict application of applicable zoning district regulations;
      2.   Promotion of a creative approach to the development of land and
related facilities resulting in better design, including aesthetic amenities;
      3.   Combination and coordination of architectural styles, building
forms, and building relationships;
      4.   Incorporation of unique but complementary development within an
existing neighborhood context;
      5.   Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics, or
incorporation of site amenities, such as natural topography, vegetation,
wetlands, and other environmentally desirable features;
      6.   Provision of open space; and
      7.   Encouragement of land uses that promote the public health, safety,
and welfare. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-3: SCOPE; PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK PLANNED DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL:
   A.   Scope: The provisions set forth in this article shall apply to the
development or redevelopment of any: 1) parcel that is twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet or more in area; 2) adaptive reuse of a building that is ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or more in gross floor area; or 3) multi-family
development of any size.
   B.   Parties Entitled To Seek Planned Development Approval: An application
for a special use permit to authorize a planned development may be filed by the
owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, the subject property.
(Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-4: PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATION:
   A.   Application: A preliminary application for a special use permit for a
planned development shall be filed in accordance with section
12-17A-3 of this chapter and subsection 12-17B-13E of this article.
   B.   Initial Staff Review: The preliminary application shall be reviewed by
village staff or consultants retained by the village to identify any issues
that should be considered by the corporate authorities. All costs incurred by
the village in this review of the preliminary application shall be reimbursed
in accordance with subsection 12-17B-13B of this article and ordinance 99-03,
otherwise known as the cost recoveries ordinance, approved and adopted by the
corporate authorities on February 16, 1999.
   C.   Referral To Corporate Authorities: Every preliminary application for a
special use permit for a planned development shall be referred by the village
clerk to the corporate authorities.
   D.   Preliminary Consideration By Corporate Authorities: The corporate
authorities shall, not later than the first regular board of trustees meeting
after referral of such application, commence and conclude a preliminary review
of the application with the applicant. The preliminary review shall be used to
acquaint the corporate authorities with the application and to provide the
applicant with any preliminary views or concerns of the corporate authorities.
The applicant should consider the views or concerns expressed by the corporate
authorities while plans are still flexible and adjustments still possible, and
prior to the time that the applicant expends funds necessary to prepare and
complete the documentation required for a formal application. No final or
binding action shall be taken by the corporate authorities during their
preliminary review, and all views and concerns expressed by the corporate
authorities shall be deemed by all parties as solely advisory, and in no way be
deemed to create, or to prejudice, any rights of the applicant, or to obligate
the corporate authorities in any manner whatsoever to approve or deny any
formal application following full consideration thereof pursuant to this
article. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-5: DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT PLAN:
   A.   Purpose: The development concept plan is intended to provide the
applicant an opportunity to submit a plan showing the basic scope, character
and nature of the entire proposed planned development without incurring undue
cost. The development concept plan is the basis on which the required public
hearing is held, thus permitting public consideration of the proposal at the
earliest possible stage. In order to permit the village and the applicant to
proceed with some assurance, approval of the development concept plan binds the
applicant and the village with respect to the following basic elements of
development:
      1.   Categories of uses to be permitted;
      2.   General location of residential and nonresidential land uses;
      3.   Overall maximum density of residential uses and intensity of
nonresidential uses;
      4.   General architectural style of the proposed development, including
conformity with the village's design standard set forth in section
12-3A-7 of this title;
      5.   General location and extent of public and private open space,
including recreational amenities;
      6.   General location of vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems;
      7.   Staging of development; and
      8.   Nature, scope and extent of public dedications, improvements or
contributions to be provided by the applicant.
   B.   Formal Application: Subsequent to the corporate authorities' review and
consideration of the preliminary application, but in no event more than six (6)
months thereafter, a formal application for approval of a development concept
plan shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of subsection 12-17B-
13F of this article. No application for approval of a development concept plan
shall be filed unless the corporate authorities shall have first reviewed a
preliminary application for a special use permit for a planned development.
   C.   Corporate Authorities Referral: Every properly filed and completed
application for approval of a development concept plan shall be referred by the
corporate authorities to the plan commission. The failure of the corporate
authorities to act on a properly filed and completed application within thirty
(30) days of the corporate authorities' receipt thereof, shall be deemed to be
a decision to refer the application pursuant to this subsection.
   D.   Public Hearing: In any case where an application for approval of a
development concept plan is referred by the corporate authorities pursuant to
subsection C of this section, a public hearing shall be set, noticed and
conducted by the plan commission.
   E.   Action By Plan Commission: Within twenty one (21) days following the
conclusion of the public hearing, the plan commission shall transmit to the
corporate authorities its recommendation that the development concept plan
either be approved, be approved subject to modifications, or not be approved.
The failure of the plan commission to act within twenty one (21) days, or such
further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation
for the approval of the development concept plan as submitted.
   F.   Action By Corporate Authorities: Within sixty (60) days following the
receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission, or its failure to act as
above provided, the corporate authorities shall either deny the application for
approval of the development concept plan; shall remand it back to the plan
commission for further consideration of specified matters; or shall, by
resolution duly adopted, approve the development concept plan, with or without
modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a condition of
such approval, and refer the matter to the plan commission for processing of
the final plan in accordance with subsection 12-17B-7F of this article.
   G.   Failure Of Corporate Authorities To Act: The failure of the corporate
authorities to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying approval of the
development concept plan.
   H.   Coordination With Subdivision Ordinance: When a subdivision of land
subject to the subdivision ordinance is proposed in connection with a planned
development, review of the tentative plat of the proposed subdivision shall be
carried out simultaneously with review of the development concept plan. (Ord.
05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-6: OPTIONAL SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAN:
The applicant may, at his option, submit a final plan for the proposed planned
development pursuant to the requirements of section
12-17B-7 of this article simultaneously with the submission of the development
concept plan pursuant to the requirements of section
12-17B-5 of this article. In such case, the applicant shall comply with all
provisions of this article. The plan commission and the corporate authorities
shall consider such plans simultaneously and shall grant or deny final plan
approval in accordance with the provisions of section
12-17B-7 of this article. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-7: FINAL PLAN:
   A.   Purpose: The final plan is intended to particularize, refine and
implement the development concept plan and to serve as a complete, thorough and
permanent public record of the planned development and the manner in which it
is to be developed.
   B.   Application: Upon approval of the development concept plan, the
applicant shall file an application for final plan approval in accordance with
the requirements of subsection 12-17B-13G of this article. The application
shall refine, implement and be in substantial conformity with the approved
development concept plan.
   C.   Public Meeting: A public meeting shall be set, noticed and conducted by
the plan commission.
   D.   Coordination With Subdivision Ordinance: When a subdivision of land
subject to the subdivision ordinance is proposed in connection with a planned
development, review of the final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be
carried out simultaneously with review of the final plan.
   E.   Phasing Of Final Plan Approval: An application for final plan approval
may include the entire area included in the approved development concept plan
or one or more phases, stages or units thereof; provided, however, that the
following matters must be addressed and provided in the first phase, stage or
unit submitted for final plan approval:
      1.   All public improvements required or proposed for the entire area
included in the approved development concept plan;
      2.   All open space required or proposed for the entire area included in
the approved development concept plan;
      3.   All land dedications required or proposed for the entire area
included in the approved development concept plan; and
      4.   The payment of all fees required by the village.
   F.   Action By Plan Commission:
      1.   Evaluation: Within sixty (60) days following the filing of an
application for approval of a final plan, the plan commission shall, with such
aid and advice of such village staff and consultants as may be appropriate,
review and act on the plan. Such review shall consider:
         a.   Whether the final plan is in substantial conformity with the
approved development concept plan;
         b.   The merit or lack of merit of any departure of the final plan
from substantial conformity with the approved development concept plan;
         c.   Whether the final plan complies with any and all conditions
imposed by approval of the development concept plan; and
         d.   Whether the final plan complies with the provisions of this
section and all other applicable federal, state and village codes, ordinances,
and regulations.
      2.   Approval Based On Substantial Conformity: If the plan commission
finds substantial conformity between the final plan and the approved
development concept plan and further finds the final plan to be in all other
respects complete and in compliance with any and all conditions imposed by
approval of the development concept plan and with the provisions of all
applicable federal, state, and village codes, ordinances and regulations, it
shall transmit the plan to the corporate authorities with its recommendation
that the corporate authorities approve the final plan, with or without
modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a condition of
approval.
      3.   Recommendation Of Denial: In any case where the plan commission
finds that the final plan is not in substantial conformity with the approved
development concept plan and does not merit approval, or in any case where it
requires modifications of a plan that are not accepted by the applicant, the
plan commission shall transmit the plan to the corporate authorities together
with its recommendation and specific reasons in support of its recommendation
that the final plan not be approved.
      4.   Failure To Act: The failure of the plan commission to act within the
sixty (60) day period specified in subsection F1 of this section, or such
further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a
recommendation to the corporate authorities to approve the final plan as
submitted.
   G.   Action By Board Of Trustees: Within sixty (60) days following the
receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission, or its failure to act as
above provided, the corporate authorities shall take action in accordance with
the following:
      1.   Approval Based On Substantial Conformity: If the plan commission has
recommended approval of a final plan pursuant to subsection F2 of this section,
the corporate authorities shall, unless it specifically rejects one or more of
the findings of the plan commission on the basis of expressly stated reasons,
approve the final plan by a duly adopted ordinance.
      2.   Approval Notwithstanding Plan Commission Recommendation Of Denial:
If the plan commission has recommended denial of a final plan pursuant to
subsection F3 of this section, the corporate authorities may, if it finds that
the final plan merits approval and otherwise conforms to the requirements of
this article and all other relevant village codes, ordinances, and regulations,
approve the final plan by ordinance duly adopted.
      3.   Referral Back To Plan Commission: In any case, the corporate
authorities may refer the final plan back to the plan commission for further
consideration of specified matters.
      4.   Conditions On Final Plan Approval: The approval of any final plan
may, in addition, be granted, with or without modifications and conditions to
be accepted by the applicant as a condition of approval.
      5.   Failure To Act: The failure of the corporate authorities to act
within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree,
shall be deemed to be a decision denying final plan approval.
   H.   Recording Of Final Plan: When a final plan is approved, the village
clerk shall cause the final plan, or the portions thereof as are appropriate,
to be recorded with the office of the Cook County recorder of deeds.
   I.   Limitation On Final Plan Approval: Construction shall commence in
accordance with the approved final plan within one year after the approval of
such plan, or within such shorter time as may be established by the approved
development schedule. Failure to commence construction within such period
shall, unless an extension of time shall have been granted, upon formal request
of the applicant, by the corporate authorities, automatically render void the
final plan approval and all approvals of the planned development and all
permits based on such approvals.
   J.   Building And Other Permits: Appropriate officials of the village may,
upon proper application by the applicant, issue building and other permits to
the applicant for the development, construction and other work in the area
encompassed by the approved final plan; provided, however, that no permit shall
be issued unless the appropriate official is first satisfied that the
requirements of any applicable codes, ordinances, or regulations of the
village, have been satisfied. Building permits may, however, be withheld at the
discretion of the corporate authorities, or their designee, at any time it is
determined that the development of the planned development is not proceeding in
strict compliance with the approved final plan. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-8: STANDARDS FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
No special permit for a planned development shall be recommended or granted
unless and until the applicant shall establish that the proposed development
will meet each of the following standards:
   A.   Unified Ownership Required: The entire property proposed for the
planned development shall be in single ownership or under such unified control
as to ensure that the entire property will be developed as a unified whole. All
owners of the property shall be included as joint applicants on all
applications and all approvals shall bind all owners. The violation of any
owner as to any tract shall be deemed a violation as to all owners and all
tracts.
   B.   Covenants And Restrictions To Be Enforceable By Village: All covenants,
deed restrictions, easements and similar restrictions to be recorded in
connection with the planned development shall provide that they may not be
modified, removed or released without the express consent of the corporate
authorities, or their designee, and that they may be enforced by the village as
well as by future landowners within the proposed development.
   C.   Public Open Space: Where the subject property is two (2) acres or more
in area, the corporate authorities may require that public grounds be
designated in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. In addition, the
corporate authorities may require evidence that all requirements of village
ordinances pertaining to the designation of public grounds have been met as
respects the proposed planned development and in accordance with the
subdivision ordinance.
   D.   Common Open Space:
      1.   Amount, Location And Use: The failure of a planned development to
provide common open space shall be considered to be an indication that it has
not satisfied the objectives for which such developments may be approved
pursuant to this article. When common open space is provided in a planned
development, the amount and location of such open space shall be consistent
with its intended function as set forth in the application and planned
development plans. No such open space shall be used for the construction of any
structure or improvement except such structures and improvements as may be
approved in the final plan as appropriate to the intended leisure and
recreational uses for which such open space is intended.
      2.   Preservation: Adequate safeguards, including recorded covenants or
dedication of development rights, shall be provided to prevent the subsequent
use of common open space for any use, structure, improvement or development
other than that shown on the approved final plan. The restrictions must be
permanent and not for a given period of years and must run with the land.
      3.   Ownership And Maintenance: The final plan shall include such
provisions for the ownership and maintenance of such open space and
improvements as are reasonably necessary to ensure their continuity, care,
conservation, maintenance and operation in accordance with predetermined
standards and to ensure that remedial measures will be available to the village
if such open space or improvements are permitted to deteriorate or are not
maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the planned
development or the village.
      4.   Property Owners' Association: When the requirements of this
subsection D are to be satisfied by the ownership or maintenance of such open
space or improvements by a property owners' association, such association shall
meet each of the following standards:
         a.   The bylaws and rules of the association and all declarations,
covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be approved as part of the final
plan prior to becoming effective. Each such document shall provide that it
shall not be amended in any manner that would result in it being in violation
of the requirements of subsection A of this section.
         b.   The association must be established and all covenants and
restrictions recorded prior to the sale of any property within the area of the
planned development designated to have the exclusive use of the proposed open
space or improvements.
         c.   The association must be responsible for casualty and liability
insurance, taxes, and the maintenance of the open space and improvements to be
deeded to it.
         d.   Membership in the association must be mandatory for each property
owner, and any successive owner, having a right to the use or enjoyment of such
open space or improvements.
         e.   Every property having a right to the use or enjoyment of such
open space or improvements must pay its pro rata share of the cost of the
association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association that
meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with
statutes of the state of Illinois.
         f.   The association must have the right to adjust the assessment to
meet changed needs. The membership vote required to authorize such adjustment
shall not be fixed at more than fifty one percent (51%) of the members voting
on the issue.
         g.   The village must be given the right to enforce the covenants.
         h.   The village must be given the right, after ten (10) days' written
notice to the association, to perform any maintenance or repair work that the
association has neglected to perform, to assess the membership for such work
and to have a lien against the property of any member failing to pay such
assessment. For this purpose alone, the village shall have all the rights and
powers of the association and its governing body under the agreements and
declarations creating the association.
         i.   Drafts of all association documents shall be provided to the
village attorney for his or her review to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this subsection D4.
   E.   Landscaping And Perimeter Treatment: Any area of a planned development
not used for structures or circulation elements shall be landscaped or
otherwise improved. The perimeter of the planned development shall be treated
so as to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses by means such as provision
of compatible uses and structures; setbacks; screening; or natural or manmade
buffers. Every planned development shall provide a perimeter landscaped open
space along each of its boundaries; each such open space shall have a minimum
depth equal to the minimum applicable yard required in the district in which it
is located.
   F.   Private Streets: Private streets shall be permitted in a planned
development provided that:
      1.   Said streets shall be treated as public streets and rights of way
for purposes of all setbacks, yards and calculations;
      2.   Said streets shall be owned and maintained by a property owners'
association meeting the requirements set forth in subsection D4 of this
section; and
      3.   A covenant shall be recorded against the subject property
acknowledging that the village shall at no time be under any obligation to
provide maintenance for or accept dedication of said streets.
   G.   Utilities: All utility lines shall be installed underground.
   H.   Conditions On Planned Development Approvals: The approval of either a
development concept plan or a final plan may be conditioned on such matters as
the corporate authorities may find necessary to prevent or minimize any
possible adverse effects of the proposed planned development; or to ensure its
compatibility with surrounding uses and development and its consistency with
the general purposes, goals and objectives of the village, and all relevant
village codes, ordinances, and regulations. Such conditions shall be expressly
set forth in the ordinance or resolution granting the approval in question.
Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this
article and shall constitute grounds for revocation of all approvals granted
for the planned development.
   I.   Affidavit Of Compliance With Conditions; Fee: Whenever any planned
development approval granted pursuant to this article is made subject to
conditions or limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon
meeting such conditions, file an affidavit, in form and substance satisfactory
to the village attorney, with the village clerk so stating. Such affidavit
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case by the
corporate authorities, or their designee, to recover the village's actual
direct cost of an inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations
have been met. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-9: CONTROLLING PROVISIONS:
Following final plan approval, in the event of an express conflict between the
provisions of the final plan and this article, the final plan shall control.
This article shall control in all other instances. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-10: INSPECTIONS DURING DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Inspections By Village: Following approval of the final plan of a
planned development, or any stage thereof, the appropriate village officials
shall, at least annually until the completion of development, review all
permits issued and construction undertaken and compare actual development with
the approved plans for development and with the approved development schedule.
   B.   Action By Village Officials: If a village official finds that
development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved schedule, or that
it fails in any other respect to comply with the final plan, the village
official shall immediately notify the village administrator of such fact and
may, if necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare or to prevent
further violation of this article and the final plan, issue an order stopping
any and all work on the planned development until such time as any
noncompliance is cured.
   C.   Action By Corporate Authorities: Within sixty (60) days following
notification by the village administrator, the corporate authorities shall
either:
      1.   Take such steps as it deems necessary to compel compliance with the
final plan; or
      2.   Require the owner or applicant to seek an adjustment to the final
plan as provided in section
12-17B-11 of this article. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-11: ADJUSTMENTS TO FINAL PLAN DURING DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Minor Adjustments:
      1.   During the development of a planned development, the corporate
authorities, or their designee, may authorize minor adjustments to the final
plan when such adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or
engineering considerations first discovered during actual development. Such
minor adjustments shall be limited to the following:
         a.   Altering the location of any one structure or group of structures
by not more than five feet (5') or one-fourth (1/4) of the distance shown on
the approved final plan between such structure or structures and any other
structure or any vehicular circulation element or any boundary of the planned
development, whichever is less;
         b.   Altering the location of any circulation element by not more than
five feet (5') or one-fourth (1/4) of the distance shown on the approved final
plan between such circulation element and any structure, whichever is less;
         c.   Altering the location of any open space by not more than twenty
feet (20');
         d.   Altering any final grade by not more than ten percent (10%) of
the originally planned grade; and
         e.   Altering the location or type of landscaping elements.
      2.   Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and
purpose of this article and the final plan as approved, shall be the minimum
necessary to overcome the particular difficulty and shall not be approved if
they would result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this
article.
   B.   Major Adjustments: Any adjustment to the final plan not authorized by
subsection A of this section shall be considered to be a major adjustment and
shall be granted only upon application to, and approval by, the corporate
authorities, by ordinance duly adopted. The corporate authorities may, by
ordinance duly adopted, grant approval for a major adjustment without a hearing
upon finding that any changes in the final plan as approved will be in
substantial conformity with said final plan. If the corporate authorities
determine that a major adjustment is not in substantial conformity with the
final plan as approved, then the corporate authorities may refer the request to
the plan commission for further hearing, review, and recommendation. (Ord. 05-
03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-12: FINAL PLAN AMENDMENTS:
After completion of a planned development, an approved final plan may be
amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures and subject to the
standards and limitations provided in this article for approval of the planned
development. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
12-17B-13: APPLICATION FEE; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application Fee Established; Lien: Every application filed pursuant to
this article shall be subject to a nonrefundable one hundred fifty dollar
($150.00) application and filing fee, the requirements of the village cost
recoveries ordinance, and the actual cost, as hereinafter defined, incurred by
the village in processing such application. The owner of the property which is
the subject of the application and, if different, the applicant, shall be
jointly and severally liable for the payment of said fee. By signing the
application, the owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such fee and to
consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to
ensure collection of any such fee, plus the costs of collection, which have not
been paid within thirty (30) days following the mailing of a written demand for
such payment to the owner at the address shown on the application. Any lien
filed pursuant to this subsection may be foreclosed in the manner provided by
statute for mortgages or mechanics' liens.
   B.   Recoverable Costs: For purposes of calculating the fee due pursuant to
subsection A of this section, the actual costs incurred by the village in
processing an application shall be deemed to consist of the following items of
direct and indirect expense:
      1.   Legal publication.
      2.   Recording secretarial services.
      3.   Court reporter.
      4.   Administrative preparation and review.
      5.   Document preparation and review.
      6.   Professional and technical consultant services.
      7.   Legal review, consultation and advice.
      8.   Copy reproduction.
      9.   Document recordation.
   C.   Fee Payment And Escrow:
      1.   Initial Payment And Escrow: Every application filed pursuant to this
article shall be accompanied by the required fee plus an additional amount for
recoverable costs as provided in subsection B of this section, to be deposited
in an application fee escrow. No interest shall be payable on any such escrow.
      2.   Charges Against Escrow: From the date of filing of any application
pursuant to this article, the village shall maintain an accurate record of the
actual costs, as hereinabove defined, of processing such application. The
corporate authorities, or their designee, shall, from time to time, draw funds
from the escrow account established for such application to pay such costs and
shall transfer such funds to the appropriate village accounts.
      3.   Additional Escrow Deposits: Should the corporate authorities, or
their designee, at any time determine that the escrow account established in
connection with any application is, or is likely to become, insufficient to pay
the actual costs of processing such application, the applicant shall be
notified of that fact and shall be required to make an additional deposit in an
amount deemed sufficient to cover foreseeable additional costs. Unless and
until such additional amount is deposited by the applicant, the corporate
authorities, or their designee, may direct that processing of the application
shall be suspended or terminated.
      4.   Final Settlement: As soon as reasonably feasible following final
action on an application, the corporate authorities, or their designee, shall
cause a final accounting to be made of the escrow deposits made in connection
with such application and the actual cost of processing such application and
shall make a final charge of such costs against such escrow deposits. A copy of
the accounting shall be provided to the owner and the applicant. If the amount
in the escrow account is insufficient to pay the total actual costs, a written
demand for payment of the balance due shall be mailed to the owner and the
applicant. If unused balance remains in the escrow account after paying the
total actual costs, it shall be returned to the applicant.
   D.   Condition Of All Applications, Approvals And Permits; Time Periods: No
application filed pursuant to this article shall be considered complete unless
and until all fees and deposits due pursuant to this section have been paid.
Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this article shall,
whether or not expressly so conditioned, be deemed to be conditioned upon
payment of fees as required by this section. Where this article provides that
the passage of time without decision or action shall be deemed an approval or a
recommendation for approval, time periods shall be tolled during any period of
nonpayment, but shall otherwise continue to run. The failure to fully pay any
such fee or deposit, when due, shall be grounds for refusing to process an
application and for denying or revoking any permit or approval sought or issued
with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee or deposit
relates.
   E.   Applications For Preliminary Consideration: Every application filed
pursuant to section
12-17B-4 of this article shall provide the following information:
      1.   The owner's name and address and the owner's signed consent to the
filing of the application.
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the owner, and
his interest in the subject property.
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all professional
consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application.
      4.   The name and address and the nature and extent of the interest of
any officer or employee of the village in the owner, the applicant or the
subject property.
      5.   The address and legal description of the subject property.
      6.   A description or graphic representation of the planned development
proposal for which approval is being sought and of the existing zoning
classification, use and development of the subject property. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the subject matter of the
application, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or
impacted by the approval being sought in the application.
      7.   Proof of control or ownership of the subject property.
   F.   Applications For Development Concept Plan Approval: Every application
filed pursuant to section
12-17B-5 of this article shall, in addition to the required information set
forth in subsection E of this section, provide the following information:
      1.   A written statement of the need for a special use permit for a
planned development.
      2.   The names and addresses of all owners of property within two hundred
fifty (250) linear feet, excluding street rights of way, in all directions from
the subject property.
      3.   Property located on the same frontage or frontages as the front lot
line or corner side lot line of the subject property, and on a frontage
directly opposite any such frontage, and on a frontage immediately adjoining or
across an alley from any such frontage, as shown in the records of the office
of the assessor of Cook County.
      4.   A survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing existing
lot lines and dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all public and
private rights of way and all streets across and adjacent to the subject
property.
      5.   A development name unique to the Berkeley area for identification
purposes.
      6.   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the subject
property to effectuate the proposed planned development, including a statement
of all legal, beneficial, tenancy and contractual interests held in or
affecting the subject property, and a recent commitment for title insurance or
ownership search certificate.
      7.   A map depicting municipal and special district boundaries where
adjacent to or within the subject property.
      8.   A written statement addressing the following matters:
         a.   A general description of the proposed planned development, the
planning objectives to be achieved by it, including the rationales and
assumptions of the applicant supporting the proposed planned development, and
the market it is intended to serve.
         b.   How the proposed planned development is to be designed, arranged
and operated so as not to adversely affect the development and use of
neighboring property in accordance with applicable regulations of this title.
         c.   Schematic, soft line drawings of the proposed planned development
concept, including public or private rights of way on or adjacent to the
subject property, the proposed dimensions and locations of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation and parking elements, public and private open space, and
residential, commercial, office, industrial and other land uses, and the
general location of and purpose of all easements.
         d.   A tax impact study indicating the possible tax consequences the
proposed planned development will have upon the village and other affected
taxing bodies.
         e.   A traffic and transit impact study including a list of new street
construction and traffic control improvements necessary to accommodate the
estimated increase in traffic and traffic related problems occasioned by the
proposed development and a statement of the applicant's proposals for providing
those needed improvements.
         f.   A preliminary engineering study showing the location and adequacy
of existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water distribution
systems.
         g.   A written statement identifying existing natural and
environmental resources and features on the subject property, including its
topography, vegetation, soils, geology, and scenic view, and the impact of the
proposed planned development on such resources and features, including
proposals to preserve or protect such resources and features.
         h.   Schematic, soft line architectural elevations indicating the
general style of architecture and typical building materials.
         i.   A statement of the applicant's intent with respect to the
ownership, sale and leasing of the various completed units, structures, spaces
and areas within the proposed planned development.
         j.   If the planned development is to be constructed in stages or
units during a period extending beyond a single construction season, a
development schedule for each and every such stage stating the approximate
beginning and completion date, proportion of total public or common open space
to be provided for each use and with each development stage.
         k.   A detailed description of the financial assurances to be
presented to guarantee completion of all public improvements and private open
space to be provided in connection with the proposed planned development.
         l.   Evidence of the financing plan the applicant proposes to use to
complete the proposed planned development. The applicant's prior success in
completing projects of similar scope may be offered in support of this
requirement.
         m.   A preliminary plat of subdivision if required pursuant to the
subdivision ordinance.
The corporate authorities, or their designee, upon request of the owner or
applicant, in their sole and absolute discretion, may waive the requirement to
file any of the above listed items with the application.
   G.   Applications For Final Plan Approval: Every application filed pursuant
to section
12-17B-7 of this article shall, in addition to the required information set
forth in subsection E of this section, provide the following information:
      1.   The date on which development concept plan approvals were granted.
      2.   A statement and plan of the proposed treatment of the perimeter of
the proposed planned development, including materials and techniques to be
used.
      3.   When the proposed planned development, or stage thereof, includes
provision for public or common open space, a statement describing the provision
made for the dedication or care and maintenance of such open space. If it is
proposed that such open space be owned or maintained by any entity other than a
governmental authority, copies of the proposed articles of incorporation and
bylaws of such entity shall be submitted. When the property is to be dedicated,
a draft of the instrument of dedication shall be submitted.
      4.   Copies of any restrictive covenants to be recorded with respect to
property included in the final plan.
      5.   A statement summarizing all changes that have been made, or have
occurred, in any document, plan, data or information previously submitted,
together with a revised copy of any such document, plan or data.
      6.   A final plat of subdivision if required pursuant to the Berkeley
subdivision ordinance.
      7.   All engineering data and drawings required in connection with an
application for final subdivision approval under the subdivision ordinance (3
sets only).
      8.   All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication
of land and recordation of documents.
      9.   Hard line elevations and floor plans.
      10.   Proof from appropriate governmental agencies that all taxes on the
subject property have been paid and that all special assessments, taxes, or
other levies against the subject property or any part thereof have been paid in
full. (Ord. 05-03, 1-18-2005)
CHAPTER 18
APPENDICES
SECTION:
12-18-1: Appendix A; Parking Spaces And Aisles
12-18-2: Appendix B; Access Driveways
12-18-3: Appendix C; Yards
12-18-4: Appendix D; Dwelling Types
12-18-5: Appendix E; Spacing Between Structures
12-18-6: Appendix F; Spacing Between Structures
12-18-7: Appendix G; Spacing Between Structures
12-18-8: Appendix H; Building Height For Roof Construction
12-18-9: Appendix I; Form For Public Notice Of Hearing
12-18-10: Appendix J; Letter To Applicant, Property Owners
12-18-11: Appendix K; Letter To Applicant, Property Owners
12-18-12: Appendix L; Published Notice Of Hearing
12-18-1: APPENDIX A; PARKING SPACES AND AISLES:
MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF PARKING LOTS BY ANGLE OF PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9d3b07587d0de7f033f7795951285a4d8c47e324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2710.png]
 
 
Angle Of               Curb Length             Minimum  Lot Width 1 Square Feet
Parking    Stall Width Per Car     Stall Depth Driveway Row Plus 1  Per Car
                                               Width    Driveway
Along curb    10'      23'      10'      12'   22'      506
= 0o
30o           10'      20'1"    18'81/   11'   29'81/   599
45o           10'      14'21/   21'6"    13'   34'6"    490
60o           10'      11'7"    22'6"    18'   40'6"    470
90o           10'      10'      20'      24'   44'0"    440
 
 
           Lot Width Square   Lot Width 3             Lot Width 4
Angle Of   2 Rows    Feet Per Rows Plus 2 Square Feet Rows Plus 3 Square Feet
Parking    Plus 1    Car      Driveways   Per Car     Driveways   Per Car
           Driveway
Along curb    32'    368   54'      414      64'      368
= 0o
30o           48'7   488   70'1"    464      88'11"   447
45o           56'    398   82'      388      103'     366
60o           63'    365   97'6"    377      120'     348
90o           64'    320   108'     360      128'     320
 
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-2: APPENDIX B; ACCESS DRIVEWAYS:
   DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ACCESS DRIVEWAYS
      1.   Width Of Driveways (Measured at the lot line adjoining a street):
         a.   Residential Uses: Not less than nine feet (9') wide, and not more
than twenty two feet (22') wide.
         b.   Nonresidential Uses:
            (1)   Not less than fourteen feet (14') wide, or not more than
twenty feet (20') wide for a one-way driveway.
            (2)   Not less than twenty feet (20') wide for a two-way driveway
when twenty (20) or less parking spaces are being served.
            (3)   Not less than twenty four feet (24') wide for a two-way
driveway when more than twenty (20) parking spaces or two (2) or more loading
spaces are being served.
            (4)   Automotive service stations not less than twenty four feet
(24') wide, measured perpendicular to the centerline of such driveway.
            (5)   In any case not more than thirty five feet (35') wide.
      2.   Radius Connecting Street Pavement Edge And Driveway Edges:
         a.   Residential Uses: Not less than five feet (5').
         b.   Nonresidential Uses:
            (1)   Not less than fifteen feet (15') at the intersection of a
driveway and a street classified as major street or collector.
            (2)   Not less than eight feet (8') at the intersection of a
driveway and a street not classified as a major street or collector.
            (3)   For driveways intersecting street pavement edge with an angle
less than ninety degrees (90°). See item 3-b.
      3.   Angle At Intersection Of A Driveway And A Street:
         a.   An acute angle formed at the intersection of driveway and street
pavement edges shall not be less than sixty degrees (60°).
         b.   Any angle at the intersection of driveway edge and street
pavement edge that is less than ninety degrees (90°) shall modify the radius of
the curb as follows:
 
Angle      Radius
90 degrees 9 feet
80 degrees 7 feet
70 degrees 51/2 feet
60 degrees 4 feet
 
      4.   Spacing Between Separate Driveway Entrances On A Lot (Measured
between centerlines of 2 driveways, and at the front lot line or side lot line
adjoining a street):
         a.   Not less than eighty feet (80') on a street classified as major
street.
         b.   Not less than sixty feet (60') on a street classified as
collector street, except in residential district driveways serving one- or two-
family dwellings, not less than twenty feet (20').
         c.   Not less than forty feet (40') on a street not classified as
major or collector street, except in residential district driveways serving
one- or two-family dwellings, not less than twenty feet (20').
      5.   On Corner Lots, Spacing Between Driveway Entrance And Right Of Way
Line Of An Adjacent Intersecting Street (Measured from the nearest edge of the
driveway pavement at its intersection with the street right of way line to the
nearest right of way line of an adjacent intersecting street):
         a.   On streets not classified as major or collector streets, not less
than eight feet (8') to an adjacent intersecting major or collector street.
         b.   On streets classified as major or collector streets, not less
than fifteen feet (15') to an adjacent intersecting street not classified as
major or collector street. (2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-3: APPENDIX C; YARDS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9d3b07587d0de7f033f7795951285a4d8c47e324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2712.png]
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-4: APPENDIX D; DWELLING TYPES:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9d3b07587d0de7f033f7795951285a4d8c47e324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2714.png]
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-5: APPENDIX E; SPACING BETWEEN STRUCTURES:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9d3b07587d0de7f033f7795951285a4d8c47e324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2716.png]
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-6: APPENDIX F; SPACING BETWEEN STRUCTURES:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9d3b07587d0de7f033f7795951285a4d8c47e324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2718.png]
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-7: APPENDIX G; SPACING BETWEEN STRUCTURES:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9d3b07587d0de7f033f7795951285a4d8c47e324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2720.png]
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-8: APPENDIX H; BUILDING HEIGHT FOR ROOF CONSTRUCTION:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9d3b07587d0de7f033f7795951285a4d8c47e324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2722.png]
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-9: APPENDIX I; FORM FOR PUBLIC NOTICE OF HEARING:
   SUGGESTED FORM FOR PUBLIC NOTICE OF HEARING ON AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING
ORDINANCE AND/OR ZONING MAP BEFORE THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Notice is hereby given that a public hearing will be held by the Planning and
Zoning Commission of the Village of Berkeley, Illinois on  (day) ,  (month) ,
(date) ,  (year) , at the hour of        P.M. at  (common street address ,
Berkeley, Illinois at which time and place the Planning and Zoning Commission
will consider the proposed amendment to zoning ordinance and the zoning map of
Berkeley, Illinois, as follows:
      (Fill in: (1) Description of the subject property)
      (2) The present zoning classification)
      (3) Requested change)
All persons desiring to appear to be heard for or against said amendment may
appear at the said hearing and be heard thereon.
Dated this        day of  (month) ,  (year) . Planning and Zoning Commission of
the Village of Berkeley, Illinois.
By                             , Chairman
   Berkeley Planning and Zoning Commission
                              , Village Clerk
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-10: APPENDIX J; LETTER TO APPLICANT, PROPERTY OWNERS:
SAMPLE FORM OF LETTER TO APPLICANT AND SURROUNDING PROPERTY OWNERS ON HEARING
OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
   Village Of Berkeley Planning and Zoning Commission
   Date                      
                                   Re:                     
Name and Address                        
Dear Property Owner:
    A request to amend the zoning district boundaries of the Village of
Berkeley, has been filed with the Board of Trustees.
    A request for a special use permit has been filed with the Board of
Trustees, by  (name of applicant) .
The property in question is situated in the             zoning district and is
located at  (common street address) .
The request, if granted, would permit the applicant to use the property in the
following manner:
                                                                                                                                                                      .
The Planning and Zoning Commission will hold a public hearing on this
application on  (day) ,  (month) ,  (date) ,  (year) , at  (time)  P.M. in
(common street address) , at which time you may express your views on the
matter in person, by writing to this Commission, or by counsel, prior to the
Planning and Zoning Commission making its recommendations to the governing
body.
Yours very truly,
                     , Secretary
Village of Berkeley
Planning and Zoning Commission
Copy to Village Clerk
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-11: APPENDIX K; LETTER TO APPLICANT, PROPERTY OWNERS:
SAMPLE FORM OF LETTER TO APPLICANT AND SURROUNDING PROPERTY OWNERS ON HEARING
BY THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
   Village of Berkeley, Illinois
   Zoning Board Of Appeals
   Date                       
                                  Appeal Application No.       
Name and Address   Variation Request No.       
Dear Property Owner:
    An appeal application, from the Zoning Administrator's decision has been
filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals.
    A request for variation from the provision of Zoning Ordinance has been
filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals by  (name of applicant) .
The property in question is situated in the             zoning district and is
located at  (common street address) .
The request, if granted, would permit the applicant to use the property in the
following manner:
                                                                                                                                                                       
The Board of Appeals will hold a public hearing on this application on  (day) ,
(month) ,  (date) ,  (year)  at  (time)  P.M.
In  (common street address)  at which time you may express your views on the
matter in person, by writing to this Board, or by counsel.
Very Truly Yours,
                         , Secretary
Zoning Board of Appeals
Copy to Zoning Administrator
(2005 Zoning Code)
12-18-12: APPENDIX L; PUBLISHED NOTICE OF HEARING:
SUGGESTED FORM FOR PUBLISHED NOTICE OF HEARING ON VARIATION, BEFORE ZONING
BOARD OF APPEALS
Notice is hereby given that a public hearing will be held by the Zoning Board
of Appeals of the Village of Berkeley, Illinois, on  (day) ,  (month) ,  (date)
,  (year) , at the hour of        P.M., at  (common street address) .
Berkeley, Illinois.
At which time and place the Board will consider the proposed variation in the
regulations of the Zoning Ordinance of Berkeley, Illinois, as follows:
To Consider Variation
In                                                                                                   .
(Fill in: (1) Description of request)
      (2) Description of the property)
      (3) The variance requested)
All persons desiring to appear and be heard for or against said variation may
appear at the said hearing and be heard thereon.
Dated this       day of  (month) ,  (year) , Board of Appeals of the Village of
Berkeley, Illinois.
   By                          , Chairman
(2005 Zoning Code)
TITLE 13
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Purpose
13-1-2: Definitions
13-1-3: Registration, License And Franchises Required
13-1-4: Application To Existing Franchise Ordinances And Agreements
13-1-5: Interference With Cable Television Systems
13-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this title is to:
   A.   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services;
   B.   Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications providers and services;
   C.   Promote competition in telecommunications;
   D.   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services;
   E.   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the village;
   F.   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the village
for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
   G.   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in
public trust by the village;
   H.   Assure that the village's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
   I.   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the village and the
residents of the village for permitting private use of the public ways;
   J.   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations
of the village;
   K.   Assure that the village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety and welfare;
   L.   Enable the village to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof,
the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the
context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or
controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.
ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE: Reserved.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, 47 USC section 532 et
seq., as now and hereafter amended.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide
"cable service" within the village as that term is defined in the cable act.
CABLE SERVICE: Shall have the same meaning provided by the cable act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way that
is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or
lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers on a national level.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The state administrative agency, or lawful
successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers,
services and providers in the state of Illinois.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of
way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications
facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground
supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and
individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for
motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village which
has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as
those terms are defined in this section, now or hereafter owned by the village,
but only to the extent of the village's right, title, interest or authority to
grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the
necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and
regulations of the Illinois commerce commission, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages a plant, equipment or property
within the village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including,
but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas,
electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means and includes every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any
ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease,
or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data,
image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: See definition of Telecommunications Facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under
the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports
for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the
lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois commerce
commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the village and acquired, established,
dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with
telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not
limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
public ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications services.
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley.
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the village,
other than public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined in
this section, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village
which are not subject to right of way licensing and franchising as provided in
this title. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-1-3: REGISTRATION, LICENSE AND FRANCHISES REQUIRED:
   A.   Registration: Except as otherwise provided herein, all
telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of
transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications originating or
terminating in the village shall register with the village pursuant to chapter
2 of this title.
   B.   License: Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications
carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise
locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way
of the village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons and areas outside the village shall first obtain a license granting the
use of such public ways from the village pursuant to chapter 3 of this title.
   C.   Telecommunications Franchise: Except as otherwise provided herein, any
telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain
or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any
public way of the village, and to also provide telecommunications service to
persons or areas in the village shall first obtain a franchise granting the use
of such public ways from the village pursuant to chapter 4 of this title. (Ord.
96-10, 5-7-1996)
   D.   Cable Television Franchise: Except as otherwise provided herein, any
telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain
or locate telecommunications facilities in any public way of the village for
the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the village shall first
obtain a cable franchise from the village. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996; amd. 2016
Code)
13-1-4: APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS:
This title shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or
franchise agreement until:
   A.   The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement.
   B.   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-1-5: INTERFERENCE WITH CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS:
   A.   Whoever knowingly and without authority causes a connection, whether
physically, electronically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any
part of a cable television system within the village for the purpose of taking
or receiving television signals, pictures, programs or sounds, or for the
purpose of enabling others to receive such signals, pictures, programs or
sounds, commits an offense under this section.
   B.   Whoever knowingly and without authority tampers with, removes or causes
injury to any cable, wires or equipment used for the distribution of television
or radio signals, pictures, programs or sounds in a cable television system
commits an offense under this section. (1976 Code § 9.58.010; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
13-2-1: Purpose
13-2-2: Registration Required
13-2-3: Fee
13-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of registration under this chapter is to:
   A.   Provide the village with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the village, or that own or operate
telecommunications facilities within the village.
   B.   Assist the village in enforcement of this title.
   C.   Assist the village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the village.
   D.   Assist the village in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-2-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any
telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the
village or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities
within the village, shall register with the village pursuant to this chapter,
on forms to be provided by the village clerk, which shall include the
following:
   A.   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates.
   B.   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
   C.   A description of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications
facilities within the village.
   D.   A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the village.
   E.   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject
to public way licensing or franchising under this title.
   F.   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the village.
   G.   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois commerce
commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the
village.
   H.   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the federal communications commission to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the village.
   I.   Such other information as the village clerk may reasonably require.
(Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-2-3: FEE:
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider
shall be accompanied by a fee as established in the annual fee schedule. (Ord.
96-10, 5-7-1996; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
13-3-1: License Required
13-3-2: Application For License
13-3-3: Grant Or Denial Determined
13-3-4: Extension Of Determination
13-3-5: Agreement Required
13-3-6: Restrictions On License
13-3-7: Term Of License
13-3-8: License Route
13-3-9: Location Of Facilities
13-3-10: Construction Permits Required
13-3-11: Compensation To Village
13-3-12: Service To Village Users
13-3-13: Amendment Of License
13-3-14: Renewal Of License
13-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the village for the sole
purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside
the village. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this chapter
shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information:
   A.   The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
   B.   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by the licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
   C.   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
   D.   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunications, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
      3.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
      4.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
   E.   If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
   F.   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   G.   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      1.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
      2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   H.   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
   I.   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   J.   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
   K.   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications
facilities and services described in the application.
   L.   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
   M.   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to chapter 6 of this
title.
   N.   Such other and further information as may be required by the village
administrator. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-3: GRANT OR DENIAL DETERMINED:
Within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application under section
13-3-2 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying
the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
   A.   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   B.   The legal ability of the applicant.
   C.   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed
facilities.
   D.   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
   E.   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
   F.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
   G.   The service that the applicant will provide to the community and the
region.
   H.   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license
is granted.
   I.   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
   J.   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
   K.   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-4: EXTENSION OF DETERMINATION:
The corporate authorities reserve the right to extend the time period in which
they shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application,
in whole or in part, an additional sixty (60) days. Written notice containing
the reasons for the extension shall be provided to the applicant. The decision
to extend the time period is at the sole discretion of the corporate
authorities. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-5: AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the
village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms
and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of the
village will be granted. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-6: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE:
   A.   No license granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.
   B.   No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or
interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 96-10,
5-7-1996)
13-3-7: TERM OF LICENSE:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license
granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years. (Ord. 96-10,
5-7-1996)
13-3-8: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this chapter shall be limited to a
grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-
1996)
13-3-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
   A.   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
   B.   A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install
its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles
only, and then only if surplus space is available.
   C.   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also
locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
   D.   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the village
engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
   E.   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of
a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional
ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to
future telecommunications carriers. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS REQUIRED:
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in chapter 6 of this title; provided,
however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a licensee
from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in
a license agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially
equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-
1996)
13-3-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each license granted under this chapter is subject to the village's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee, provided, nothing
in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a licensee from agreeing to the
compensation to be paid. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-12: SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to
persons or areas within the village upon submitting an application for approval
pursuant to chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-13: AMENDMENT OF LICENSE:
   A.   A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the village which are not
included in a license previously granted under this title.
   B.   If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the
village shall grant a license amendment without further application. (Ord. 96-
10, 5-7-1996)
13-3-14: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Application For Renewal: A grantee that desires to renew its license
under this chapter shall, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less
than ninety (90) days before expiration of the current license, file an
application with the village for renewal of its license which shall include the
following information:
      1.   The information required pursuant to section
13-3-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between
the village and the grantee.
   B.   Grant Or Denial Determined: Within sixty (60) days after receiving a
complete application under subsection A of this section, the corporate
authorities shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal
application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the
renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the
reasons for nonrenewal.
      1.   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      2.   The legal ability of the applicant.
      3.   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
      4.   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this title and
the license agreement.
      5.   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules
and policies.
      6.   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to
use the public ways will serve the community interest.
   C.   Conditions Of Renewal: No license shall be renewed until any ongoing
violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the license agreement,
or of the requirements of this title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the
corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the village.
(Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
CHAPTER 4
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
SECTION:
13-4-1: Franchise Required
13-4-2: Application For Franchise
13-4-3: Grant Or Denial Determined
13-4-4: Extension Of Determination
13-4-5: Agreement Required
13-4-6: Restrictions On Franchise
13-4-7: Term Of Franchise
13-4-8: Franchise Territory
13-4-9: Location Of Facilities
13-4-10: Construction Permits Required
13-4-11: Compensation To Village
13-4-12: Service To Village Users
13-4-13: Amendment Of Franchise
13-4-14: Renewal Of Franchise
13-4-1: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the village and to provide
telecommunications services to any person or area in the village. (Ord. 96-10,
5-7-1996)
13-4-2: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this chapter
shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information:
   A.   The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of
the applicant.
   B.   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed
facilities.
   C.   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
   D.   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunications, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
      3.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
      4.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
   E.   If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
   F.   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   G.   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      1.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
      2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   H.   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
   I.   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   J.   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
   K.   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical
qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications
facilities and services described in the application.
   L.   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
   M.   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone
service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
   N.   An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications
facilities in the village that the applicant intends to use or lease.
   O.   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will
offer or make available to the village and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
   P.   A description of the applicant's access and line extension policies.
   Q.   The area or areas of the village the applicant desires to serve and a
schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
   R.   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to chapter 5 of this
title.
   S.   Such other and further information as may be requested by the village
administrator. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-3: GRANT OR DENIAL DETERMINED:
Within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application under section
13-4-2 of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying
the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
   A.   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   B.   The legal ability of the applicant.
   C.   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed
facilities.
   D.   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
   E.   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
   F.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
   G.   The service that the applicant will provide to the community and
region.
   H.   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
franchise requested is granted.
   I.   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
   J.   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
   K.   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-4: EXTENSION OF DETERMINATION:
The corporate authorities reserve the right to extend the time period in which
they shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application,
in whole or in part, an additional sixty (60) days. Written notice containing
the reasons for the extension shall be provided to the applicant. The decision
to extend the time period is at the sole discretion of the corporate
authorities. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-5: AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the village
have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the
village will be granted. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-6: RESTRICTIONS ON FRANCHISE:
   A.   No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive
right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the
village for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.
   B.   No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title
or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 96-10,
5-7-1996)
13-4-7: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications
franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord.
96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-8: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be limited to
the specific geographic area of the village to be served by the franchise
grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 96-
10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
   A.   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
   B.   A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
   C.   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
   D.   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the village
engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
   E.   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of
a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional
ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to
future carriers. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS REQUIRED:
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in chapter 6 of this title; provided,
however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a
franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures
provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction
practices. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the village's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing
in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a franchisee from agreeing to
the compensation to be paid. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-12: SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS:
   A.   A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to
any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's
services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a
franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently
situated customers.
   B.   A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to
the village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-13: AMENDMENT OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to
locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the village which
are not included in a franchise previously granted under this title.
   B.   If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the
village shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. (Ord.
96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-4-14: RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Application For Renewal: A grantee that desires to renew its franchise
under this chapter shall, not more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less
than one hundred fifty (150) days before expiration of the current franchise,
file an application with the village for renewal of its franchise which shall
include the following information:
      1.   The information required pursuant to section
13-4-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between
the village and the grantee.
   B.   Grant Or Denial Determined: Within sixty (60) days after receiving a
complete application under subsection A of this section, the corporate
authorities shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal
application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the
renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the
reasons for nonrenewal.
      1.   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      2.   The legal ability of the applicant.
      3.   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
      4.   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this title and
the franchise agreement.
      5.   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules
and policies.
      6.   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to
use the public ways will serve the community interest.
   C.   Condition Of Renewal: No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing
violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement,
or of the requirements of this title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the
corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the village.
(Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
CHAPTER 5
FEES AND COMPENSATION
SECTION:
13-5-1: Purpose
13-5-2: Application And Review Fee
13-5-3: Other Village Costs
13-5-4: Reserved Compensation For Public Ways
13-5-5: Compensation For Village Property
13-5-6: Construction Permit Fee
13-5-7: Annual Fee
13-5-8: Fees And Compensation Are Additional
13-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the payment and recovery of
all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the village related to the
enforcement and administration of this title. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-5-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
   A.   Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to chapter 3 or 4 of
this title shall pay a fee as established in the annual fee schedule or a
percentage of the estimated cost of the applicant's proposed telecommunications
facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional engineer and as
established in the annual fee schedule, whichever is greater.
   B.   The application and review fee shall be deposited with the village as
part of the application filed pursuant to chapter 3 or 4 of this title.
   C.   An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn,
abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its application and review
fee written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under this section,
less:
      1.   An amount as established in the annual fee schedule.
      2.   All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the village in
connection with the application. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996; amd. 2016 Code)
13-5-3: OTHER VILLAGE COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written
demand therefor, reimburse the village for all direct and indirect costs and
expenses incurred by the village in connection with any modification,
amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or
franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-5-4: RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS:
The village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications
license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the
village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the
granted property rights. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-5-5: COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use
and occupy village property for the installation of telecommunications
facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the village. (Ord.
96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-5-6: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit
fee as established in the annual fee schedule or a percentage of the estimated
cost of constructing the telecommunication facilities, as certified by the
applicant's engineer and approved by the village engineer and as established in
the annual fee schedule, whichever is greater. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996; amd. 2016
Code)
13-5-7: ANNUAL FEE:
Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each license
or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the village as
established in the annual fee schedule as reimbursement for village costs in
connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of
the public ways in behalf of the public and existing or future users. (Ord. 96-
10, 5-7-1996; amd. 2016 Code)
13-5-8: FEES AND COMPENSATION ARE ADDITIONAL:
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any
compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in section
13-5-4 of this chapter, are separate from, and additional to, any and all
federal, state, local and village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on
account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications
services. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
CHAPTER 6
CONDITIONS OF LICENSE AND FRANCHISE
SECTION:
13-6-1: Compliance With JULIE
13-6-2: Construction Permits
13-6-3: Interference With Public Ways; Damage To Property Prohibited
13-6-4: Notice To Village Of Work
13-6-5: Maintenance Of Facilities
13-6-6: Relocation Or Removal Of Facilities
13-6-7: Nonliability Of Village For Damaged Facilities
13-6-8: Restoration Of Public Ways And Property
13-6-9: Facilities Map
13-6-10: Duty To Provide Information
13-6-11: Leased Capacity
13-6-12: Insurance, Indemnification, Security, Bonds
13-6-13: Coordination Of Construction Activities
13-6-14: Transfer And Assignment Of License Or Franchise
13-6-15: Transactions Affecting Control Of License Or Franchise
13-6-16: Revocation Or Termination Of License Or Franchise
13-6-1: COMPLIANCE WITH JULIE:
All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction in
the public ways, comply with all regulations of JULIE. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-2: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits
for telecommunications facilities as required in title 8, chapter 2 of this
code. However, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the village and a grantee
from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in
a license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide
substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.
(Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996; amd. 2016 Code)
13-6-3: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC WAYS; DAMAGE TO PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
   A.   No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its
telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of
the public ways by the village, by the general public or by other persons
authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities
shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the
village engineer.
   B.   No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's
behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair
or damage any village property, public ways of the village, other ways or other
property located in, on or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-4: NOTICE TO VILLAGE OF WORK:
   A.   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no
license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee's behalf,
shall commence any nonemergency work in or about the public ways of the village
or other ways without ten (10) working days' advance notice to the village.
   B.   In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may
commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the
circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the village as promptly as
possible before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as possible
if advance notice is not practicable. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-5: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and
safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state
and local requirements. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-6: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: Within thirty (30) days following written notice
from the village, a license or franchise grantee shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the corporate
authorities shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary for:
      1.   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any village
or other public improvement in or upon the public ways.
      2.   The operations of the village or other governmental entity in or
upon the public ways.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the village, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or
other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized
telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public
ways of the village shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or
appurtenances from the public ways of the village. A telecommunications system
or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following
circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications
license or franchise.
      2.   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the
village.
      3.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise.
      4.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior issuance of a required construction permit.
      5.   If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location
not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation: The village retains the right and
privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the
public ways of the village as the village may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
(Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-7: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE FOR DAMAGED FACILITIES:
Unless directly and proximately caused by the wilful, intentional or malicious
acts by the village, the village shall not be liable for any damage to or loss
of any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the village as a
result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements,
construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public
ways by or on behalf of the village. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-8: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY:
   A.   When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its
behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or village
property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions
therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed
before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the village.
   B.   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration
required by this section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the affected
ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the licensee's sole
expense, and the licensee shall promptly undertake and complete the required
permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent
such permanent restoration.
   C.   A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for
the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage
to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such
ways or property. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-9: FACILITIES MAP:
Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the village with an accurate
map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within
the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 96-10,
5-7-1996)
13-6-10: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
Within ten (10) days of a written request from the village administrator, each
license or franchise grantee shall furnish the village with information
sufficient to demonstrate:
   A.   That grantee has complied with all requirements of this title.
   B.   That all municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due
the village in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities
provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
   C.   All books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the grantee
with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made available
for inspection by the village at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 96-10,
5-7-1996)
13-6-11: LEASED CAPACITY:
A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior village
approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers, provided:
   A.   Grantee shall furnish the village with a copy of any such lease or
agreement.
   B.   The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the
requirements of this title. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-12: INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION, SECURITY, BONDS:
   A.   Insurance Requirements:
      1.   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each
grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the village and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as co-insureds:
         a.   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:
            (1)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or
death to each person;
            (2)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
            (3)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability.
         b.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with
a limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each person and three
million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each accident.
         c.   Workers' compensation within statutory limits and employer's
liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
         d.   Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products-completed hazard with limits of not
less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
      2.   The liability insurance policies required by this subsection A shall
be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications
license or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is
operating without a franchise or license hereunder, or is engaged in the
removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall
contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village
Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
      3.   Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the village of said notice,
and in no event later than thirty (30) days prior to said cancellation, the
grantee shall obtain and furnish to the village replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this subsection A.
   B.   General Indemnification: Each license or franchise agreement shall
include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee's express undertaking to
defend, indemnify and hold the village and its officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and
expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense,
arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct
of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal
of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering
telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts
or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this title or by a grant
agreement made or entered into pursuant to this title.
   C.   Performance And Construction Surety: Before a license or franchise
granted pursuant to this title is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the
grantee shall provide and deposit such monies, bonds, letters of credit or
other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the village as may be
required by this title or by an applicable license or franchise agreement.
   D.   Security Fund:
      1.   Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with the
village by depositing the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with
the village in cash, an unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument
acceptable to the village, which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense
of the grantee so long as any of grantee's telecommunications facilities are
located within the public ways of the village.
      2.   The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete
performance of this title, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the
village pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to
comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the
village.
      3.   Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the village
shall give written notice to the grantee:
         a.   Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the
damages, costs or expenses which the village has incurred by reason of
grantee's act or default.
         b.   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy
the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable.
         c.   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies
due the village before the village withdraws the amount thereof from the
security fund, if applicable.
         d.   That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act,
default or failure described in the notice with the village administrator or
his designee.
      4.   Grantees shall replenish the security fund within fourteen (14) days
after written notice from the village that there is a deficiency in the amount
of the fund.
   E.   Construction And Completion Bond:
      1.   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a
performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the village equal
to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of constructing
grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways of the village
shall be deposited before construction is commenced.
      2.   The construction bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days
after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the village
engineer, including restoration of public ways and other property affected by
the construction.
      3.   The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the
village:
         a.   Timely completion of construction.
         b.   Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards.
         c.   Proper location of the facilities as specified by the village.
         d.   Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the
construction.
         e.   The submission of as built drawings after completion of the work
as required by this title.
         f.   Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens
for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 96-
10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-13: COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
   A.   All grantees are required to cooperate with the village and with each
other.
   B.   By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the village with a
schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public ways.
   C.   Each grantee shall meet with the village, other grantees and users of
the public ways annually or as determined by the village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
   D.   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the village engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-14: TRANSFER AND ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE:
   A.   Except in the event of the merger, consolidation or reorganization of a
licensee or franchisee, the licensee or franchisee shall not have the right to
assign its rights and privileges under this title or to otherwise transfer them
in any manner whatsoever, without the prior written approval of the village,
pursuant to an ordinance enacted by the corporate authorities.
   B.   In the event of a transfer or assignment of the rights and privileges
of the licensee or franchisee under this title, all provisions of this title
which are obligatory upon, or which inure to the benefit of a licensee or
franchisee, shall also be obligatory upon and shall inure to the benefit of any
and all successors and assigns of the licensee or franchisee. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-
1996)
13-6-15: TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE:
Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of ten
percent (10%) or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of
the ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise,
of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control
of the capacity or bandwidth of grantee's telecommunication system, facilities
or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or transfer
requiring village approval pursuant to section
13-6-13 of this chapter. Transactions between affiliated entities are not
exempt from village approval. (Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
13-6-16: REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF LICENSE OR FRANCHISE:
   A.   Reasons For Revocation Or Termination: A license or franchise granted
by the village to use or occupy public ways of the village may be revoked for
the following reasons:
      1.   Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways of
the village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
      2.   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
      3.   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
      4.   Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
      5.   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or
license assets, or a substantial interest therein.
      6.   Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in
any application to the village.
      7.   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
      8.   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this title.
      9.   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due
the village.
      10.   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
      11.   Violation of material provisions of this title.
      12.   Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise
agreement.
   B.   Notice Requirements: In the event that the village administrator
believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, he shall
give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance,
providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the
violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of
time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, to furnish evidence:
      1.   That corrective action has been or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
      2.   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
      3.   That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
   C.   Hearing: In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence
reasonably satisfactory to the village administrator as provided in subsection
B of this section, the administrator shall refer the apparent violation or
noncompliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall
provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard
concerning the matter.
   D.   Standards For Revocation Or Lesser Sanctions: If persuaded that the
grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this
title, or of a franchise or license agreement, the corporate authorities shall
determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some
lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and
gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
      1.   Whether the misconduct was egregious.
      2.   Whether substantial harm resulted.
      3.   Whether the violation was intentional.
      4.   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
      5.   Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
      6.   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
(Ord. 96-10, 5-7-1996)
CHAPTER 7
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
13-7-1: Purpose
13-7-2: Interaction With Other Code Provisions And Laws
13-7-3: Definitions
13-7-4: Zoning
13-7-5: Permits; Application Process
13-7-6: Construction
13-7-7: Permit Duration
13-7-8: Height Limitations
13-7-9: General Requirements
13-7-10: Stealth, Concealment And Design Standards
13-7-11: Reservation Of Village Utility Pole Space
13-7-12: Applicability Of Existing Agreements
13-7-13: Collocation On Village Owned Infrastructure
13-7-14: Notice Of Sale Or Transfer
13-7-15: Abandonment
13-7-16: Dispute Resolution
13-7-17: Indemnification
13-7-18: Insurance
13-7-19: Maintenance Of Small Wireless Facilities
13-7-20: Revocation Of Permit
13-7-21: Exceptions To Applicability
13-7-1: PURPOSE:
Consistent with the requirements of the small wireless facilities deployment
act, Public Act 100-585 ("Act"), and in anticipation of a continued increased
demand for placement of small wireless facilities of the type regulated by the
Act both within the public rights of way and in other locations within the
jurisdiction of the village, the village board has found it to be in the best
interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the village to
adopt the code amendments set forth in this chapter in order to establish
generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location,
construction, deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and
removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights of way
and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the village so as to, among
other things:
   A.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within public
rights of way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the village;
   B.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small
wireless facilities are installed;
   C.   Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and
prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are
installed;
   D.   Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to small wireless facilities;
   E.   Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic
landmarks or districts within the village; and
   F.   Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not
negatively impact public safety and the village's public safety technology.
(Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-2: INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS:
   A.   Other Code Provisions: The provisions of this chapter are intended to
supplement general requirements and standards relative to the siting of
telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements for
construction within public rights of way set forth elsewhere within this code,
including, but not limited to, the regulations set forth in title 8, chapter 2.
In the event of a conflict, however, the provisions of this chapter shall
control in all matters involving small wireless facilities, as defined below.
   B.   State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state
laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, a wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum
extent possible without violating such federal or state laws or regulations.
(Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT: The small wireless facilities deployment act (Public Act 100-585).
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the national electric safety code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
AUTHORITY: The village or other unit of local government that has jurisdiction
and control for use of public rights of way as provided by the Illinois highway
code for placements within public rights of way or has zoning or land use
control for placements not within public rights of way.
COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole, whether existing or new.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §153(33), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §522
(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The federal communications commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the national
register of historic places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
keeper of the national register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the national register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the nationwide programmatic agreement codified at
47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the certified
local government program of the Illinois state historic preservation office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois state
historic preservation office is pending.
LAW: A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width,
and twelve (12) inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no
longer than eleven (11) inches.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the village or other permitting
authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in the public
utilities act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-105.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT OF WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. RIGHT
OF WAY does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: A person licensed under the laws of the state of Illinois
to practice structural engineering.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley.
VILLAGE UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the village in public
rights of way.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber-optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless
services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any person
who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a non-discriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-4: ZONING:
   A.   Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and
shall not be subject to zoning review, if collocated in rights of way in any
zoning district, or outside rights of way in the following zoning districts:
      1.   M-1 restricted manufacturing district;
      2.   M-2 manufacturing district;
      3.   M-3 manufacturing district;
   B.   In all other zoning districts, the village's normal zoning approvals,
processes and restrictions shall apply, if zoning approval, processes or
restrictions are required by the village's zoning ordinance. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-
2018)
13-7-5: PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this chapter, a permit to
collocate a small wireless facility within the village is required in all
cases. Permits are subject to the following.
      1.   Permit Applications: Permit applications for the collocation of
small wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the village for
such purpose. In addition to any generally applicable information required of
other communications service providers or for other installations in the public
right of way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate small wireless
facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide the
following information:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a village utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the structural engineering practice act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital
photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before and after" views
demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed wireless facilities on the
surrounding environment;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the structural engineering practice act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
         f.   Certification that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, the
collocation complies with the written design standards established by the
village, and with the various other requirements set forth in this chapter and
code;
         g.   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from
the village (for example, zoning approval, where required), other agencies and
units of government with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location
and operation of the small wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence
of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
         h.   In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be
attached to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an
entity other than the village, legally competent evidence of the consent of the
owner of such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Means Of Submission: Permit applications, along with all supporting
information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be
submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the village.
      3.   Multiple Applications For Same Location: Multiple applications for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.
      4.   Permit Application Fees: All applications for collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in
the following amounts:
 
Request to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of $1,000.00
a new utility pole
Request to collocate a single small
wireless facility on an existing utility   $650.00
pole or wireless support structure
Request to collocate multiple small
wireless facilities on existing utility    $350.00 per small wireless facility
poles or wireless support structures
addressed in a single application
 
      5.   Permit Review Timelines:
         a.   Completeness of Application:
            (1)   Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities
shall be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of the Act, this
chapter, and other applicable provisions of this code. Within thirty (30) days
after receiving an application, the village must determine whether the
application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is
incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing information.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends a notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
            (2)   An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails
to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date
when all documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the
village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the
village.
         b.   Existing Pole Or Wireless Support Structure: Requests for the
collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a non-discriminatory basis and
either approved or denied within ninety (90) days of submission of a completed
application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the village fails
to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days, subject to the
following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be
deemed approved on the later of the ninetieth day after submission of the
completed application, or the tenth day after receipt of the deemed approved
notice by the village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the village shall
not preclude the village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
         c.   New Utility Pole: Requests for the collocation of small wireless
facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a non-discriminatory basis and either approved or denied within
one hundred and twenty (120) days of submission of a completed application. A
permit application shall be deemed approved if the village fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days, subject to the
following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be
deemed approved on the later of the one hundred twentieth day after submission
of the completed application, or the tenth day after receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the
village shall not preclude the village from denying the permit within the
allowed time limit.
      6.   Tolling: The time limitations for approval or denial of applications
shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as
set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, state or
federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
      7.   Pole Replacement: Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's
sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or code relative to the siting of small wireless
facilities, or other applicable codes and regulations that concern public
safety.
      8.   Denial: The village shall deny an application that does not meet the
requirements of this chapter. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall be
provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall include
the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based.
      9.   Resubmittal After Denial: In the case of a permit denial, an
applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and
resubmit a revised application once within thirty (30) days after the notice of
denial is sent without payment of an additional application fee. The village
shall have thirty (30) days to approve or deny the resubmitted application or
it is deemed approved, if the applicant has notified the village of its
intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which notification may be submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of
a resubmitted application is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original
notice of denial. This subsection does not apply if a revised application is
not resubmitted within thirty (30) days, or curing any deficiencies in the
original application requires review of a new location, new or different
structure for collocation, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated
with the small wireless facility. In such cases, a new application and
application fee are required.
      10.   Consolidated Applications: Consolidated applications for small
wireless facilities for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small
wireless facilities shall be allowed if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the
same type of structure. Each consolidated application shall provide all the
information required by this chapter for each small wireless facility at each
location. If such an application includes incomplete information for one (1) or
more small wireless facility collocations, or includes requests for small
wireless facilities that do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are
otherwise denied, the village may remove such collocation requests from the
application and treat them as separate requests. Separate permits may be issued
for each collocation approved in a consolidated application.
      11.   Alternate Locations: If an applicant is seeking to install a new
utility pole as part of its application, the village may propose that the small
wireless facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing wireless
support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation.
The applicant shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has
the right to use the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the
alternate location imposes technical limits or additional material costs as
determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location
based on the foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence
in the form of a written certification, under oath, describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate
location from being utilized.
      12.   Exemptions: No application, permit approval or fee shall be
required from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the right
of way when the work in question is for:
         a.   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless
facilities if the wireless provider notifies the village in writing at least
forty eight hours prior to the planned maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village in writing at least ten (10) days prior to the
planned replacement and includes equipment specifications, including (i)
equipment type and model numbers, for the replacement of equipment consistent
with the equipment specifications information required on a permit application
for original installation; and (ii) information sufficient to establish that
the replacement is substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide
all information necessary and requested by the village to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The village has the sole right and
responsibility to determine if a proposed small wireless facility is
substantially similar to the existing small wireless facility; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are
strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety
codes.
   B.   The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers from
village permitting requirements where traffic patterns are affected or lane
closures are required. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-6: CONSTRUCTION:
Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within one
hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of the permit, unless the village agrees
to extend the period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a village
utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the
site, provided the applicant has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Permits that are not completed
within applicable timelines shall be void absent an extension granted in
writing by the village. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-7: PERMIT DURATION:
Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this chapter shall be
for a period of five (5) years. Permits are subject to renewal at the end of
the five (5) year permit period for a successive five (5) year term so long as
the installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the
time of renewal. A finding by the village at the time of a request for renewal
that an installation does not comply with the applicable code provisions in
force at the time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If the Act is
repealed or found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
permits granted by the village under this chapter shall terminate at the end of
their current term. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-8: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Antenna Installations: The maximum permitted height of a small wireless
facility is ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure
on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   B.   New Poles: The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
      1.   Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted, and that is located within three
hundred (300) feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right of way within the village. The village
may designate which intersecting right of way within three hundred (300) feet
of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the
height limitation for such facility; or
      2.   Forty five (45) feet above ground level.
   C.   Waiver Process: A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the
village administrator or his or her designee from the maximum permitted height
of a new pole set forth in this section, if the wireless provider can establish
that:
      1.   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or
practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created
by the wireless provider; and
      2.   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new
utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this
section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to
function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
      3.   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support
structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new
pole allowed by this section, is not technically feasible. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-
2018)
13-7-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Safety Technology: A wireless provider's operation of a small
wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public
safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR Part 22.970 through 47 CFR
Part 22.973 and 47 CFR Part 90.672 through 47 CFR Part 90.675. The burden to
establish the good faith effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall
timely deliver to the village all information necessary to demonstrate its
efforts to resolve the interference consistent with the code of federal
regulations sections cited above. Failure to remedy the interference as
required herein shall constitute a public nuisance and the small wireless
facility may be abated through the procedures for abatement of such nuisances
set forth in this code.
   B.   A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any wireless
facility that:
      1.   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on a
right of way;
      2.   Obstructs the legal use of right of way by utility users;
      3.   Violates non-discriminatory applicable codes;
      4.   Violates or conflicts with title 8, chapter 2 or title 13, or other
applicable regulations set forth in this code or otherwise adopted by the
village, except to the extent such chapters, sections or regulations may be
modified by the provisions of this chapter; or
      5.   Violates the federal Americans with disabilities act of 1990, 42
U.S.C. §12101 et seq.
   C.   Contractual Requirements: Wireless providers shall comply with all
requirements imposed by a contract between the village and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles
and ground-mounted equipment located in the right of way.
   D.   Ground-Mounted Equipment: Wireless providers shall comply with any
ground- mounted equipment requirements within rights of way as set forth in
title 8, chapter 2 of this code.
   E.   Undergrounding:
      1.   The wireless provider shall comply with village code provisions,
policies or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements, including
section
8-2-9 of this code, that prohibit the installation of new or the modification
of existing utility poles or equipment in the right of way.
      2.   A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the village
administrator or his or her designee to allow wireless facilities to be located
above-ground in an area where village ordinances or regulations prohibit or
restrict above-ground facilities if the wireless provider can establish that:
         a.   Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is no
reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right of
way;
         b.   An above-ground wireless facility at the proposed location is
necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area;
         c.   An above-ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety hazard;
         d.   An above-ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies;
         e.   Space exists within the public right of way to accommodate the
above- ground wireless facility at the proposed location;
         f.   An above-ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not create a safety hazard;
         g.   The above-ground wireless facility is located and designed in
such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
         h.   In any historical area, that the above-ground wireless facility
will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
      3.   Screening For Ground Mounted Facilities: Where a ground-mounted
facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape architect.
Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous planting
materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance
of all landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan.
      4.   Future Undergrounding: The village may, from time to time, make a
decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type
generally, such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of
the village. In the event that such a utility pole has a collocated small
wireless facility in place at the time of such a decision, the village shall
either:
         a.   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a
reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of
the small wireless facility; or
         b.   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole
so it can maintain service from that location.
   F.   Collocation Limits:
      1.   Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      2.   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subsection, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the national electric safety code as published
by the institute of electrical and electronics engineers.
   G.   Code Compliance: Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes
and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. (Ord. 18-
38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-10: STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
Every wireless facility installation shall comply with the following standards.
   A.   General Stealth, Concealment And Design Standards: Installations shall
comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable
to utility installations in the public right of way, as set forth in title 8,
chapter 2 of this code, as well as any written design standards that are
generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment, design and aesthetic requirements that are otherwise identified by
the village in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the village board of
trustees, in the village's comprehensive plan, or in a written design plan that
applies to other occupiers of the rights of way, including on a historic
landmark or in a historic district.
   B.   Historic Districts And Landmarks: For areas designated as historic
districts, or on buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks
pursuant to federal or state law, in addition to the stealth, concealment and
design requirements referenced above, the following additional restrictions/
conditions apply to the installation of small wireless facilities: small
wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials that are consistent with
the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with any buildings or
structures designated as historic landmarks or located within a designated
historic district, and shall be designed to blend with the surrounding
historical landmarks and/or district in design and color.
   C.   Historic District Or Landmark Limitations:
      1.   Any stealth, concealment and design standards in a historic district
or on a historic landmark, including restrictions on a specific category of
utility poles, may not have the effect of prohibiting any provider's
technology. Such stealth, concealment and design measures shall not be
considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size
restrictions of a small wireless facility.
      2.   This section shall not be construed to limit the village's
enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements
adopted pursuant to the Illinois state agency historic resources preservation
act or the national historic preservation act of 1966, 54 U.S.C. §300101 et
seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-
2018)
13-7-11: RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE:
The village may reserve space on village-owned utility poles for future public
safety uses or for village electric utility uses. Such reservation may preclude
collocation of small wireless facilities if the village reasonably determines
that the village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. (Ord. 18-38, 7-
17-2018)
13-7-12: APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Existing Installations: Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
   B.   Applications Received Between June 1, 2018 And June 1, 2020: Subject to
any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place
between the village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of
small wireless facilities on village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the village
from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates,
fees and terms of this chapter and the Act received after June 1, 2020,
whichever is later.
   C.   Applications Received After June 1, 2020: Subject to any applicable
termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the
village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless
facilities on village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until
receipt by the village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is
accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 18-38,
7-17-2018)
13-7-13: COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE:
   A.   Fee: The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a
village-owned utility pole located in a right of way shall be the higher of:
      1.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per small wireless facility;
or
      2.   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
providers use of space on the pole.
   B.   Exception: Small wireless facilities collocated on village-owned
utility poles located outside of public rights of way are not subject to the
rate limitations in this section.
   C.   Attachment Agreement: An attachment agreement in a form approved by the
village is required for any collocation upon any village-owned utility pole or
wireless support structure. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-14: NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER:
A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or
control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the
village, provide written notice to the village of such sale or transfer of
control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-15: ABANDONMENT:
   A.   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the
facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after
receipt of written notice from the village notifying it of the abandonment. The
notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
by the village to the owner at its last known address. If the small wireless
facility is not removed within ninety (90) days after receipt of such notice,
such wireless facility shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the village may
remove or cause the removal of such facility, and recover or place a lien for
its costs, pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment or other agreement for
village utility poles or through the procedures for abatement of nuisances set
forth in this code.
   B.   In the event the village suspects that the wireless provider is no
longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may
send the wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless provider
to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the small wireless
facility is operational and still being used within thirty (30) days, and
informs the wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the
small wireless facility will result in the village removing the small wireless
facility at the wireless provider's cost. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-16: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The circuit court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning
rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility poles
within the right of way, the village shall allow the collocating person to
collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year per pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution
of the dispute. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-17: INDEMNIFICATION:
Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole negligence
of the village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall indemnify
and hold the village harmless against any and all liability or loss from
personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole
or in part, the use or occupancy of the village infrastructure or improvements,
or right of way associated with such infrastructure or improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider proceeding under this chapter waives any claims it may have against
the village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-18: INSURANCE:
At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are
located on village infrastructure, improvements or in right of way, the
wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following
insurance coverages:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by
law; and
   C.   1.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village infrastructure, improvements or rights of way,
including coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less
than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability.
      2.   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall provide
certificates of insurance and proof of inclusion of the village in a commercial
general liability policy to the village prior to the collocation of any
wireless facility, and shall keep updated certificates and proof of inclusion
on file with the village at all times that the provider maintains small
wireless facilities within the village.
   D.   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limits required by the village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement that the village be named an additional insured. A wireless
provider that self-insures shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits required
by the village. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-19: MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities
installed within the village in a condition that maintains the safety,
integrity and aesthetics of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall
not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such
facilities, the village shall notify the wireless provider, in writing, who
shall have thirty (30) days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If
not corrected within such period, the village reserves the right to take such
action as it deems necessary, including revocation of the permit. Maintenance
and replacement of small wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless
provider at the wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
   B.   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or
property, the village may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at
the wireless provider's expense. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-20: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   A permit to collocate a wireless facility may be revoked for one (1) or
more of the following reasons:
      1.   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a
misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal;
      2.   The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless
facility in accordance with the approved plans;
      3.   The wireless provider failed to comply within any material condition
of a permit issued;
      4.   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or
the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the village;
      5.   The wireless provider failed to notify the village of the
replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this chapter;
      6.   A substantia] change of law has occurred affecting the wireless
provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located;
      7.   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
use of the public right of way;
      8.   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely
restoration of the right of way or the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located;
      9.   The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the wireless
facility as required by this chapter;
      10.   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public
safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR Part 22.970 through 47 CFR Part 22.973 and 47 CFR Part 90.672
through 47 CFR Part 90.675; or
      11.   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless
provider has failed to remove the wireless facilities as provided in this
chapter.
   B.   Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation. The wireless provider shall, within
fourteen (14) days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with
the village administrator or his or her designee setting forth the reasons why
the permit should not be revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the
revocation as the wireless provider determines necessary. Failure to file a
response with the village administrator or his or her designee shall be deemed
an admission of the facts set forth in the notification of written notification
and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. The village
administrator or his or her designee shall render findings and a decision
within twenty one (21) days of the date of receipt of the wireless provider's
response, if any.
   C.   If the village administrator or his or her designee revokes the permit,
the wireless provider may file a written notice of appeal with the village
clerk within twenty one (21) days of notification of the permit revocation.
Such notice shall contain a response to the decision of the village
administrator or his or her designee. The village board shall hear the
revocation appeal and render a decision on such appeal. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-2018)
13-7-21: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter authorizes the collocation of small wireless
facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party without the written consent of the
property owner;
      2.   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is
not located within rights of way without the written consent of the unit of
local government (local governments are, however, required to authorize the
collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned or controlled
by the local government or located within rights of way to the same extent the
local government permits access to utility poles for other commercial projects
or uses);
      3.   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure,
without the consent of the property owner;
      4.   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights of way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-101 et seq.; or
      5.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under the Illinois
vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18c-7201, Metra commuter rail or
any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in
the public utilities act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-102, without the
consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      1.   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the
public utilities act; or
      2.   Small wireless facilities owned by the village. (Ord. 18-38, 7-17-
2018)
TITLE 14
ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ENGINEERING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
14-1-1: Short Title
14-1-2: Intent And Purpose
14-1-3: Jurisdiction; Compliance Required
14-1-4: Interpretation
14-1-5: Improvements Generally
14-1-6: Documents And Specifications Adopted
14-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be designated as the ENGINEERING STANDARDS
AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE VILLAGE OF BERKELEY, ILLINOIS. (2016 Code)
14-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   While it is obvious that regulations are needed to assure orderly
extension of village improvements, the other purposes of these regulations are:
      1.   To ensure sound, harmonious development and community growth, and to
safeguard the interest of the owner, the developer, the investor and the
village.
      2.   To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the village.
      3.   To minimize scattered development beyond existing public utilities
and prevent excessive development costs.
      4.   To assure the development of land for optimum use with necessary
protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
      5.   To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can be
caused by inadequate or incomplete urban development.
      6.   To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the village and the developer.
      7.   To lessen congestion in the streets and highways.
      8.   To attempt to provide for adequate light and air.
      9.   To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water,
sewerage, schools and other public necessities.
      10.   To ensure proper legal description and proper monumenting of
subdivided land.
   B.   These regulations are established with reasonable consideration of the
character of the village with a view toward conserving the value of buildings
upon the land and providing the best possible environment for human habitation.
It is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and development standards contained in the
building code, official map regulations, zoning ordinance, the official village
comprehensive plan, and the subdivision regulations. (2016 Code)
14-1-3: JURISDICTION; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
This title shall apply to all "improvements", as defined herein, located within
the village and entirely or in part within the unincorporated area within one
and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village, in accordance
with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1 et seq., as amended. The proposed
improvements to be installed, and all procedures relating thereto, shall in all
respects be in full compliance with this title. (2016 Code)
14-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Minimum Standards: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   Conflicting Provisions: Where the conditions imposed by any other
provisions of this title or any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and
impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   C.   Abrogation Of Easements, Covenants And Agreements: This title is not
intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement;
provided, that where the regulations of this title are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other
private agreement, the requirements of this title shall govern.
   D.   Existing Improvements: No improvements which were not lawfully existing
at the effective date hereof shall be made lawful solely by reason of the
adoption of this title, and to the extent that said improvements are in
conflict in any manner with the requirements of this title, said improvements
remain unlawful hereunder. (2016 Code)
14-1-5: IMPROVEMENTS GENERALLY:
   A.   Public Improvements: The public improvement requirements, standards and
specifications contained herein are adopted as the minimum required standards
and specifications for public improvements of the village. When public
improvements are required by application for subdivision, no such improvements
may be made until the plats for a subdivision and also the plans for
improvements thereto have been formally recommended by the village planning and
zoning commission and approved by the board of trustees. The village engineer
is designated as the enforcing officer of the public improvement requirements,
standards and specifications contained herein. When public improvements are
made other than as part of a subdivision, no such improvements may be made
until the plans are approved by the village engineer. If any improvements are
being constructed in violation of regulations contained herein, it shall be the
responsibility of the village engineer, or his designee, to stop such
construction until there is full compliance with these regulations.
   B.   Improvements In Flood Hazard Areas: No improvements shall be approved
for any use in any area which is determined, after investigation by the village
engineer, to be located within areas of special flood hazard until the
subdivider has complied with chapter 3 of this title.
   C.   Unsuitable Land:
      1.   No improvements shall be approved for any use in any area which is
determined, after investigation by the village engineer, to be unsuitable for
such a use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth and rock
formation or topography, or any other features likely to be harmful to the
health, safety or welfare of the public.
      2.   Unsuitable land and any improvements located within areas of special
flood hazard and identified in chapter 3 of this title shall be subject to the
provisions of chapter 3 of this title.
      3.   Unsuitable land and any improvements located outside of special
flood hazard areas may be developed only if the developer agrees to make
improvements which will, in the opinion of the village engineer, make the area
safe for occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage and stormwater
detention facilities.
   D.   Variances:
      1.   Where the developer of land outside areas of special flood hazard
can show in writing and with appropriate documentation that the strict
adherence to the standards and specifications set forth causes an unnecessary
hardship, the village board may approve a variance. Such variance may be
granted after recommendation by the village engineer and where topography and
conditions peculiar to the site or surrounding area substantiates a variance
without destroying the intent of the provisions of this title.
      2.   Variances for land within areas of special flood hazard shall be
subject to the provisions of chapter 3 of this title. (2016 Code)
14-1-6: DOCUMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS ADOPTED:
The latest editions, with any revisions thereof, of the following documents are
hereby identified as part of this title and are incorporated herein:
   A.   United States geological survey maps, Washington, D.C., that includes
the village.
   B.   Official map (comprehensive plan), as adopted by the village.
   C.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", Illinois
department of transportation, Springfield, Illinois.
   D.   "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois", Illinois Society Of Professional Engineers, Springfield, Illinois.
   E.   "Manual For Structural Design Of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement In
Illinois", Illinois department of transportation, Springfield, Illinois.
   F.   "Manual Of Instructions For The Structural Design Of Flexible Pavements
On Projects Involving MFT, FAS And FAUS Funds", Illinois department of
transportation, Springfield, Illinois.
   G.   "Dynaflect Pavement Evaluation Specifications", Novak, Dempsey &
Associates, Inc., Palatine, Illinois.
   H.   "American Standard Practice For Roadway Lighting", Illuminating
Engineering Society, New York, N.Y.
   I.   AASHTO T99-74, "Standard Methods Of Test For Moisture Density",
American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials, Washington,
D.C.
   J.   ASTM parts 2, 4, 13, 14, 15, 16, 34, and 8, American Society Of Testing
Materials, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
   K.   "National Electrical Code", National Fire Protection Association,
Boston, Massachusetts.
   L.   "Metropolitan Sanitary District Of Greater Chicago, Manual Of
Procedures For The Administration Of The Sewer Permit Ordinance", metropolitan
sanitary district of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
   M.   "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", 1978 edition, adopted by
the Illinois department of transportation.
   N.   1975 edition of the "Urban Hydrology For Small Watersheds, Technical
Release Number 55", published by the United States department of agriculture.
(2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14-2-1: Application Of Provisions
14-2-2: Rules Of Word Construction
14-2-3: Definitions
14-2-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
In the interpretation of this title, the rules and definitions contained in
this chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise. (2016 Code)
14-2-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot" and "piece" and "parcel".
   E.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for". (2016
Code)
14-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
ADT: Average daily traffic.
ALLEY: The right of way which affords secondary means of access to properties
abutting upon a street.
APPLICANT: The owner or contract purchaser of land proposed to be subdivided or
his legal representative.
APRON: An extension of a driveway lying between the public sidewalk (or the
right of way line if there is no sidewalk) and the curb and gutters of a
street; the maintenance responsibility for this facility normally being with
the owner of the driveway so extended.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of one or more
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, shorelines or
waterways, or corporate limit lines.
BOND: Any form of security approved as to form by the village attorney
including a cash deposit, surety bond, letter of credit, collateral or
instrument of credit in an amount or form accepted by the board of trustees.
BORINGS, SOIL: Examination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific
parcel of land by drilling.
BUILDING: A structure, with a permanent roof, separated on all sides from
adjacent open space by exterior or party walls, built for the support, shelter
or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, and which
is permanently affixed to the ground.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village of Berkeley for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the dedicated right of way line or
parallel to the private street edge of pavement, at a distance from it as
regulated by the Berkeley zoning ordinance. This is a line over which no part
of any building may extend for the entire length of the line.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The composite of the functional and geographic elements of
the official comprehensive plan of the village of Berkeley, or any segment
thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text of reports, implementing
ordinances and the official map.
CORINGS, PAVEMENT: Examination and analysis of the completed surface and/or
subsurface of a finished pavement by removing a core by drilling.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way located across a block to provide pedestrian
access to adjacent streets or alleys.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street of short length, having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
CURB: The permanent edge of a paved surface designed to separate the vehicular
travelway from the parkway.
DATUM PLANE: A reference point from which elevations are measured. The datum
plane is mean sea level as established by the United States geological survey
(USGS).
DETENTION BASIN: A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an excessive
accumulation of stormwater so as to reduce peak flow in a stormwater drainage
system.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard or elsewhere within the village of Berkeley or its
area of planning jurisdiction.
DRAINAGE, SWALE: A turf drainage ditch of shallow depth with side slopes not
exceeding one foot to twelve feet (1':12').
EASEMENT: An authorization or grant by a property owner for the use by another
for a specific purpose or purposes, or any designated part of his property.
ELEVATIONS: The vertical distance measured from a point on the ground to the
datum plane.
EXCAVATION: Any act of changing of the grade or subgrade of a tract of land by
cutting, scraping, grading, trenching, digging, filling in or otherwise
reshaping the natural contour of the ground. The following shall not be
construed as excavating/filling:
   A.   Any cutting, grading, trenching, digging or backfilling of any
foundation of a building approved for construction.
   B.   Top dressing in an area of existing homes, which top dressing does not
change the drainage patterns.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a
new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FLOODPLAIN: That land as defined in section
14-3-2 of this title. Information pertaining to the floodplain, including maps
and profiles, is based on the studies and reports prepared by HUD, identified
as "Flood Insurance Study, Village Of Berkeley, Illinois", and the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) that includes the village.
GRADE: The slope of the land, road, street or other public way expressed in
percent.
GRADIENT OR PERCENT OF GRADE: The vertical rise in feet per one hundred feet
(100') of horizontal distance. (A 1 percent grade is a rise of 1 foot in 100
feet, for example.)
GRADING: Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROSS LAND AREA: The entire area of a development, including lots, streets and
alleys, measured to the closest curb line of any bounding streets which were
previously dedicated.
IMPROVEMENTS: Grading, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water
mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, trees, bushes,
landscaping and other additions to the natural state of the land which increase
its value, utility or habitability in accordance with the provisions of this
title.
Private Common Improvement: Any installed or constructed facility for which the
responsibility of maintenance and ownership will be retained by the homeowner
or condominium association. The term includes amenities such as, swimming
pools, tennis courts, parks, etc.
Private Improvement: Any installed or constructed facility for which the
responsibility of maintenance and ownership will be retained by the private
owner.
Public Improvement: Any facility for which the village of Berkeley or other
municipal body may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation or which is constructed for general public use or benefit.
LOT: A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended
as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, or transfer of
ownership or for building development. (See chapter 14 of this title.)
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets,
where the interior angle of such intersection coterminous with the right of way
lines of such streets does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County,
Illinois; or a single parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in
the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street
lines shall be deemed front yard lines for the purpose of establishing front
yard lines on both ends of such through lot.
OFFICIAL MAP: The official map of the village as adopted by the corporate
authorities and amended from time to time in accordance with the provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-6, as amended.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or
any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the
same.
PARCEL: A continuous area of real property which is legally described and
accurately drawn on the plat of such property.
PARKWAY: That part of the public street right of way not occupied by the street
pavement and located between the back of the curb and the sidewalk and/or the
dividing strip of a roadway.
PAVING IMPROVEMENTS: Road excavation, aprons, base course, binder course,
surface course, curb and gutter, sidewalk, streetlights and related
appurtenances excluding those in parking lots, as required in this title.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way or easement, however designed, across or within a
block for use by pedestrian traffic; and shall include, but not be limited to,
sidewalks and crosswalks.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm or corporation, public or private, the state
of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States
Of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant,
officer, or employee of any of the foregoing.
PLAN, SKETCH: A general map or drawing on which the subdivider's design for the
subdivision of land is presented for discussion purposes prior to the
preparation of the preliminary plan.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a size
sufficient to create its own character controlled by a single landowner or by a
group of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be developed as a
single entity, the character of which is compatible with adjacent parcels and
the intent of the zoning district or districts in which it is located.
PLAT: A plan, map or chart of a subdivision of land.
Final Plat: A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial
conformance to the preliminary plan of a subdivision prepared in conformance
with the requirements of the plat act and title 11 of this code, and for the
recording by the county recorder.
Preliminary Plan: A map showing all requisite details of a proposed subdivision
submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration,
prepared in conformance with the plat act and title 11 of this code.
PLAT ACT: 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq., as amended.
RECORDER: The recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
RESIDUE AREA: That portion of a development not platted as residential lots or
designed for dedication as streets or alleys.
RESUBDIVISION: The relocation of property boundaries or the reallocation of
property in a plat of record. The dissolution of property lines not accompanied
by the relocation of new property lines shall not constitute resubdivision.
ROADWAY OR ROAD: Shall be deemed the paved area existing on the street right of
way and not the street right of way width and shall include all curb and gutter
facilities.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street or crosswalk way, paved or otherwise
surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
driveways.
SOIL TESTING: Determination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a
specific land area by use of soil borings.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: Refers to the "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", state of Illinois, department of transportation, current
edition, as well as "Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", current
edition.
STREET: A publicly owned right of way which affords primary means of access by
pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a
street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, land or however otherwise designated.
STREET, COLLECTOR: Streets penetrating neighborhoods which collect traffic from
minor streets in the neighborhood and channel it into the arterial systems. A
minor amount of through traffic may be carried on collector streets, but the
system primarily provides land access service and carries local traffic
movements within residential neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas.
STREET, HALF: A street of less than the total required width along one or more
property lines of a subdivision.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
arterial streets and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the arterial
streets.
STREET, MINOR: Streets not classified in a higher system, providing direct
access to abutting land and access to the higher systems. They offer the lowest
level of mobility and have limited continuity to discourage through traffic.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL: Streets and highways interconnecting with and
augmenting the principal arterials system and providing service to trips of
moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility. The system places
more emphasis on land access and distributes travel to geographic areas smaller
than those identified with the principal arterial system. The term includes all
arterials not classified as principal.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL: Streets and highways serving major metropolitan
activity centers, the highest traffic volume corridors, the longest trip
desires, and a high proportion of total urban area travel on a minimum of
street mileage. Service to abutting land is subordinate to the provisions of
travel service to major traffic movements. This system carries the major
portion of trips entering and leaving the Berkeley urban area as well as the
majority of through movements desiring to bypass the village.
STREET, PRIVATE: An undedicated street, generally within a planned development,
which is privately owned or maintained or an easement of access benefiting the
dominant tenant.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any arterial, collector or minor street which is shown on the
subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated to public use.
STREET RIGHT OF WAY: A general term denoting that portion of land dedicated,
acquired for or used as a roadway or pedestrianway or other public use.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the
public street.
SUBDIVIDER: The person or persons responsible for preparing the plats of the
subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements relating thereto
as outlined in this title.
SUBDIVISION: A planned development is, for the purposes of this title, a
subdivision whether or not it is divided into two (2) or more parts. A
subdivision is also the division of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels,
any of which is less than five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all public
streets, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds
or other public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots or blocks, and
numbering of all such lots, blocks or parcels by progressive numbers, giving
their precise dimensions. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and,
where it is appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing
or to the land subdivided; provided however, that the following shall not be
considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements of this
title:
   A.   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5)
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
   B.   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
   C.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and
contiguous land.
   D.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interest therein for use as a
right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
   E.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
   F.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
   G.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
   H.   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of
land existing on July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or easements
of access.
   I.   The sale of a single lot of less than five (5) acres from a larger
tract when a survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided, that this
exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same
larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of the
larger tract on October 1, 1973, and provided also, that this exemption does
not invalidate any local requirements applicable to the subdivision of land.
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as an
arterial trafficway between the various districts of Berkeley and its environs.
VILLAGE: The village of Berkeley, Illinois.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator of the village of Berkeley,
Illinois, or the duly authorized representative.
VILLAGE BOARD: The president and the village board of trustees of the village
of Berkeley, Illinois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The village engineer of the village of Berkeley, Illinois, or
the duly authorized representative.
WATER LEVEL, CONSTANT: The minimum depth of water designed to be contained at
all times within a retention basin.
WATER LEVEL, OCCASIONAL: The maximum depth of water designed to be contained
within a retention or detention basin during periods of peak stormwater flow.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Berkeley, Illinois, zoning ordinance, as amended. (2016
Code)
CHAPTER 3
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
14-3-1: Statute Authority; Purpose
14-3-2: Definitions
14-3-3: Duties Of Village Engineer
14-3-4: Base Flood Elevation
14-3-5: Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas
14-3-6: Occupation And Use Of Identified Floodways
14-3-7: Occupation And Use Of SFHA Areas With Unidentified Floodways
14-3-8: Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
14-3-9: Other Development Requirements
14-3-10: Variances
14-3-11: Disclaimer Of Liability
14-3-12: Violation; Penalties
14-3-13: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
14-3-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police and home rule powers granted to
the village by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, including 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2, as amended. The purpose
of this chapter is to maintain the village's eligibility in the national flood
insurance program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding,
including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve
and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values
and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources. This
chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   A.   To meet the requirements of the rivers, lakes, and streams act 1 , as
amended.
   B.   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion.
   C.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage.
   D.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding.
   E.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and
relief operations.
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program.
   G.   To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59 - 79, as amended.
   H.   To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources.
   I.   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats.
   J.   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to
moderate floodwater and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 615 ILCS 5/4.9 et seq.
14-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following definitions are adopted:
ACT: The rivers, lakes, and streams act 1 , as amended.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit insurance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in subsection 14-3-6C of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in section
14-3-4 of this chapter.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, manufactured home,
mobile home or prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway which has a definite bed and
banks or shorelines in or into which surface water or groundwater flows either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation,
debris or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel
modification involving a typically involved relocation of the existing channel
(e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain; the uncompensated loss of natural floodplain. The uncompensated
loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off site floodwater elevations
and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and the federal emergency management agency of a proposed
change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this
chapter, gives assurances to the property owner that when an appropriate use is
constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as
previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the
federal emergency management agency will revise base flood elevations, flood
insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway, as shown on an effective
flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as built plans
are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
   B.   Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers), and hazardous materials storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals or hazardous or toxic substances).
   C.   Examples of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended
include: sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DEVELOPMENT: A. Any manmade change to real estate, including:
      1.   Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or
any addition to a building.
      2.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
      3.   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads and
bridges or similar projects.
      4.   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
      5.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
      6.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or culverts;
channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; or
deposit of solid or liquid waste.
      7.   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height or
velocity of floodwater or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal.
   B.   Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase
in elevation, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading or the construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been
elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, including state, federal or local units of
government.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59 -
79, effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include any
later additions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRMs): A map prepared by the federal emergency
management agency that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within the
village. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may
not depict floodways.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA). The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the
village of Berkeley that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such
on panel numbers 168, 169, and 307 of the countywide flood insurance rate map
of Cook County and prepared by the federal emergency management agency. The
SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the
village are generally identified as such on the countywide flood insurance rate
map of Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects, such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): An official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective flood
hazard boundary map or the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): A letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or
floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use, with or without a
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety
and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion
and sedimentation control and channel restoration.
NAVD: North American vertical datum of 1988. A reference surface set by the
national geodetic survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing
adjustments in 1988.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flow over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS: All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by
watercraft.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois
under the Illinois professional land surveyor act of 1989 2 , as amended.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of
Illinois under the professional engineering practice act of 1989 3 , as
amended.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR/
OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future
100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than 0.1 foot increase in stage
due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent
(10%) increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways are designated for the
west branch of the DuPage River on the regulatory flood insurance rate map
prepared by the federal emergency management agency and shown on panel numbers
168, 169, and 307 of the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County
dated August 19, 2008, and panel numbers 103, 201, 106, and 204 of the
countywide flood insurance rate map of DuPage County dated December 16, 2004.
The regulatory floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook or DuPage
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that
may be annexed into the village are designated on panel numbers 168, 169, and
307 of the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County dated August 19,
2008, and panel numbers 103, 201, 106, and 204 of the countywide flood
insurance rate map of DuPage County dated December 16, 2004, prepared by the
federal emergency management agency. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary
on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the
regulatory floodway map and located on the site plan, using reference marks
common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact
location of the regulatory floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for
the interpretation.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for the storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term
does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of
sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from
a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or any other identified channel or
ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as
zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M or E.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below
the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or replacement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home; or installing a trailer on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive
loss buildings.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any repairs, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either:
      1.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
   B.   For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
         C. The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for the improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or a state inventory of historic places.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 615 ILCS 5/4.9 et seq.
2 1. 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
3 2. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
14-3-3: DUTIES OF VILLAGE ENGINEER:
   A.   The village engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the
duties listed in subsection B of this section. To fulfill those duties, the
village engineer first should use the criteria listed in section
14-3-4, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether the
development site is located within a floodplain. Once it has been determined
that a site is located within a floodplain, the village engineer must determine
whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway or
an SFHA or a floodplain on which no floodway has been identified. If the site
is within a flood fringe, the village engineer shall require that the minimum
requirements of section
14-3-5 of this chapter be met. If the site is within a floodway, the village
engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section
14-3-6 of this chapter be met. If the site is located within an SFHA or a
floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the
village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section
14-3-7 of this chapter be met.
   B.   In addition, the general requirements of section
14-3-8 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of section
14-3-5,
14-3-6 or
14-3-7 of this chapter. The village engineer shall assure that all subdivision
proposals shall meet the requirements of section
14-3-9 of this chapter.
   C.   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the village engineer
shall review the requirements of section
14-3-10 of this chapter to make sure that they are met. In addition, the
village engineer shall complete all notification requirements.
   D.   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the village engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in
section
14-3-12 of this chapter.
   E.   The village engineer shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter, which shall include the
following:
      1.   Determining Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites
to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they
are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or
floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more
than one square mile.
      2.   Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a
floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted
which drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be referred to a
registered professional engineer (PE) under the employ or contract of the
village for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of
section
14-3-6 of this chapter. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state
in writing that the development meets the requirements of section
14-3-6 of this chapter.
      3.   Dam Safety Requirements: Ensure that an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit
has been issued or a letter indicating that no dam safety permit is required if
the proposed development activity includes construction of a "dam" as defined
in section
14-3-2 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts
or impoundment structures.
      4.   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal,
state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
      5.   Plan Review And Permit Issuance: Ensure that all development
activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this chapter and issue a floodplain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of the
village when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.
      6.   Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during
and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to
ensure that they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      7.   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain in the permit
files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the
elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a
floodproofing certificate for all buildings subject to section
14-3-8 of this chapter for public inspection and provide copies of the same.
      8.   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional
letter of map amendment and as built elevation and floodproofing or elevation
and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this
chapter.
      9.   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been
granted by the Illinois office of water resources for all development projects
subject to sections
14-3-6 and
14-3-7 of this chapter unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to
the village. Upon acceptance of this chapter by IDNR/OWR and FEMA,
responsibility is hereby delegated to the village as per 17 Illinois
administrative code 3708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and
floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections
14-3-6 and
14-3-7 of this chapter. However, the following review approvals were not
delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
         a.   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
         b.   Department of transportation IDNR/OWR projects, dams or
impoundment structures as defined in subsection
14-3-2 of this chapter, definition of "dam", and all other state, federal or
local units of government projects, including projects of the village and
county except for those projects meeting the requirements of subsection 14-3-6H
of this chapter;
         c.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile per subsection 14-3-6D5 of this chapter;
         d.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 14-
3-6D4 of this chapter;
         e.   Alternative transaction sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensation storage as indicated in subsections 14-3-6D1, D2 and D8 of this
chapter;
         f.   Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable
rivers, lakes and streams;
         g.   Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations;
and
         h.   Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
      10.   Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with state and federal
floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency
flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter.
Submit data to IDNR/OWR and the federal emergency management agency for
proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for the
national flood insurance program. Notify the federal emergency management
agency of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
      11.   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as
necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject,
however, to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter
changes. (2016 Code)
14-3-4: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
   A.   This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance
study for the village. If a base flood elevation for the 100-year frequency
flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois
state water survey's floodplain information repository. When a party disagrees
with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study
needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and
FEMA.
   B.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs
shall be as delineated in the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide FIS for
Cook County dated August 19, 2008, prepared by the federal emergency management
agency.
   C.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an AH zone or AO zone shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the village.
   D.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an A zone on the flood insurance rate map of the
village shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois
state water survey floodplain information repository. When no base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model,
such as HEC-2, WSP-2 or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in
the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrological model, such as HEC-
1, TR-20 or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by
the United States geological survey for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood
flows should be based on anticipated future land use conditions in the
watershed as determined from adopted local and regional land use plans. Along
any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses shall
be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval; once approved, it must be submitted to
the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository for filing.
For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of
record plus three feet (3') unless calculated by a detailed engineering study
and approved by the Illinois state water survey. (2016 Code)
14-3-5: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
   A.   Development Restricted; Compliance Required: Development in and/or
filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper elevation and compensatory
storage and other provisions of this chapter are met. No use will be permitted
which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems.
Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of
this section along with the requirements of section
14-3-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Development Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without
first obtaining a development permit from the building official.
      2.   Application For Permit: An application for a development permit
shall be made on a form provided by the building official. The application
shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property
line dimensions and the legal description for the property and sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in
MSL, NAVD 88 and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the
location and dimensions of all buildings, the elevation of the lowest flood
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans, and the development will be subject to the requirements of section
14-3-8 of this chapter.
      3.   Review Of Application: Upon receipt of a development permit
application, the building official shall compare the elevation of the site to
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located
on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as
of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA
and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The building
official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that the ground elevation existed prior to
the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
      4.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan: A soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan
shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate
their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures and the identification of a responsible
party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
      5.   Additional Required Permits: The building official shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state
and federal permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be
required for this type of activity. The building official shall not issue a
permit unless all other local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
   C.   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
   D.   Using Fill: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit
sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the
purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
   E.   Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and
watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas
so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (2016 Code)
14-3-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
   A.   Scope; General Requirements: This section applies to proposed
development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a
regulatory floodway. The regulatory floodway shall be delineated on the
regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR according to and referenced in
subsection
14-3-2 of this chapter, definition of "regulatory floodway". Only those uses
and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All
floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose
of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of section
14-3-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Development Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without
first obtaining a development permit from the building official.
      2.   Application For Permit: An application for a development permit
shall be made on a form provided by the building official. The application
shall include the following information:
         a.   Name and address of the applicant;
         b.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         c.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
         d.   Description of the proposed activity;
         e.   Statement of purpose of the proposed activity;
         f.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         g.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
         h.   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
         i.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
         j.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
         k.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign
the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the application identifying each beneficiary of the trust
by name and address and defining the respective interests therein;
         l.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include,
as a minimum:
            (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale and north arrow;
            (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study, each
showing existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (NAVD 88 datum), adjacent
property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of
any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed
activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a
commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, floodplain
limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications,
location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow and a graphic or
numerical scale;
            (3)   Cross section views of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            (4)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance;
            (5)   A copy of the regulatory floodway map marked to reflect any
proposed change in the regulatory floodway location;
         m.   Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development;
         n.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted,
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection C of
this section;
         o.   If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA;
         p.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
on the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings, subject to the requirements of section
14-3-8 of this chapter;
         q.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
            (1)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed
work;
            (2)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative
locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
            (3)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts that
the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected;
            (4)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in subsection D4b of this section would have on
the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;
            (5)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected;
         r.   Accompanying the preliminary plans of each proposed subdivision
which involves any portion of a base flood area as described by the official
maps of the village, there shall be furnished the following information and
data in addition to that required elsewhere in this chapter:
            (1)   Contour Map: A topographic map with one foot (1') interval
contours of the land to be subdivided and such adjoining land whose topography
may affect the layout or drainage of the development. On such a map, there
shall be shown the following:
               (A)   The location of streams and other floodwater runoff
channels, their normal channels, the extent of their floodplains at the
established high water elevations and the limits of the floodway, all properly
identified;
               (B)   The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention
basins, their floodplains and line of inflow and outflow if any;
               (C)   The location of farm drains and their inlets and outlets;
               (D)   Storm and sanitary sewers and any sewer outfalls;
               (E)   Septic tank systems and outlets if any;
               (F)   Seeps, springs and flowing and other wells;
               (G)   Location of existing structures that will remain;
               (H)   100-year flood elevation and limits, including floodway
data for that portion of a subdivision or development which is in the base
flood area;
            (2)   Channel Profiles: Profile drawings of each stream, channel,
pond and basin showing elevations of the following:
               (A)   The streambed;
               (B)   Channel banks if any;
               (C)   Waterway openings of existing culverts and bridges within
and near the tract;
               (D)   Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets into the
stream channel or basin;
               (E)   The base flood elevations established by this chapter.
      3.   Additional Required Permits: The building official shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state
and federal permits and approvals that may be required for this type of
activity. The building official shall not issue the development permit unless
all required federal and state permits have been obtained. A registered
professional engineer under the employ or contract of the village shall review
and approve applications reviewed under this section.
   C.   Preventing Increased Damages; List Of Appropriate Uses: The only
development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses which will
not cause a rise in the base flood elevation and which will not create a
damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a
threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic
and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel or permanently impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only
those appropriate uses listed in 17 Illinois administrative code 3708 will be
allowed. "Appropriate uses" do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting design to act as a fence)
and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate
use. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
      1.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control or drainage, flooding, erosion or
water quality or habitat for fish or wildlife.
      2.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of or required access
to the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses.
      3.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls.
      4.   Underground and overhead utilities.
      5.   Recreational facilities, such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows and including open
air pavilions.
      6.   Detached garages, storage sheds or other nonhabitable accessory
structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will not block
flood flows or reduce floodway storage.
      7.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto.
      8.   Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where the depth of
flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot) and
aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation.
      9.   Regulatory floodway regrading without fill to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a watercourse.
      10.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures, including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure.
      11.   In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or
repairs made to a building that are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced and which do
not increase the outside dimensions of the building.
      12.   Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do not increase
the building's footprint and are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the building.
   D.   Construction Of Appropriate Use: Within the regulatory floodway as
identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the
construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible; provided,
that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation
criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and
data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure
meets the protection requirements of section
14-3-8 of this chapter:
      1.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance To Not Increase Flood Stages
Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on
stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway
conveyance, the following facts shall be taken into consideration:
         a.   Regulatory floodway conveyance, two-thirds (2/3):
            K = 1.486 AR/n
            Where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area
of the cross section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter
(see Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York).
         b.   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a record maintenance agreement with the federal,
state or local unit of government can assure that the proposed conditions will
be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a
nonvegetative land cover.
         c.   A transition section shall be provided and used in calculations
of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
            (1)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expend no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
            (2)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length.
            (3)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction,
a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of
stream length shall be used.
            (4)   Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
            (5)   All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
      2.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage To Not Increase Downstream
Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory floodway
storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures
placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. Compensatory
storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume
of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost due to a
reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be placed between the
proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All
regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All regulatory
flood storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced
above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory
storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the
applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through a determination of
flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is
hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway
surface area as a result of a floodway modification unless such modification is
necessary to reduce flooding at the existing structure.
      3.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities To Not Increase Stream Erosion
Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of
bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased
at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by
the use of riprap or other design measures.
      4.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches:
         a.   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks),
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or
within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact IDNR/
OWR, dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or waiver.
         b.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section
14-3-4 of this chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/FHWA
"Hydraulic Chart For The Selection Of Highway Culverts". Bridges must be
analyzed using the U.S. DOT/"Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics Of
Bridge Waterways" calculation procedures.
         c.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated per subsection D2 of
this section.
         d.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection D3 of this
section.
         e.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for
recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
         f.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by
subsection C of this section.
         g.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per subsection D8 of this section.
      5.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And
Approach Roads:
         a.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event if the existing structure is not a source of flood
damage.
         b.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
         c.   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a
source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance
with IDNR/OWR rules, 17 Illinois administrative code 3708 (floodway
construction in northeastern Illinois), and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review
and concurrence before a permit is issued.
      6.   On Stream Structures Built For Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any
increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot, when compared to the
existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing
vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection
grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. A
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR, dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or waiver for any
structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal
or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as defined in subsection
14-3-2 of this chapter, definition of "dam", shall meet the permit requirements
of 92 Illinois administrative code 702 (construction and maintenance of dams).
If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to
accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
         a.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing flood control, public recreation or regional stormwater detention;
         b.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish
species which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle,
such as for spawning;
         c.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water
quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation basin;
         d.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
         e.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
      7.   Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for
floodproofing activities.
      8.   Excavation In Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of
bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of
existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance
for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the
excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless
an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations
or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same
efficiency:
         a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section,
the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
         b.   When water is flowing from a wider section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length; and
         c.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used.
         d.   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided upstream and
downstream of the transition sections.
      9.   Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
         a.   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would
accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body
of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization,
floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel or the establishment of a
stream side buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable if
the purpose is to restore natural conditions and to improve water quality and
fish and wildlife habitat;
         b.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification, and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
         c.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
            (1)   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design where practical.
            (2)   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both
the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
            (3)   One sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of stream side (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
            (4)   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is
essential for the construction of the channel.
            (5)   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical wherever practicable.
Natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials, such as concrete, gabions or construction
rubble, should be avoided unless there are not practicable alternatives.
            (6)   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to the establishment of the vegetative
cover.
            (7)   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity, such as deep pools, riffles and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and
flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established
where appropriate.
            (8)   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of
the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
            (9)   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry, and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to the
diversion of water into the new channel.
            (10)   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
            (11)   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
         d.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
      10.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
      11.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the
floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is
potential for the erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures shall be employed, consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum
vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time that
the soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior
to the initiation of the improvements.
         b.   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to
denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after the final grade is reached on any
portion of the site and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not
be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
         c.   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches
and sediment basins.
         d.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in
width shall be preserved and/or reestablished where possible along existing
channels (subsection D16 of this section). Construction vehicle use of channels
shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where
necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels
shall be restabilized immediately.
         e.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed
and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil
Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois", 1988, also known as the "Green
Book", and "Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control"
(IEPA, 1987).
      12.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
      13.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
         a.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory
floodway study, referenced in section
14-3-4 of this chapter, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If
the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR
shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base
conditions data to use.
         b.   If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the
proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations.
         c.   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, or modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
      14.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would
result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and to FEMA
all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR
conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is
issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by IDNR/
OWR until as built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by FEMA
and IDNR/OWR. In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued. No further development activities shall
take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and
IDNR/OWR.
      15.   Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall
be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.
      16.   Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of Channel:
         a.   For all activities in the floodway involving construction within
twenty five feet (25') of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
            (1)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within
at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
            (2)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during
the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon the completion of construction.
            (3)   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the
buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided when necessary
for stream maintenance purposes.
         b.   After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway
change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision,
construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may
proceed, but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an
appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map is
changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The regulatory floodway
map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the
as built plans.
   E.   State Review: For those projects listed below located in a regulatory
floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their
review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
      1.   IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due
to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection D4 of this section.
      2.   IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing
bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile pursuant to subsection D5 of this
section.
      3.   IDNR/OWR will review alternative transition sections and
hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections D1, D2 and D8 of this
section.
      4.   IDNR/OWR will review and approve prior to the start of construction
any department projects, dams (as defined in section
14-3-2 of this chapter), and all other state, federal or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county.
   F.   Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is
not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/4.9 et seq., as amended. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/
OWR has delegated this responsibility to the village.
   G.   Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification
or removal of a "dam", as defined in section
14-3-2 of this chapter, per 17 Illinois administrative code 3702 (construction
and maintenance of dams), shall obtain an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit prior to
the start of construction of a dam. If the village engineer finds a dam that
does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the village engineer shall immediately notify
the dam safety section of IDNR/OWR. If the village engineer finds a dam which
is believed to be in unsafe condition, the village engineer shall immediately
notify the owner of the dam, IDNR/OWR, the dam safety section in Springfield
and the Illinois emergency management agency (EMA).
   H.   Activities Not Requiring Registered Professional Engineer Review: The
following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of
this chapter, including the mitigation requirements:
      1.   Underground and overhead utilities that:
         a.   Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or
         b.   Require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway;
or
         c.   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe
or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed; and
         d.   In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are
placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
      2.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
         a.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope; and
         b.   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
         c.   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall
location.
      3.   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences),
properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
      4.   Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection that:
         a.   Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
         b.   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
         c.   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area
of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
         d.   Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the
preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative
stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials.
Artificial materials, such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions, should
be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
      5.   Temporary stream crossings in which:
         a.   The approach roads will be 0.5 foot or less above natural grade.
         b.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up
the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
         c.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two
feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
         d.   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized
as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
         e.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
one year after authorization. (2016 Code)
14-3-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WITH UNIDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
   A.   Development Restrictions: In SFHAs or floodplains where no floodways
have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations
have been established by FEMA and draining more than a square mile, no
development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated cases and structures,
shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the
floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
   B.   Development Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in an SFHA or
floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the building
official.
      2.   Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall
be made on a form provided by the building official. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions; existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor;
the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and
the elevation at the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings subject to the requirements of section
14-3-8 of this chapter. The application for a development permit shall also
include the following information:
         a.   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose and
intended use.
         b.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area.
         c.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of the activity.
         d.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided, which include
as a minimum:
            (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, the name of
the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale and north arrow;
            (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study, each
showing existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (NAVD 88), adjacent property
lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, the distance between
the proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is
near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and
orientation of cross sections, north arrow and a graphical or numerical scale;
            (3)   Cross section views of the project and engineering study,
each showing existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
            (4)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of the final stabilization and revegetation measures and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
         e.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted,
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection C of this
section.
         f.   Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of development.
      3.   Elevation Of Site: Based on the best available existing data
according to the Illinois state water survey's floodplain information
repository, the village engineer shall compare the elevation of the sites to
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation
information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the
elevation according to subsection 14-3-4D of this chapter. Any development
located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood
elevation as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not
in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
The building official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
      4.   Additional Required Permits: The building official shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state
and federal permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be
required for this type of activity. The building official shall not issue the
development permit unless all required local, state and federal permits have
been obtained.
   C.   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA where a
floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health,
safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter.
   D.   Undetermined Floodways: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway
has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
      1.   The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in
writing and show through supporting plans, calculations and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of subsections 14-3-6D1 through D12
of this chapter for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of
subsection 14-3-4D of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should
have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that
engineering study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon
acceptance of their floodway by the department, the developer shall then
demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section
14-3-6 of this chapter for the regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be
defined according to section
14-3-2 of this chapter, definition of "regulatory floodway".
      2.   A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first
obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR.
      3.   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
permit responsibility to the village (per 17 Ill. adm. code part 3708), for
regulatory floodways, per IDNR/OWR statewide permit entitled "Construction In
Floodplains With No Designated Floodways In Northeastern Illinois".
      4.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
"dam", as defined in section
14-3-2 of this chapter, or an on stream structure to impound water shall obtain
an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit or letter indicating that a permit is not
required prior to the start of the construction of a dam. If the village
engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the village
engineer shall immediately notify the dam safety section of IDNR/OWR. If the
village engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the
village engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois
emergency management agency (EMA) and IDNR/OWR, dam safety section, in
Springfield.
      5.   The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review or the calculation of a base flood elevation and
regulatory floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of
this chapter.
         a.   Underground and overhead utilities that:
            (1)   Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations;
or
            (2)   Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the
floodway; or
            (3)   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the
pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed; and
            (4)   In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are
placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
         b.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
            (1)   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope; and
            (2)   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
            (3)   Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the
outfall location.
         c.   Construction of shoreline and streambed protection that:
            (1)   Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length or two
(2) cubic yards per linear foot of streambed.
            (2)   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of the
bank.
            (3)   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional
area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
            (4)   Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the
preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative
stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials.
Artificial materials, such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions, should
be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
         d.   Temporary stream crossings in which:
            (1)   The approach roads will be 0.5 foot or less above the natural
grade.
            (2)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing
up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile
or outfall invert.
            (3)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least
two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall
be nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
            (4)   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise
stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
            (5)   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed
within one year after authorization.
         e.   The construction of light poles, signposts and similar
structures.
         f.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade.
         g.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures,
such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports, built at or below the
existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters.
         h.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g.,
animal shelters and toolsheds).
         i.   The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not
increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building and which
do extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the
flow of floodwaters.
         j.   Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
            (1)   The affected length of stream is less than one thousand feet
(1,000');
            (2)   The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural
stream channels; or
            (3)   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
      6.   The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
   E.   Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and
watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas
so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (2016 Code)
14-3-8: REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections
14-3-5,
14-3-6 and
14-3-7 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways
and SFHAs or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (zones A, AO,
AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements
shall be met:
   A.   Public health standards.
   B.   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE.
   C.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines
and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted; provided, that all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
   D.   For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities
in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the
alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
   E.   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an
SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway
shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in
section
14-3-6 of this chapter. These building protection criteria apply to the
following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building;
      2.   A structural alteration to an existing building that either
increases the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or the
building's market value by more than fifty percent (50%);
      3.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply
to returning a mobile home to the same site that it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage; and
      4.   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.
This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following
methods.
   F.   A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent landfill in accordance with the following:
      1.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation. The flood protection elevation shall be one foot (1')
above the base flood elevation.
      2.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1')
deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the
ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an
alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill
shall not adversely effect the flow or surface drainage from or onto
neighboring properties.
   G.   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance
with the following:
      1.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than
one foot (1') above grade and consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The
openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch of every
one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation.
      2.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned
in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrodynamic forces, such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
      3.   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed
of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation.
      4.   No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for
storage of items or materials.
      5.   Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days shall be elevated to or above the flood
protection elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and
regulations for the Illinois mobile home tiedown act 1 , as amended, issued
pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code 870.
   H.   Only a nonresidential building may be structurally floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation); provided, that a registered professional engineer shall
certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the
flood protection elevation and the structure and attendant utility facilities
are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood. The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures
shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity. (Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.)
   I.   Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in
use but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A nonconforming
structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may
be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value
before it was damaged, in which case, it shall conform to this chapter. (2016
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
14-3-9: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The board of trustees shall take into account flood hazards to the
extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management,
use and development.
   B.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and
planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with sections
14-3-5,
14-3-6,
14-3-7 and
14-3-8 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans
for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs)
shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 , as amended.
   C.   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer
parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this information is not
available from an existing study filed with the Illinois state water survey,
the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 14-3-4D of this chapter and
the floodway delineation per the definition of "regulatory floodway" in section
14-3-2 of this chapter and submitting it to the state water survey and IDNR/OWR
for review and approval as best available regulatory data.
   D.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   E.   The board of trustees shall not approve any planned unit development
(PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (2016
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
14-3-10: VARIANCES:
   A.   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
"regulatory floodway", as defined in section
14-3-2 of this chapter. However, when a development proposal is located outside
of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the standards of this chapter place
undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to
the village engineer for a variance. The village engineer shall review the
applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the
board of trustees.
   B.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing or repairs to streambeds and stream banks, roads, utilities or other
public facilities;
      6.   The provisions of subsections 14-3-5C and 14-3-7C of this chapter
shall still be met;
      7.   The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
      8.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a
general problem; and
      9.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved, including existing stream uses.
   C.   The village engineer shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of section
14-3-8 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with the knowledge of these risks
and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
(2016 Code)
14-3-11: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and specific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur, or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA
will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on
the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully hereunder. (2016 Code)
14-3-12: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation: Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or
conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this
title.
   B.   Determination And Notice Of Violation: Upon due investigation, the
village engineer may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of
this chapter exists. The village engineer shall notify the owner in writing of
such violation.
   C.   Injunction And Penalty:
      1.   If the owner fails, after ten (10) days' notice, to correct the
violation, the village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   D.   Insurance Suspension: The village engineer shall inform the owner that
any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
   E.   Other Remedies: Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking
such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (2016
Code)
14-3-13: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinances,
easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PAVEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
14-4-1: Introduction
14-4-2: General Specifications And Design Requirements; Street Classifications
14-4-3: Pavement Width
14-4-4: Pavement Design
14-4-5: Material Testing
14-4-6: Flexible Pavements
14-4-7: Rigid Pavements
14-4-8: Driveways, Driveway Aprons, Loading/Unloading Berths And Storage Areas
14-4-9: Allowable Pavement Construction Materials
14-4-10: Subgrade Preparation
14-4-11: Street Grades
14-4-12: Sight Distances
14-4-13: Curbs And Gutters
14-4-14: Sidewalks And Carriage Walks
14-4-15: Maintenance And Responsibility
14-4-1: INTRODUCTION:
   A.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets to be dedicated to the public and all private streets shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable
circulation of traffic within the development and adjoining lands, to
topographical conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the area to
be served. All traffic intersections and confluences must encourage safe and
efficient traffic flow.
   B.   Within this chapter, the design requirements for pavements, as well as
curbs and gutters and sidewalks, will be defined. Supplementary improvements,
such as sewer, water, lighting and landscaping, will be discussed in the
following chapters of this title. (2016 Code)
14-4-2: GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS; STREET CLASSIFICATIONS:
   A.   All street pavements within the village shall be constructed in
accordance with one or more of the following as they apply:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", state of
Illinois, department of transportation, current edition.
      2.   "Manual For Structural Design Of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement",
department of transportation, current edition.
      3.   "Manual Of Instruction For The Structural Design Of Bituminous
Pavements On Projects Involving MFT And FAUS Funds", department of
transportation, current edition.
   B.   Design requirements for the pavement will be related to the street
classification as set forth by the village engineer.
   C.   The classification of new streets as well as variations to street
classifications shown in table 1 of this section for a given street, must be
submitted to the village engineer for his review prior to submittal of the
preliminary plat to the plan commission.
   D.   Street classifications are defined as follows:
      1.   Arterial Streets: An arterial street is a federal, state, county or
township roadway linking consecutive municipalities, counties or townships. The
following streets are classified as arterial streets:
St. Charles Road.
      2.   Major Collector Streets: A major collector street is a municipal
roadway of considerable continuity that connects municipalities or various
sections of that municipality. The following streets are classified as major
collector streets:
   Reserved.
      3.   Local Collector Streets: A local collector street is a municipal
roadway that carries traffic from minor streets to major streets or arterials,
including principal entrance streets of residential developments. The following
streets are classified as local collector streets:
   Reserved.
      4.   Industrial/Business Service Streets: An industrial/business service
street is a municipal roadway bounded by property zoned industrial/business.
Industrial/business zoning on one side is sufficient for an industrial/business
service street classification.
      5.   Minor Multi-Family Residential Streets: A minor multi- family
residential street is a roadway that provides access to abutting property zoned
for multi-family. Multi-family zoning on one side is sufficient for the minor
multi-family classification.
      6.   Minor Single-Family Residential Streets: A minor single- family
residential street is a roadway that provides access to abutting property zoned
for single-family.
   E.   The pavement design and right of way chart (table 1 of this section) is
intended to show minimum right of way widths and the minimum design standards
for a particular street classification. If, in the opinion of the village
engineer, traffic use or geometric considerations for a road or a part of a
road warrant a greater right of way width, a wider pavement width and/or a
greater structural number than listed on the chart, the village engineer shall
submit his written reasons to the planning and zoning commission prior to the
approval of the preliminary plat. Variations to the requirements of table 1 of
this section shall be considered only as a variation of this chapter.
TABLE 1
PAVEMENT DESIGN AND RIGHT OF WAY WIDTH CHART
Street         Minimum Right Of Width (Back Of  Minimum Crown  Minimum
Classification Way Width (Feet) Curb To Back Of (Inches)       Structural
                                Curb) (Feet)                   Number
Street            Minimum Right Of Width (Back Of  Minimum Crown  Minimum
Classification    Way Width (Feet) Curb To Back Of (Inches)       Structural
                                   Curb) (Feet)                   Number
Arterial          100 - 200        52              7              4.0
                                  or 2 -28 with   4.5            4.0
                                   median strip
Collector:
     Major   80               47              6              3.75
     Local   66               39              6              3.5
Minor:
     Multi-fa66ly             31              5.5            3.0
     Single- 60               27              5.5            3.0
family
     Private -                27              5.5            3.0
Industrial/       80               41              6              3.75
business
 
Note: The pavement diameter (back to back) of circular ended cul-de-sacs shall
be 100 feet and the ROW diameter shall be 130 feet. Cul-de-sacs shall have a
maximum length of 300 feet measured from the centerline of the intersecting
street to the center of the turnaround.
(2016 Code)
14-4-3: PAVEMENT WIDTH:
All new streets, either public or private, within the corporate limits of the
village proposed after the effective date hereof shall be improved with roadway
paving and bordered by portland cement concrete curbs, in accordance with the
pavement design and right of way chart in section
14-4-2, table 1 of this chapter. Driveways to individual residential buildings
do not require curb and gutter or concrete barrier curb. Driveways to all other
buildings require combination concrete curb and gutter or concrete barrier
curb. (2016 Code)
14-4-4: PAVEMENT DESIGN:
   A.   All pavement shall be designed in accordance with the previously
referenced standards and manuals of the department of transportation. The
design thickness shall be dependent on the soil support value and projected
traffic factor. However, in no case shall structural numbers be less than those
shown in section
14-4-2, table 1 of this chapter.
   B.   All subgrade material shall have a minimum Illinois bearing ratio (IBR)
of 2.5. Subgrade material having an IBR less than 2.5 shall be removed and
replaced with a suitable fill material, or the pavement must be designed to
compensate for the soil conditions. The soil support IBR values selected for
use by the designer shall represent a minimum value for the soil to be used.
   C.   At the request of the village engineer, a copy of all design
assumptions and computations on which the proposed design is based shall be
submitted. (2016 Code)
14-4-5: MATERIAL TESTING:
   A.   The requirements of this chapter shall be applicable where deemed
necessary by the village engineer.
   B.   Concurrent with construction of any pavement within the corporate
limits of the village, the developer must furnish the village engineer with
copies of the certificates of testing from the Illinois department of
transportation, Cook County highway department, or from a testing laboratory
which has been prequalified by the Illinois department of transportation for
bituminous aggregate mixture, bituminous mixture, class I and pozzolanic base
course, type A as follows:
      1.   Proportioning tests: Minimum of one plant inspection per day is
required to provide control of moisture and mix gradation.
      2.   Density tests: A minimum required of two (2) per day, one per
location, or one per five hundred (500) tons, whichever shall provide the
greatest number of compaction tests. The thickness of each lift will be
verified by string line and completed pavement by cores where required by the
village engineer.
      3.   Certificates of testing for portland cement concrete shall be
required to verify portland cement concrete design for a minimum of twenty
eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi:
One set of cylinders (1 to 7 day break, 2 to 28 day break) shall be required
for each day's pour or for every fifty (50) yards.
      4.   a. Prior to the installation of the bituminous surface course, but
after installation of the binder course, the contractor or developer shall
furnish the village engineer with a copy of a Dynaflect pavement evaluation
program report of the completed pavement improvements.
         b.   The Dynaflect pavement evaluation program shall be performed
according to the Dynaflect pavement evaluation specification on file in the
office of the village engineer. The program shall generally embody the
following testing/pavement evaluation techniques:
            (1)   Environmental study (frost cycle, drainage, etc.) pavement
surface evaluation.
            (2)   Soil borings at approximately one location per mile.
            (3)   Dynamic pavement deflection analysis (Dynaflect machine or
equal correlated with Benkelman beam or equal).
         c.   The program shall evaluate the existing condition of the base and
binder course in maximum two hundred foot (200') sections. It shall determine
whether or not the pavement section with the addition of the surface course of
design thickness will be projected to meet a ten (10) year pavement life or
greater.
         d.   If the pavement section is projected to meet life expectancy of
ten (10) years or more, then the contractor or developer may proceed as
indicated in subsection 14-4-6D of this chapter.
         e.   If the pavement section is not projected to meet a life
expectancy of ten (10) years or more, then the report shall propose asphalt
overlays in excess of the surface course design thickness or pavement
reconstruction to bring the new pavement section to a ten (10) year life
expectancy. The village engineer shall evaluate the results of the report and
inform the contractor or developer as to the required pavement operation for
each section in question. Upon resolution of these pavement operations, the
contractor or developer may proceed as indicated in subsection 14-4-6D of this
chapter.
      5.   The Dynaflect pavement evaluation program shall not be considered
valid unless the wearing surface was applied during the same construction
season. (2016 Code)
14-4-6: FLEXIBLE PAVEMENTS:
   A.   The design of all flexible pavements shall be based on the minimum
structural design number for the type of street in question.
   B.   A minimum of 2.5 inches of compacted asphalt is required on all
pavements with a structural number of 3.00 to 3.99. This surface shall consist
of one inch (1") wearing surface, class I, and 1.5 inches of binder course,
class I. Pavements with a structural number of 4.00 to 4.99 will require three
inches (3") of asphalt. This surface shall consist of one inch (1") wearing
surface class I and two inches (2") of binder class I.
   C.   The bituminous binder course for all flexible type pavements must set
for a minimum of nine (9) months, including a winter and a spring.
   D.   After receipt of the Dynaflect pavement evaluation program report, the
village engineer will review said report and will perform an inspection of the
existing base and binder courses. All base and binder course failures will then
be repaired to the village engineer's satisfaction. (2016 Code)
14-4-7: RIGID PAVEMENTS:
The design of all concrete pavements shall be based on the minimum thickness as
determined by the structural coefficient for concrete pavements and the
required structural number. The thickness shall be rounded up to the nearest
0.5 inch. Concrete pavement shall be reinforced with rigid wire mesh (6 inch by
6 inch no. 6 rigid fabric), if required by the village engineer. (2016 Code)
14-4-8: DRIVEWAYS, DRIVEWAY APRONS, LOADING/UNLOADING BERTHS AND STORAGE AREAS:
   A.   Driveways, Parking Lots And Storage Areas:
      1.   Driveways, parking lots and storage areas for residential buildings
must be constructed of a minimum two inches (2") bituminous concrete surface
class I over six inches (6") aggregate base course (crushed) type B or five
inches (5") concrete pavement or paving blocks installed in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications.
      2.   Driveways and parking lots for commercial or industrial buildings
shall be constructed of 1.5 inches of bituminous concrete binder class I and
one inch (1") surface class I over either ten inches (10") of crushed stone or
five inches (5") of reinforced concrete pavement (6 inch by 6 inch no. 6 rigid
fabric) shall be considered an acceptable alternate in lieu of the base and
surface combinations above.
      3.   All parking lots for multi-family residential, commercial, or
industrial buildings which have five (5) or more parking spaces shall have a
six inch by eighteen inch (6" x 18") concrete barrier curb type B or concrete
curb and gutter type B-6.12 constructed around the perimeter of the parking
lot.
   B.   Aprons:
      1.   Aprons for residential buildings must be constructed of a minimum of
five inches (5") nonreinforced concrete pavement or a minimum of a two inch
(2") bituminous concrete class I over six inch (6") aggregate base course type
B, or type B or paving blocks installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications. The owner of the property assumes all liability for damage and/
or replacement of paving blocks within the village right of way. The village or
other utility company which damages or removes paving blocks when working
within the right of way shall not be required to make repairs or replace paving
blocks but may use either permitted concrete or bituminous concrete paving. The
owner of the property shall have the option to repair or replace the paving
blocks at his own expense rather than have the village or utility company make
the repair or replacement.
      2.   Aprons for commercial or industrial buildings shall be constructed
of a minimum eight inches (8") reinforced concrete (6 inch by 6 inch no. 6
rigid fabric) on a two inch (2") base of grade 9 gravel.
   C.   Loading/Unloading Berths: Berths provided in nonresidential areas for
the loading and unloading of materials or merchandise from vehicles must be
constructed to a minimum of eight inches (8") reinforced concrete pavement.
   D.   Pavement Requirements For Storage In Nonresidential Areas: All outside
areas used for the storage of materials, products or vehicles in nonresidential
areas shall be a minimum six inches (6") reinforced concrete pavement (6 inch
by 6 inch no. 6 rigid fabric). (2016 Code)
14-4-9: ALLOWABLE PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS:
   A.   Table 2 of this section indicates the approved materials which can be
used for roadway construction within the village. Listed with these materials
are the coefficients to be used for approved pavement structural number. The
coefficients, when multiplied by the thickness of the materials, will yield the
structural number.
TABLE 2
ALLOWABLE PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
Structural Materials Strength Requirements
                     MS IBR1 psi           Coefficients
Structural Materials           Strength Requirements
                               MS          IBR1 psi    Coefficients
Bituminous surface:
 Class I                      1,700                   0.40
Base course:
 Aggregate, type B
 Uncrushed                                50          0.10
 Crushed (100%)                           80          0.13
 Aggregate, type A                        80          0.13
 Waterbound macadam                       110         0.14
 Cement aggregate                              6502   0.23
Bituminous aggregate mixture   900 - 1,900             0.24 - 0.33
Bituminous mixture, class I    1,700                   0.33
Portland cement concrete (new)                  3,5003 0.50
 
Notes:
1.   Marshall stability.
2.   7 day design compressive strength.
3.   28 day design compressive strength.
   B.   Portland cement concrete shall be proportioned according to the
applicable sections of the state standard specifications and shall be designed
for a minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five
hundred (3,500) psi. Air entrainment shall be four percent (4%) to seven
percent (7%) and slump between two inches (2") and four inches (4"). (2016
Code)
14-4-10: SUBGRADE PREPARATION:
   A.   The subgrade of all roads shall be graded and rolled in accordance with
section 212 of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
current edition, by the department of transportation, hereinafter referred to
as "state standard specifications". Particular attention is directed to the
requirements for the replacement of soft and unstable material as contained in
article 202.03. Embankment shall be placed and compacted in accordance with
section 207 of said specifications.
   B.   At least one standard density test (performed in accordance with AASHTO
T99) shall be taken in each fill section, with the maximum distance between
tests of three hundred feet (300'). One standard proctor test shall be taken
from each different source of borrowed material, if required by the village
engineer. The proctor and density tests must be submitted for review and
approval by the village engineer. Upon approval of these tests, an inspection
of the subgrade will be made by the village, and the subgrade must be approved
prior to placing any type of curb and gutter or base material. (2016 Code)
14-4-11: STREET GRADES:
   A.   The longitudinal gradient shall not be in excess of four percent (4%)
on primary, major or secondary streets, nor in excess of six percent (6%) on
other streets, unless approved by the village engineer, nor will it have a
minimum of less than 0.35 percent.
   B.   Where the gradient of the street warrants installation of vertical type
curb and other special design of improvements due to right of way conditions,
such as double inlets, the village engineer is authorized to require said
design.
   C.   The minimum length of vertical curves shall be one hundred feet (100')
for 1.5 percent difference of grade. For each additional one percent (1%)
difference in grade over 1.5 percent, a fifty foot (50') increment shall be
added to the length of vertical curve. If the grade differential is less than
1.5 percent, a vertical curve is not required. (2016 Code)
14-4-12: SIGHT DISTANCES:
The village engineer shall show at the points of intersection of proposed roads
with existing roads that the minimum stopping sight distance indicated below
for the legal speed limit is provided on existing roads:
 
Legal Speed Limit Minimum Stopping Sight Distance (Feet)
25 - 30           200
31 - 40           275
41 - 50           350
51 - 60           475
61 - 70           600
 
(2016 Code)
14-4-13: CURBS AND GUTTERS:
   A.   Combination curb and gutters shall be concrete with a two inch (2")
minimum compacted granular subbase and shall conform to the village standard
details.
   B.   On major collector, local collector or industrial/business service
streets, all curb and gutter at the parkway side of the road shall be B-6.12
barrier type except at driveways and ramps and except where the village
engineer approves a modification to conform with an existing curb and gutter.
On arterial streets, all curbs and gutters shall be B-6.18.
   C.   The concrete used for the curb and gutter shall be of class X and
conform with the Illinois department of transportation publication, "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", section 500, entitled
"Concrete For Structures And Incidental Construction", and section 700,
"Materials".
   D.   On minor multi-family residential, minor single-family residential and
cul-de-sac streets, all curb and gutters at the parkway side of the road shall
be roll type except at driveways and ramps and except where the village
engineer approves a modification to conform with an existing curb and gutter.
At crosswalks, sidewalk ramps will be constructed in accordance with the
village standard details, "Sidewalk Ramps For The Handicapped".
   E.   At concrete medians, the curb and gutter shall be reversed slope B-
6.12.
   F.   All minor private streets shall have a six inch by eighteen inch (6" x
18") concrete barrier curb type B constructed on both sides. (2016 Code)
14-4-14: SIDEWALKS AND CARRIAGE WALKS:
   A.   All public walks designed for pedestrian travel shall be improved with
not less than five inches (5") of class X portland cement concrete pavement,
six inches (6") at driveways and extending three feet (3') each side of the
driveway. The width shall be at least four feet (4') in areas zoned residential
and five feet (5') in other areas. Sidewalks shall be poured on a two inch (2")
compacted granular subbase. Expansion joints are to be placed fifty feet (50')
on center.
   B.   Construction joints are to be troweled in four feet (4') on center for
four foot (4') sidewalks and five feet (5') on center for five foot (5')
sidewalks. The sidewalk shall have a cross slope of one-fourth inch (1/4") per
foot down toward the street and be elevated one inch (1") above the finished
grade of the parkway. The parkway shall be pitched down from the sidewalk
toward the street with a minimum pitch of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot to a
maximum of three-fourths inch (3/4") per foot. Sidewalks shall meet the
requirements of the following applicable sections of "Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction" of the Illinois department of transportation:
section 600, "Incidental Construction", and diagram D; and section 700,
"Materials".
   C.   Whenever a side of a street in a block of a development is more than
seventy five percent (75%) completed by the building of structures on such
block, sidewalks must be installed by the developer on all vacant premises to
provide a continuity of sidewalks. (2016 Code)
   D.   Concrete carriage walks shall be improved with not less than five
inches (5") of class X portland cement concrete pavement, six inches (6") at
driveways and extending three feet (3') each side of the driveway. The width
shall be at least four feet (4') in areas zoned residential and five feet (5')
in other areas. Sidewalks shall be poured on a minimum two inch (2") compacted
granular subbase. Any addition of field or flagstone to further beautify the
walkway requires that all stone be mortared to the concrete.
   E.   Carriage walks constructed with paving bricks and sand shall be
improved with not less than two to three inches (2-3") of compacted sand over a
six inch (6") base of three quarter inch (3/4") gravel or stone. (amd. Ord. 18-
51, 10-2-2018)
14-4-15: MAINTENANCE AND RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The maintenance and responsibility for all CPD or private roadways
shall be accountable to the developer/owner or homeowners' association.
   B.   All streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be under warranty for
all defects and failures in base course, as well as surface course, for a
period of two (2) years. A guarantee for those improvements, which will be
dedicated to the village, shall be for a period of two (2) years after the date
of acceptance. Those improvements in private areas shall be guaranteed for one
year from the date of release of the subdivision improvement security. (2016
Code)
CHAPTER 5
STREET NAME SIGNS; TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS; STREET LIGHTING
SECTION:
14-5-1: Street Name Signs
14-5-2: Traffic Control Devices And Markings
14-5-3: Street Lighting
14-5-1: STREET NAME SIGNS:
   A.   Street name signs should be erected at all street intersections
regardless of other route marking that may be present. Lettering on street name
signs should be at least four inches (4") high. Supplementary lettering to
indicate the type of street (e.g., Street, Avenue, Road, etc.) or section of
the village (e.g., N.W.) may be in smaller lettering, at least two inches (2")
high. Conventional abbreviations are acceptable except for the street name
itself.
   B.   The street name sign should be reflectorized or illuminated. The legend
and background shall be of contrasting colors and should have a white message
and border on a green background.
   C.   In business districts and on principal arterials, street name signs
should be placed at least on diagonally opposite corners so that they will be
on the far right hand side of the intersection for traffic on the major street.
Signs naming both streets should be erected at each location. They should be
mounted with their faces parallel to the streets they name, and they shall be
installed at a height of seven feet (7') and not less than two feet (2') nor
more than six feet (6') from the edge of the pavement. Where possible, they
shall be installed adjacent to street lighting. Street name signs shall be
permanently anchored in concrete. (2016 Code)
14-5-2: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS:
   A.   All traffic control devices and signals, except traffic control light
signals, shall be installed on all streets in accordance with the standards in
the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", Illinois department of
transportation, Springfield, Illinois, and approved by the village engineer.
   B.   All streets shall be striped with lane markings in accordance with the
standards in the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", Illinois
department of transportation, Springfield, Illinois, and approved by the
village engineer. (2016 Code)
14-5-3: STREET LIGHTING:
   A.   Description:
      1.   Streetlights and appurtenances shall be installed according to:
         a.   The "American Standard Practice For Roadway Lighting", current
edition.
         b.   The national electrical code, current edition.
      2.   The streetlight system consists of the poles, mast arms, luminaries,
wire and all other materials and work necessary to complete the street lighting
installation.
      3.   The street lighting system is to be constructed within the right of
way or easements for improvements to be accepted by the village and in
locations shown on the approved plan for comprehensive planned developments.
      4.   All streetlights and appurtenances and installation and operation
shall conform to the current requirements of Commonwealth Edison Company. All
streetlight engineering and plans must be approved by Commonwealth Edison
Company prior to final approval by the village engineer. Any requirements of
Commonwealth Edison Company shall override any requirements of this section
where appropriate.
   B.   Spacing: Streetlights are to be located at all intersections, as well
as along street blocks as indicated in the following table:
            Mounting             Spacing        Luminaries Type
Street Type Height   Pole Height Measured Along And Wattage     Initial Lumens
                                 Centerline
              Mounting             Spacing        Luminaries
Street Type   Height   Pole Height Measured Along Type And   Initial Lumens
                                   Centerline     Wattage
Arterial      35'0"    33'         175'           250        30,000
Collector:
 Major        30'10"   28'         175'           1501       16,000
 Local        30'10"   28'         200'           1501       16,000
Multi-family  25'10"   23'         250'           1501       16,000
Single-family 25'10"   23'         250'           1501       16,000
Private       25'10"   23'         250'           1501       16,000
Commercial    30'10"   28'         200'           1501       16,000
 
Note:
1.   HPS = High pressure sodium.
   C.   Location: Streetlights shall be located on one side of the street
unless, in the judgment of the village engineer, it is impractical to do so.
All streetlight poles shall be set three feet (3') back from curb line. At
intersections with only one standard, the bracket of each shall be
perpendicular to a street as determined by the village engineer.
   D.   Design Requirement And Approval: The complete lighting system shall be
designed by a registered professional engineer of the state of Illinois and
shall be submitted to the village engineer for approval. In special cases, the
village engineer may designate larger lamps, higher poles, two (2) masted
poles, or vary the spacing as he deems necessary to meet special conditions. In
no event shall streetlights in residential districts be spaced less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') apart.
   E.   Materials And Workmanship: All materials comprising the lighting
systems shall be the product of a firm or firms regularly engaged in the
manufacture of such materials and shall be covered by the manufacturer's or
installing contractor's warranty or guarantee. The materials shall be new, of
current manufacture and of standard design and free from all defects.
Workmanship shall be of the highest grade in accordance with standard practice.
All work shall be done in accordance with those standards requiring the highest
grade.
   F.   Material And Equipment Specifications:
      1.   Conduit: All driveways and street and sidewalk crossings shall have
a two inch (2") galvanized rigid steel conduit or PVC conduit used as a raceway
for underground cable with two inch (2") insulating fiber bushings.
      2.   Wire/Cable: All wire installed under this section shall be "USE"
copper with six hundred (600) volt insulation. Cable shall be of a type
approved by the village engineer for direct burial such as type "USE". Uniduct
cable shall be required for commercial and manufacturing areas. One conductor
shall be white to determine neutral. Wire installed in the trench shall be six
hundred (600) volt no. 6 copper "USE". All wire will be subject to an
insulation test to ground after installation. Any section of wiring failing to
pass the minimum insulation test or showing an obvious short circuit shall be
replaced. All wire is to be buried at least twenty four inches (24") below
finished grade.
      3.   Fuses: Each pole shall be fused with a ten (10) amp fusetron and
"USE" bussman, HEB type fuse holder with rubber boots. All hot conductors must
be fused.
      4.   Lamps: All lamps shall be rated 120/240 volts. All lamps shall be
high pressure sodium. All lamps shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150)
watts, except at intersections with state or county highways or at
intersections in business parks or industrial parks where they shall be two
hundred fifty (250) watts.
      5.   Luminaries: The luminaries for lighting improvements to be accepted
by the village for maintenance shall be a standard line of luminaries equipped
with photoelectrical control units and one piece reflector housing of anodized
aluminum. The luminary shall be equipped also with a hinged refractor holder
that shall be securely held in place by a suitable latch. The luminary head
shall embody a two inch (2") slip filter and shall be equipped with adjustable
latch lugs to permit the proper orientation of the light pattern on the street;
and EEL-NEMA standard, three (3) terminal polarized lock in type, photoelectric
control receptacle. In addition, sodium units shall be equipped with built in
ballasts. The luminaries shall provide lighting distribution equivalent to IES
type II except at intersections where IES type V or IES type II with four-way
distribution shall be provided. The luminaries for lighting improvements to be
installed in planned unit or other developments shall be approved by the
village engineer for construction.
      6.   Ballasts: Ballasts shall be of high quality grain oriented strip
steel, high power factor, constant wattage and shall have a primary voltage
rating of 120/240 volts. They shall be suitable for outdoor service and capable
of starting the lamp at minus twenty degrees Fahrenheit (-20°F).
      7.   Controls: Individual photoelectric control units shall be provided
with each luminaire. Said control units shall fit all EEL-NEMA standard
receptacles and shall be rated two hundred forty (240) volts, one thousand two
hundred (1,200) watts and constructed so as to prevent false turnoff by passing
automobile headlights or lightning flashes.
      8.   Mast Arm Brackets:
         a.   Mast arm brackets for lighting improvements to be accepted by the
village for maintenance shall have a minimum spread of approximately eight feet
(8') and shall be the upsweep type with wire inlet and necessary bracing. The
brackets shall be manufactured from aluminum alloy and shall be capable of
accommodating the slip filter arrangement of the luminaire.
         b.   The mast arm clamps and fittings shall be heat treated aluminum
castings, and shall be free of all imperfections to ensure an even grip on the
standard and to provide easy mounting of the mast arms.
         c.   Where drawn seamless tubing is used for the mast arm, it shall
conform to ASTM specifications 10-58T and GS10A-T6.
         d.   Aluminum for the mast arm clamps and fittings shall conform to
ASTM specifications S5A-F and B26-50T.
         e.   Mast arm brackets for lighting improvements to be installed in
planned unit and other private developments shall be of the type and length
approved by the village engineer.
      9.   Light Standards:
         a.   Light standards to be accepted by the village for maintenance may
be manufactured of concrete, centrifugally cast, prestressed, and steel
reinforced and of breakaway design. The standards shall have smooth ground and
polished surfaces. The cross section of the standard shall contain a raceway
extending throughout the length of the standard. The raceway shall have a
minimum opening of one and one-half inches (11/2") and shall not exceed two
inches (2") at the top of the standard. A handhold shall be provided and shall
be covered with a heat treated cast aluminum door, fastened to nonferrous
inserts in the standard with stainless steel bolts.
         b.   All standards shall be provided with an aluminum mast cap held to
the top of the standard by stainless steel screws and nonferrous inserts.
         c.   Aluminum for the handhold doors and mast caps shall conform to
ASTM specifications S5A-F or SG70A-T6 and B26-50T.
         d.   Roadway lighting standards shall be not less than eight inches
(8") in diameter with a butt base below final grade level. It shall be equipped
with mast arm brackets securely attached to the standard.
      10.   Splices: All underground cable shall be continuous. Necessary
splices shall be made aboveground and shall have the location recorded on the
plans. Splices shall be made by using 3M Scotch cast kits or approved equal.
Connection to Commonwealth Edison feeder lines must include a fuse box for
shutoff to Commonwealth Edison power supply. Said fuse box shall be of the type
approved by the village engineer.
      11.   Size Of Trench And Backfilling Procedures:
         a.   This work shall consist of constructing a trench for the
accommodation of cables or conduit and backfilling it at the location shown on
the plans or as directed by the village engineer. The trench shall be excavated
at least twenty four inches (24") below finished grade.
         b.   Backfilling material shall be deposited in the trench in layers,
not to exceed six inches (6") in depth, and shall be thoroughly compacted by
suitable tamping before the next layer is deposited in the trench. The trench
shall be located two feet (2') back of the curb or as directed by the village
engineer.
      12.   Tests: After the installation is complete and at a time convenient
to the village, all equipment shall be demonstrated to operate in accordance
with the drawings and specifications.
      13.   Warranty: The contractor and his surety shall guarantee and warrant
that the equipment, material and workmanship, regardless of the manufacturer,
will, for a period of two (2) years from the date of final acceptance by the
village or private owner, satisfactorily serve the purpose for which they were
installed. Any defective material or workmanship shall be repaired or replaced
by said contractor to the satisfaction of the village without cost to the
village.
      14.   Existing Utilities: The location of existing underground utilities,
such as water mains, sewers, gas lines, etc., can be determined from plans
available at the project. However, the village does not assume responsibility
in the event that the actual location may be different from the location as
shown on the available plans.
      15.   As Built Drawings: Upon completion of the installation and testing
by the village, the contractor must present a marked set of as built,
reproducible drawings to the village. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 6
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
SECTION:
14-6-1: General Requirements
14-6-2: Design
14-6-3: Allowable Materials
14-6-4: Construction Requirements
14-6-5: Water Main Pressure Testing
14-6-6: Water Main Leakage Testing
14-6-7: Preliminary Flushing
14-6-8: Sterilization
14-6-9: Final Flushing And Testing
14-6-10: Compliance With State Regulations
14-6-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No residential, commercial or industrial subdivision or development
within the corporate limits of the village shall be approved unless it is
served by the village water supply system.
   B.   All water supply systems which are installed in the public ways or in
easements serving a central system shall be dedicated to the village. In all
cases where a central water supply system is installed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, said water supply system shall be dedicated to the
village. (2016 Code)
14-6-2: DESIGN:
   A.   General Specifications:
      1.   Water distribution mains shall be of adequate size and shall serve
the entire development.
      2.   The mains shall be designed according to the "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" or according
to the "Recommended Standards For Water Works". The more stringent requirements
of either shall apply.
      3.   The mains shall, in general, be installed in the street right of
way. In no case shall mains be installed within seven feet (7') of a building
in a residential district and within ten feet (10') of a building in any other
zoning district.
      4.   The minimum size shall be six inches (6") internal diameter in
residential areas. In other developments, the minimum size shall be eight
inches (8").
      5.   All water mains shall be installed with a minimum depth of cover of
5.5 feet, measured from the established grade shown on the plans to the top of
the pipe.
      6.   Mains shall be extended to the far property line of the development
along public rights of way and at any other location indicated by the village
engineer.
   B.   Fire Protection System: The design engineer shall show in a separate
report that at several locations and at any other location that may be selected
by the village engineer, the proposed water main system, together with that
proposed in the master plan for the village, will supply the fire flow required
in excess of domestic consumption demands, using a "C" factor of 100 for cast
iron or ductile iron and 120 for asbestos cement or thick walled PVC water
mains, ignoring fittings, and with a minimum residual pressure of twenty (20)
psi.
      1.   Residence:
         a.   Dwellings, detached and semidetached: One thousand (1,000) to one
thousand five hundred (1,500) gpm.
         b.   Dwellings, attached (townhouses), each unit separated by an
approved firewall: One thousand (1,000) to two thousand (2,000) gpm.
         c.   Dwellings attached other than above and dwellings, multiple-
family: Three thousand (3,000) to four thousand (4,000) gpm.
      2.   Business:
         a.   Business and office uses: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) to
three thousand (3,000) gpm.
         b.   Commercial and mercantile buildings, including warehouses: Three
thousand (3,000) to six thousand (6,000) gpm.
      3.   Manufacturing: Three thousand (3,000) to six thousand (6,000) gpm.
      4.   Institutional: Three thousand (3,000) gpm.
   C.   Gridiron Or Looping Of Mains:
      1.   Each six inch (6") water main shall be looped (except cul-de-sacs or
stubbed streets unless deemed necessary by the village engineer) so that runs
between connections to six inch (6") or larger size mains shall not be greater
than one block not to exceed one thousand eight hundred feet (1,800').
      2.   Each eight inch (8") water main shall be looped so that runs between
connections to eight inch (8") or larger mains shall not be greater than one
thousand four hundred feet (1,400') in a commercial area or one thousand eight
hundred feet (1,800') in a residential area.
      3.   Each ten inch (10") water main shall be looped so that runs between
connection to ten inch (10") or larger size mains shall not be greater than two
thousand two hundred feet (2,200').
      4.   Each twelve inch (12") and larger water main shall be looped so that
runs between connections to twelve inch (12") or larger mains shall not be
greater than three thousand feet (3,000').
      5.   If the design engineer's report shows spacing greater than provided
in subsections C1 through C4 of this section for the required residual
pressure, then that spacing shall supersede the said requirements.
   D.   Fire Hydrants:
      1.   Whenever a water main is to be installed for the purpose of
providing fire hydrants, the local fire protection district having jurisdiction
and the village engineer must approve the hydrant spacing plan prior to
commencement of work.
      2.   Fire hydrants shall not be located closer than thirty feet (30') to
any building.
      3.   Fire hydrants shall be located at all corners and intersections of
public and private streets, and the minimum spacing allowed shall be such that
three hundred foot (300') radius circles centered on each hydrant cover all
construction on the site that will burn.
      4.   If the location or configuration of the building requires it,
private fire hydrants shall be installed. Private elevated or ground storage
reservoirs may also be installed as required.
      5.   Dead end six inch (6") main extensions serving hydrants in cul-de-
sacs shall not be more than four hundred feet (400') long.
      6.   Where water transmission lines or off site water lines are installed
in an existing right of way (or in easements to an existing right of way),
hydrants must be installed at three hundred foot (300') intervals. In other
locations, six hundred foot (600') intervals are required with tees for future
hydrants being provided within three hundred feet (300') of the fire hydrants.
      7.   Fire hydrants must be located such that access routes from all
points of any building to adjacent fire hydrants do not exceed three hundred
feet (300').
   E.   Valves:
      1.   Valves shall be located on water mains so as to effectively isolate
the sections from the system with minimum disruption.
      2.   Valves shall be installed so that not over eight hundred feet (800')
of main will be shut off at any given time unless the village engineer permits
spacing at greater intervals.
      3.   If a tee is installed, two (2) valves may be utilized.
      4.   The design engineer shall, by diagrams and/or written report, set
forth his basis for location of water main valves.
      5.   No more than thirty (30) single-family dwelling units shall be
without water with the shutting off of any three (3) valve locations.
      6.   Valve vaults are required on all valves 2.5 inches or larger. Forty
eight inch (48") vaults are required on valves ten inches (10") or smaller.
Sixty inch (60") vaults or larger are required on all other size valves.
      7.   A maximum of three (3) valves shall be used to isolate any given
section of a water main.
   F.   Services: The plans, except for residential developments with
individual service for each unit, shall show the calculated static water
pressure at the lowest and highest ground elevations on the site. Calculations
shall be presented showing that the proposed water services are of a large
enough size to supply an adequate flow of water at the outlet of the meter,
assuming the service is "fairly rough pipe" as specified in the Illinois state
plumbing code, current edition.
   G.   Thrust Blocks: Thrust blocks are required at all valves, hydrants, tees
and bends. Engineering drawings shall indicate the location of each concrete
thrust block to be installed. Where undisturbed earth is not available or not
likely to be available to back up pressure type concrete thrust blocks, the
engineer shall specify tie rods with or without anchor type concrete thrust
blocks and submit design data for such specifications. (2016 Code)
14-6-3: ALLOWABLE MATERIALS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All water main pipe, be it new installation, replacement and/or
repair, shall be ductile cast iron cement lined bituminous coated pipe class
52. All fittings shall be cast iron. The village engineer may allow other
materials, as listed in this section, only if soil conditions warrant alternate
pipe materials.
      2.   Water main pipe and fittings must conform to the applicable
paragraphs of section 40 of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois (SSWS)", current edition.
   B.   Water Main:
      1.   Ductile Iron:
         a.   Ductile iron pipe shall conform to AWWA specification C151-65.
Normal working pressure shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) psi. Pipe
shall be furnished in nominal eighteen foot (18') laying lengths.
         b.   Ductile iron pipe shall be bituminous coated cement mortar lined
as specified in section 51-8.2 of AWWA specification C151-65. The ductile iron
pipe shall be coated on the outside as specified in section 15.8.1 with the
exceptions that the thickness of the coating shall be an average of two (2) to
four (4) mils and a minimum of two (2) mils.
         c.   Each pipe shall have the weight and class designation
conspicuously painted on it. In addition, the manufacturer's mark and year in
which the pipe was made shall be distinctly stamped or cast on the face of the
bell.
         d.   All fittings shall be connected to sections of water main pipe by
means of mechanical joints or approved push type joints.
      2.   Thick Walled PVC (Asbestos Cement Pipe):
         a.   Asbestos cement pipe shall conform to the requirements of AWWA
specification C400 or ASTM C296. Normal working pressure shall exceed one
hundred fifty (150) psi. Pipe shall be furnished in nominal thirteen foot (13')
laying lengths; except, that six inch (6") diameter pipe may be furnished in
nominal ten foot (10') lengths.
         b.   All fittings shall be connected to sections of water main pipe by
means of mechanical joints or approved push type joints designed for use on
asbestos cement water pipe.
      3.   Thick Walled PVC:
         a.   PVC pressure pipe (pipe class 150-SDR 18), available in sizes up
to twelve inches (12"), shall conform to the requirements of AWWA C900-75 and
shall be manufactured to cast iron dimensions. Normal working pressure shall
not exceed one hundred fifty (150) psi. The pipe shall not exceed twenty feet
(20') in laying length. Random lengths shall not be less than ten feet (10')
long.
         b.   All fittings shall be connected to water main pipe by means of
mechanical joints or approved push type joints.
   C.   Pipe Joints:
      1.   Ductile Iron Water Main:
         a.   Slip Joints:
            (1)   Sections of the water main pipe shall be connected by means
of slip joints, consisting of bells cast integrally with pipe which have
interior angular recesses conforming with the shape and dimensions of a rubber
sealing gasket, the interior dimension of which is such that it will admit the
insertion of the spigot end of the joining pipe in such manner as to compress
the gasket tightly between the bell of the pipe and the inserted spigot, thus
securing the gasket and sealing the joint. Such a slip joint shall be any one
of the following make or type or its equivalent:
               (A)   Super belltite: As supplied by James B. Clow And Son.
               (B)   Fastite: As supplied by the American Cast Iron Pipe
Company.
               (C)   Tyton: As supplied by the U.S. Pipe And Foundry Company.
            (2)   The lubricant used in conjunction with the slip joints shall
be that recommended by the supplier specified or commercially processed animal
fat or vegetable shortening.
         b.   Mechanical Joint Pipe: Mechanical joint pipe shall meet the
requirements of ASA specification A-U 11. Bolting materials shall meet the
requirements of the manufacturer.
      2.   Thick Walled PVC Joints: PVC pressure pipe joints (pipe class 150-
SDR 18), available in sizes up to twelve inches (12"), shall conform to the
requirements of AWWA specification C900-75 with an integral wall thickened bell
and an elastomeric gasket such that the minimum wall thickness of the bell at
any point shall conform to SDR 18.
   D.   Concrete Thrust Blocks: All thrust blocks shall be precast or poured
with class X concrete in accordance with the provisions of "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction (STSRB)", section 5.04; except,
that the contractor shall bear the cost of the mix design. When poured, care
shall be taken so that the cement does not interfere with access to joints or
with hydrant drainage.
   E.   Pipe Sleeves For Augering Or Tunneling: Pipe sleeves for augering or
tunneling shall be fabricated of 0.312 inch thick rolled sheet steel, of the
diameter specified, with a continuous circular one-half inch (1/2") bead weld
and shall meet the requirements of ASTM A-120.
   F.   Castings: Castings for water valve vaults shall be Neenah R-1031 or
approved equal with type B lid stamped "Village of Berkeley – Water".
   G.   Curb Stops: Curb stops shall be the O-ring sealing type, Mueller
Oriseal Mark II model H-15154 with copper service thread connections at both
ends. The stop shall be quarter turn with a solid tee head which is an integral
part of the plug. The stop shall be of nominal size equal to the size of the
service line and be Minneapolis pattern type (11/2 inch threads for 3/4 inch
stop) with check and without drain.
   H.   Curb Box: Curb boxes shall be Minneapolis pattern base, telescoping
extension type, equipped with stationary rod, Mueller model H-10300 for three-
fourths inch (3/4") stops, model H-10302 for one inch (1") stops and model H-
10304 for one and one-half inch (11/2") or two inch (2") stops.
   I.   House Service: All house service water lines shall be a minimum of
three-fourths inch (3/4") copper type K complete with corporation cock, stop
cock and cast iron buffalo box. Service lines shall conform to ASTM B-88-58 or
equal and the village plumbing ordinance.
   J.   Corporation Stops: Corporation stops shall be Mueller H-15000, with
nominal size being equivalent to the copper service line.
   K.   System Valves:
      1.   Four inch (4") to twelve inch (12") gate valves shall be resilient
wedge type conforming to AWWA C-509-80, manufactured by Mueller. Valves larger
than twelve inches (12") in size shall be resilient seated butterfly valves
conforming to C-504 and shall be equipped with manual operators designed for
submersible service.
      2.   Four inch (4") to ten inch (10") system valves shall be installed in
a forty eight inch (48") precast concrete valve vault, and system valves
greater than ten inches (10") in size shall be installed in a sixty inch (60")
precast concrete valve vault.
      3.   All valve vaults shall be in accordance with the requirements set
forth in chapter 9, "Appurtenances To Water, Sanitary Sewer And Storm Systems",
of this title. Steps are not required for water vaults.
      4.   Fire hydrant auxiliary valves shall be furnished with a two (2)
piece, five inch (5") buffalo style cast iron screw type adjustable valve box,
Mueller H-10360 with the word "WATER" cast on the lid.
      5.   All valves shall have mechanical joint or push type ends, inside
screw, and shall be equipped with a two inch (2") operated nut. All valves
shall open by turning counterclockwise.
   L.   Fire Hydrants:
      1.   The fire hydrant shall have a valve opening of five inches (5") and
shall be equipped with two (2) 2-inch hose connections and one 4-inch male
pumper connection. The outside diameter of the male thread on the two inch (2")
hose connection shall be "National Standard" threads. Hose caps shall be
fastened to the barrel with steel chain of at least one-eighth inch (1/8")
thickness.
      2.   Each hydrant shall be provided with a drain that will leave no water
standing in the barrel of the hydrant when the hydrant is closed. This drain
shall close tightly before the hydrant begins to open.
      3.   All fire hydrants shall be equipped with a six inch (6") Mueller
resilient wedge gate valve flanged directly to the hydrant.
      4.   Fire hydrants shall be the break flange type, open against pressure,
and shall be one of the following:
         a.   Mueller Centurion as manufactured by Mueller Company, Decatur,
Illinois.
         b.   Clow Medallion as manufactured by Clow Valve Co., Oskaloosa,
Iowa.
      5.   The bowl of each hydrant shall be well braced against unexcavated
earth at the end of the trench with stone slabs or concrete backing, or it
shall be tied to the pipe with suitable rods or clamps.
      6.   All hydrants shall be thoroughly cleaned of dirt and foreign matter
before setting.
      7.   Fire hydrants shall be installed not further than seven feet (7')
nor less than three feet (3') from the edge of a lane of traffic that is to be
kept open to all weather and is adequate in width, clearance and strength for
firefighting equipment. Parking lots shall be designed to provide not less than
fifteen feet (15') of clearance on each side of the hydrant on which a steamer
or hose connection is located.
      8.   The height of the nut on a four inch (4") steamer connection shall
be no less than twenty four inches (24") nor more than thirty six inches (36")
above the finished grade at the hydrant.
      9.   All fire hydrants shall conform to AWWA C-502.
   M.   Air Release Valves:
      1.   Air release valves shall be placed on the water main at high points
as deemed necessary by the village engineer to serve as air vents preventing
air locking of the water main.
      2.   These air release valves shall be of the APCO 200 A type or an
approved equal. All air release valves (sic). (2016 Code)
14-6-4: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Excavation:
      1.   The trench shall be excavated so that the water main will be at a
minimum depth of 5.5 feet. The trench for the pipe shall be excavated at least
twelve inches (12") wider than the external diameter of the pipe and not more
than eighteen inches (18") wider than the diameter of the pipe at the top of
the pipe.
      2.   Bell holes of sufficient depth shall be provided across the bottom
of the trench to accommodate the bell of the pipe to provide sufficient room
for joint making and to ensure uniform bearing for the pipe.
      3.   Where a firm foundation is not found to exist for the bottom of the
trench at the required depth due to soft, spongy or other unsuitable soil, such
unsuitable soil shall be removed for the full width of the trench or tunnel and
replaced with well compacted unwashed gravel or an equal substitute therefor,
or crushed stone if such compacted material proved unsatisfactory. Where rock
in either ledge or bounder formation is encountered, it shall be removed below
grade and replaced with a well compacted cushion of unwashed gravel having a
thickness under the pipe of not less than eight inches (8").
   B.   Sheeting And Bracing:
      1.   Sheeting and bracing shall be placed in the ditch, as may be
necessary, for the safety of the work and public, for the protection of the
workers, adjacent properties, or structures and for the proper installation of
the work.
      2.   Sheeting and/or bracing shall be progressively removed as the
backfill is placed in such a manner as to prevent the caving in of the sides of
the trench or excavation and to prevent damage to the work.
      3.   Sheeting which is placed for the protection of the public, adjacent
properties or structures shall not be removed until the backfill has been
placed and thoroughly compacted. While sheeting is being withdrawn, all
vacancies shall be carefully filled with sand free from silt, rammed into
place, puddled or otherwise firmly compacted.
   C.   Laying Water Main:
      1.   The contractor shall keep the trench free from water while the water
main is being placed and until the pipe joint has been sealed to the
satisfaction of the village engineer or his representative.
      2.   Adequate provision shall be made for safety, storing and protecting
all water pipe prior to actual installation in the trench. Care shall be taken
to prevent damage to the pipe castings, both inside and out. Provisions shall
be made to keep the inside of the pipe clean throughout its storage period and
to keep mud and/or other debris from being deposited therein. All pipe shall be
thoroughly cleaned on the inside before the laying of the pipe. Proper
equipment shall be used for the safe handling, conveying and laying of the
pipe. All pipe shall be carefully lowered into the trench, piece by piece, by
means of a derrick, ropes, or other suitable tools or equipment, in such manner
as to prevent damage to water main materials and protective coatings and
linings. Under no circumstances shall water main materials be dropped or dumped
into the trench.
      3.   In making joints, all portions of the jointing materials and the
socket and spigot ends of the joining pipe shall be wiped clean of all foreign
materials. The actual assembly of the jointing shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions and/or directed in writing by the
village engineer. During construction, until jointing operations are complete,
the open ends of all pipes shall be at all times protected and sealed with
temporary watertight plugs.
   D.   Pipe Cutting:
      1.   The cutting of pipe for inserting valves, fittings or closure pieces
shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner without damage to the cement
lining and so as to leave a smooth end at right angles to the axis of the pipe.
When machine cutting is not available for cutting pipe twenty inches (20") in
diameter or larger, the electric arc cutting method will be permitted, using a
carbon or steel rod. Only qualified and experienced workers shall be used on
this work.
      2.   The flame cutting of pipe by means of an oxyacetylene torch shall
not be allowed.
   E.   Water Service Connections:
      1.   House Services:
         a.   Water service connections for house services shall be located as
directed by the village or its representative and shall be laid at a depth of
not less than 5.5 feet and conform to requirements of the village plumbing
code, title 10, chapter 5 of this code.
         b.   Each service connection shall be connected to the water main by a
brass corporation cock, said pipe to extend horizontally at right angles with
the water main to the front line of the lot or parcel which it is to serve
unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified herein. Said service pipe
shall be provided with a brass stopcock at the location in the lines as
directed by the village over which a cast iron service box or valve vault shall
be set. Flared type joints shall be used between the service pipe and fittings.
      2.   Commercial Services: Water service connections for commercial
services shall be installed according to the requirements of the village
plumbing code, title 10, chapter 5 of this code.
   F.   Backfilling:
      1.   The contractor shall not backfill above the top of the pipe until
grade, alignment and the pipe joints have been made available for checking by
the village engineer or his representative.
      2.   Unless otherwise directed, all trenches and excavations shall be
backfilled as soon as possible, and the work shall be prosecuted expeditiously
after it has been commenced. As soon as it is laid, all pipe shall have the
space between the pipe and the bottom and sides of the trench packed full of
sand, grade 9 gravel, or clean, dry materials by hand and thoroughly tamped
with a shovel, hoe or light tamper, as fast as placed up to the level of the
middle of the pipe. The filling shall be carried up evenly on both sides. Care
shall be taken that no rock, frozen material, or other hard substances are
placed in contact with the pipe. The pipe shall then be covered at least
eighteen inches (18") with clean, dry material.
      3.   The remainder of the trench shall be backfilled by using the
material originally excavated from the ditch (except for conditions hereinafter
defined) to a height slightly above the original elevation of the ground.
      4.   Pipe constructed in open cut across any existing or proposed
pavement, existing driveways and sidewalks shall be backfilled to subgrade with
grade 9 gravel thoroughly flushed and jetted or tamped in nine inch (9") lifts
into place. (2016 Code)
14-6-5: WATER MAIN PRESSURE TESTING:
   A.   Pressure Test Required:
      1.   Each section of the water main and appurtenances shall be tested by
the contractor and village jointly. Any defects or leaks shall be corrected by
the contractor.
      2.   It is the responsibility of the contractor to reexcavate the pipe at
his expense if the system fails to meet the requirements of the test.
      3.   A hydrostatic pressure of one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square
inch shall be applied for the testing of the water main, valves, fittings and
fire hydrants. The duration of the test shall be for a period of not less than
two (2) hours. The section of water main shall pass if the pressure loss in the
pipe is not greater than 7.5 pounds per square inch during the test.
   B.   Procedure For Test: Each section of pipe to be tested, as determined by
the village engineer, shall be slowly filled with water, and the specified test
pressure shall be applied by means of a pump connected to the pipe in a
satisfactory manner. The pump pipe connection and all necessary apparatus
including gauges and meters shall be furnished by the contractor. Before
applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe.
To accomplish this, taps shall be made as necessary at points of highest
elevation and afterwards tightly plugged. Any cracked or defective pipes,
fittings, valves or hydrants discovered in consequence of this pressure test
shall be removed and replaced by the contractor with sound material, and the
test shall be repeated until satisfactory to the village engineer. Provisions
of AWWA C-600 and C-603, where applicable, shall apply. (2016 Code)
14-6-6: WATER MAIN LEAKAGE TESTING:
   A.   After completion of the pressure test, the village engineer may require
a leakage test to be conducted to determine the quantity of water lost by
leakage under the specified test pressure. "Test pressure" is defined as the
maximum operating pressure of the section under test and is based on the
elevation of the lowest point in the line or section under test corrected to
the elevation of the test gauge. Applicable provisions of AWWA C-600 and C-603
shall apply. Duration of each leakage test shall be a minimum of one hour in
addition to the pressure test period.
   B.   Allowable leakage in gallons per hour for a cast iron water main shall
not be greater than that determined by the formula:
 
L = ND P
    3,700
 
for mechanical joints; or
 
L = ND P
    1,850
 
for caulked bell and spigot joints.
Note:
L = Allowable leakage in gallons per hour.
N = Number of joints in the length of the pipeline tested.
D = Nominal diameter of the pipe in inches.
P = Average test pressure during leakage test in pounds per square inch gauge.
Tables of allowable leakage and basis of allowable leakage can be found in
table 4 of this section for cast iron water main.
Allowable leakage for asbestos cement water pipe shall conform to provisions of
AWWA C-603. Allowable leakage per one hundred (100) couplings based on one
hundred fifty (150) psi pressure represents a leakage of thirty (30) gpd per
mile of pipe per inch of diameter for pipe in thirteen foot (13') lengths. A
table showing the allowable leakage is provided in table 4 of this section.
   C.   "Leakage" is defined as the quantity of water to be supplied in the
newly laid pipe or any valved section under test which is necessary to maintain
the specified leakage test pressure after the pipe has been filled with water
and the air expelled.
   D.   Flanged pipe shall be "bottle tight".
   E.   In no case shall the leakage exceed the greater of either three
thousand (3,000) gallons per day per mile of water main or three percent (3%)
of total supplied water.
TABLE 4
ALLOWABLE LEAKAGE FOR CAST IRON AND CEMENT ASBESTOS PIPE
ALLOWABLE LEAKAGE FOR MECHANICAL JOINT OR PUSH ON JOINT PIPE IN EIGHTEEN FOOT
NOMINAL LENGTHS
Average Test Pressure (psi) Pipe Size (Inches)
                            2 3 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 24 30 36 42 48
Average  Pipe Size (Inches)
Test
Pressure 2    3    4    6    8    10   12   14   16   18   20   24   30   36   42   48
(psi)
        Allowable leakage per 1,000 feet in gph
200      0.42 0.64 0.85 1.27 1.70 2.12 2.55 2.97 3.40 3.82 4.25 5.10 6.37 7.64 8.92 10.10
175      0.40 0.60 0.79 1.19 1.59 1.99 2.86 2.78 3.18 3.58 3.97 4.77 5.96 7.15 8.34 9.54
150      0.37 0.55 0.74 1.10 1.47 1.84 2.20 2.58 2.94 3.31 3.68 4.41 5.52 6.62 7.72 8.83
140      0.36 0.53 0.71 1.07 1.42 1.78 2.13 2.49 2.84 3.20 3.55 4.26 5.33 6.40 7.46 8.53
120      0.33 0.49 0.66 0.99 1.32 1.64 1.98 2.30 2.63 2.96 3.29 3.95 4.93 5.92 6.91 7.89
100      0.30 0.45 0.60 0.90 1.20 1.50 1.80 2.10 2.40 2.70 3.00 3.60 4.50 5.40 6.31 7.21
80       0.27 0.40 0.54 0.80 1.08 1.34 1.61 1.88 2.15 2.42 2.69 3.22 4.03 4.84 5.64 6.45
60       0.23 0.35 0.46 0.70 0.93 1.16 1.39 1.63 1.86 2.09 2.32 2.79 3.49 4.19 4.89 5.58
 
   ALLOWABLE LEAKAGE FOR CEMENT ASBESTOS PIPE IN THIRTEEN FOOT LENGTHS
Average Test Pressure (psi) Pipe Size (Inches)
                            4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 24 30 36
Average Test   Pipe Size (Inches)
Pressure (psi) 4    6    8    10   12   14   16   18   20   24   30   36
              Allowable leakage per 1,000 feet in gph
75             0.67 1.00 1.33 1.66 1.99 2.32 2.65 2.98 3.32 3.98 4.96 5.96
100            0.77 1.16 1.54 1.93 2.31 2.70 3.10 3.48 3.85 4.62 5.79 6.95
125            0.79 1.29 1.73 2.15 2.58 3.08 3.45 3.86 4.30 5.15 6.45 7.75
150            0.95 1.42 1.89 2.36 2.84 3.30 3.76 4.25 4.72 5.55 7.06 8.05
200            1.09 1.64 2.18 2.73 3.27 3.83 4.86 4.90 5.45 6.65 8.20 9.82
 
(2016 Code)
14-6-7: PRELIMINARY FLUSHING:
Prior to chlorination, the main shall be flushed as thoroughly as possible with
the water pressure and outlets available. Flushing shall be done after the
pressure test is made. It must be understood that such flushing removes only
the lighter solids and cannot be relied upon to remove heavy material allowed
to get into the main during laying. If no hydrant is installed at the end of
the main, a tap should be provided large enough to effect a velocity in the
main of at least 2.5 feet per second. (2016 Code)
14-6-8: STERILIZATION:
   A.   The preferred point of application of the chlorinating agent shall be
at the beginning of the pipeline extension or any valved section of it and
through a corporation stop in the top of the newly laid pipe. The water
injector for delivering the chlorine bearing water into the pipe should be
supplied from a tap on the pressure side of the gate valve controlling the flow
into the pipeline extension. In a new system, application of chlorine may be
made at the pumping station, the elevated tank, the standpipe or the reservoir.
When properly cleaned first, these units are thus chlorinated adequately.
   B.   Water from the existing distribution system or other source of supply
shall be controlled so as to flow slowly into the newly laid pipeline during
the application of chlorine. The rate of chlorine mixture flow shall be in such
proportion to the rate of water entering the pipe that the chlorine applied to
the water entering the newly laid pipe shall be at least forty (40) to fifty
(50) ppm, or enough to meet the requirements during the retention period. A
convenient method of determining the rate of flow of line full of water and
measure the rate of discharge at a hydrant with a Pitot tube. Great flexibility
is made possible by providing a series of orifices to give good gauge readings
at high and low flows.
   C.   Valves shall be manipulated so that the strong chlorine solution in the
line being treated will not flow back into the line supplying the water.
   D.   Treated water shall be retained in the pipe long enough to destroy all
spore forming bacteria. This retention period should be at least twenty four
(24) hours. After the chlorine treated water has been retained for the required
time, the chlorine residual at the pipe extremities and at other representative
points should be at least ten (10) ppm.
   E.   In the process of chlorinating newly laid pipe, all valves or other
appurtenances shall be operated while the pipeline is filled with the
chlorinating agent. (2016 Code)
14-6-9: FINAL FLUSHING AND TESTING:
   A.   Following chlorination, all treated water shall be thoroughly flushed
from the newly laid pipeline at its extremities until the replacement water,
throughout its length, shall, upon test, be approved as safe water by the
department of public works. This quality of water delivered by the new main
should continue for a period of at least two (2) full days as demonstrated by
laboratory examination of samples taken from a tap located and installed in
such a way as to prevent outside contamination. Samples should never be taken
from an unsterilized hose or from a fire hydrant because such samples seldom
meet current bacteriological standards.
   B.   Should the initial treatment fail to result in the conditions
specified, the chlorination procedure shall be repeated until such results are
obtained.
   C.   Three-fourths inch (3/4") bronze corporation cocks shall be installed
in all water mains at intervals not exceeding one thousand feet (1,000').
   D.   The contractor must notify the engineering department at least twenty
four (24) hours in advance to arrange for appropriate pressure testing and
water samplings. The contractor is to provide the engineering department with
sampling bottles at the time of sampling. All samples will be sent to a state
of Illinois approved testing lab for analysis. (2016 Code)
14-6-10: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Water main design and construction shall in all respects be in accord
with the regulations of the bureau of public water supply, environmental
protection agency, state of Illinois. No construction shall commence until a
copy of a permit from this agency is filed with the village or that the village
received verification from this agency that a permit has been issued.
   B.   All water mains must be constructed according to the rules and
regulations of the Illinois department of public health regarding the
protection of water mains, water service lines and appurtenances from
contamination. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 7
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
14-7-1: General Requirements
14-7-2: Design
14-7-3: Allowable Materials
14-7-4: Construction Requirements
14-7-5: Inspections And Tests
14-7-6: Sewer Services
14-7-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no residential, commercial or
industrial subdivision or development within the corporate limits of the
village shall be approved unless it is served by sanitary sewers connected to
the village sewer system.
   B.   All sanitary sewers which are installed in the public ways or in
easements serving a central system shall be dedicated to the village. (2016
Code)
14-7-2: DESIGN:
   A.   Sewer mains shall be designed according to the "Standard Specifications
For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" or according to "Recommended
Standards For Sewage Works". The more stringent requirements of either shall
apply. Sewer mains shall be of adequate size to serve the entire development
proposed and, except as otherwise approved by the village engineer, shall be
installed in the street right of way or in an easement adjacent thereto. In no
case shall mains be installed within ten feet (10') of a building. The minimum
size of mains shall be eight inch (8") internal diameter. Manholes shall be
installed not more than four hundred feet (400') apart for sewers fifteen
inches (15") in diameter or less, and five hundred feet (500') for sewers
eighteen inches (18") to thirty inches (30") in diameter.
   B.   Before commencing the sewer layout, the developer shall confer with the
village to determine the required size and grades for any trunk sewers
traversing the subdivision to fit the village's available or proposed
capacities required for existing or proposed developments both upstream and
downstream. Construction required to accommodate the subdivision or development
shall be submitted as part of the engineering plans. Sanitary sewers shall be
extended to the edge of the development along public rights of way and at other
points indicated by the village engineer.
   C.   All sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accord with the provisions
of division II and division III of the "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", 1967, as modified and/or more
specifically defined herein. In case of conflict, the provisions of the
following subsections shall apply.
   D.   For pipe depths less than three feet (3'), pipe shall be case iron,
ductile iron or thick walled PVC, or vitrified clay of ACP in a concrete cradle
or encased in concrete.
   E.   Type 2 bedding, consisting of at least four inches (4") of clean,
uniformly graded granular aggregate CA11 or CA13, shall be furnished and placed
across the trench bottom under all sewer pipe, except ductile iron, and shall
completely cover the pipe to a point six inches (6") over the top of the sewer
pipe. Material shall be placed and formed as described in ASTM specification
C12-64.
   F.   Sanitary sewer service laterals of a minimum of four inches (4")
internal diameter shall be provided for each lot, parcel or tract prior to the
construction of street pavements. Services shall extend to the property line.
Service connection shall consist of one-eighth (1/8) sewer pipe bend set in the
bell of the eye or tee and the necessary lengths of pipe.
   G.   1. If a lift station is part of the engineering design, it shall be
shown in plan elevation. Specifications for said lift station shall be
submitted with engineering plans. The lift station shall be of the dry well or
wet well type, and shall conform in all respects to the standards established
by the state of Illinois environmental protection agency and MSD. However,
every reasonable effort shall be made to avoid a lift station in engineering
design.
      2.   A separate source of power shall be furnished to each sewerage lift
station. This shall be from another electrical source provided by a separately
powered engine. Engine, enclosure and mounting shall be subject to approval by
the village engineer. An alarm shall be installed to the village master panel
in the event of failure at the lift station. (2016 Code)
14-7-3: ALLOWABLE MATERIALS:
   A.   Sewer Pipe:
      1.   Extra strength vitrified clay pipe (ESVCP) conforming to the
requirements of ASTM C-700.
      2.   Extra strength concrete sewer pipe (ESCSP) conforming to the
requirements of ASTM C-14 or C-76.
      3.   Cast iron main conforming to the requirements of ASA A21.11 and
A21.6, class 150.
      4.   Ductile iron main shall conform to AWWA specification C151-65.
      5.   Thick walled PVC pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D-
224.1 or D-3034, SDR 35. (SDR, or standard dimension ratio, is the ratio of the
pipe OD to the minimum wall thickness (SDR = D/t). The structural stability and
supporting strength of the pipe decrease with the increase of SDR.) The pipe
shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in laying length. Installation and selection
of bedding material shall conform to the requirements of ASTM specification D-
2321.
      6.   Truss pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D2680-68T.
   B.   Pipe Joints:
      1.   Rubber Gasket Joints:
         a.   On tongue and groove type of pipe joints, rubber gaskets may be
used. The gasket shall consist of a special rubber ring of a size to fit snugly
over the tongue of each size pipe. The gasket shall be circular, elliptical or
of the manufacturer's special design cross section fabricated out of a special
composition or rubber specifically designed to resist the hardening action of
the sulphur compounds in sewage and to prevent disintegration from sewage or
water over long periods.
         b.   A ring shall be fitted over the tongue of each pipe to be laid at
its outer end. The tongue shall be inserted into the groove of the pipe
previously laid and the pipe pulled home.
         c.   Joints shall be made up in strict conformance with the
manufacturer's recommendations and directions. Rubber gasket material shall
conform to ASTM designation C425 type I or III (O-ring gasket).
      2.   Slip Joints:
         a.   Sections of cast iron pipe shall be connected by means of slip
joints consisting of bells cast integrally with the pipe, which have interior
angular recesses conforming with the shape and dimension of a rubber scaling
gasket, interior dimension of which is such that it will admit the insertion of
the spigot end of the joining pipe in such manner as to compress the gasket
tightly between the bell of the pipe and the inserted spigot, thus securing the
gasket and sealing the joint. Such slip joints shall be any one of the
following make or type or equal:
            (1)   Super bellites, supplied by James B. Clow And Son.
            (2)   Fastite, supplied by the American Cast Iron Pipe Company.
            (3)   Tyton, supplied by the U.S. Pipe And Foundry Company.
         b.   The lubricant used in conjunction with the slip joints shall be
that recommended by the suppliers or commercially processed animal fat or
vegetable shortening as approved by the engineer.
      3.   Thick Walled PVC Joint: The pipe joint shall conform to the
requirements of ASTM D-1869. The joint shall consist of a bell that is an
integral part of the pipe, stiffened to securely lock a solid cross sectional
rubber ring into position. A "home" mark shall be provided on the spigot end of
the pipe. The joint shall be able to withstand an internal hydrostatic pressure
of twenty five (25) psi for one hour, and leakage during that time shall be
considered a failure of test and joint.
      4.   Truss Pipe Joint: The pipe joint shall conform to the requirements
of ASTM D-2680.
   C.   Pipe Sleeves For Augering Or Tunneling:
      1.   Steel sleeves shall be three-eighths inch (3/8") thick of the
diameter specified, with a continuous, circular one-half inch (1/2") bead weld
and shall meet the requirements of ASTM A-120.
      2.   Concrete sleeves (alternate), if selected in place of the steel
sleeves specified in subsection C1 of this section, shall be reinforced
concrete pipe, tongue and groove type, conforming to the requirements of ASTM
C-76-57, table IV, class designation 3,000D. (2016 Code)
14-7-4: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Excavation And Foundation:
      1.   The trench shall be excavated so that the flow line of the finished
sewer shall be at the depth and grade established by the village engineer. The
trench for the pipe shall be excavated at least twelve inches (12") wider than
the external diameter of the pipe. The width of the trench shall not exceed the
external diameter of the pipe by more than eighteen inches (18") at the top of
the pipe.
      2.   The pipe foundation shall be bedding material consisting of road
gravel or one-fourth inch (1/4") to three-fourths inch (3/4") crushed stone of
the depth shown on the plans. Where pipes with bells or hubs are used, cross
trenches shall be excavated to prevent nonuniform loading at the joints. The
cross trenches shall not be more than two inches (2") wider than the width of
the bell or hub.
      3.   If the excavation has been made deeper than necessary, the
foundation shall be brought to proper grade by the addition of well compacted
bedding material. Where a firm foundation is not encountered at the grade
established, due to soft, spongy or other unsuitable soil (unless other special
construction methods are called for on the plans or in the special provisions),
all such unsuitable soil under the pipe and for the width of the trench shall
be removed and replaced with well compacted bedding material.
      4.   Where it is necessary to tunnel, the width shall be the same as for
trenches. Where sheeting or shoring is necessary, this width shall be between
the faces of said sheeting or shoring. The ends of a tunnel shall be at a
distance equal to not less than the depth of the trench from the edge of
pavements where tunneling is done under pavements. Ends of tunnels under trees,
driveways, walks and other obstacles shall be of sufficient distance from them
to give ample protection to them. The sides and roof shall be braced
sufficiently to support roadways and other obstacles and to prevent caving,
bulging and settlement. It is preferred that open trenching be used in all
cases under pavements, walks and driveways except where they exist of concrete.
Where trenches are dug through pavement, walks and driveways, the contractor
shall provide substantial bridges over same so that traffic can be maintained
and access to occupied properties is assured. Access must be left to all fire
hydrants, valves and private drives at all times.
   B.   Sheeting And Bracing:
      1.   Sheeting and bracing shall be placed in the ditch, as may be
necessary for the safety of the work and public, for the protection of the
workers, adjacent properties, pavement or structures and for the proper
installation of the work. In any event, the minimum protection shall conform to
the recommendations in OSHA's "Safety And Health Standards For Construction". A
sandbox or trench shield may be used in place of sheeting as permitted by OSHA.
When close sheeting is used, it shall be driven so as to prevent adjacent soil
from entering the trench either below or through such sheeting.
      2.   Sheeting and/or bracing shall be progressively removed as the
backfill is placed in such a manner as to prevent the caving in of the sides of
the trench or excavation and to prevent damage to the work.
      3.   Sheeting which is placed for the protection of the public, adjacent
properties, pavement or structures shall not be removed until the backfill has
been placed and thoroughly compacted. While being drawn, all vacancies left by
the sheeting shall be carefully filled with sandfree silt, rammed into place,
puddled or otherwise firmly compacted.
   C.   Dewatering: Dewatering sufficient to maintain the water level at or
below the surface of trench bottom or base of the bedding course shall be
accomplished prior to pipe laying and jointing if not prior to excavation and
placing of the bedding as called for in other sections of the specifications or
special provisions. The dewatering operation, however accomplished, shall be
carried out so that it does not destroy or weaken the strength of the soil
under or alongside the trench. The normal water table shall be restored to its
natural level in such a manner as to not disturb the pipe and its foundation.
   D.   Pipe Laying:
      1.   The laying of pipes in finished trenches shall be started at the
outlet end with the spigot ends pointing in the direction of flow and shall
proceed toward the inlet end with pipes abutting and shall be true to line and
grade. The ends of the pipes shall be carefully cleaned before the pipes are
lowered into the trenches, and the pipes shall be lowered in such a manner that
unnecessary handling in the trench will be avoided. As each length of pipe is
laid, the mouth of the pipe shall be properly protected to prevent the entrance
of earth or the bedding material. The pipe shall be fitted and matched so that
when laid in the work, it will form a sewer with a smooth, uniform invert.
      2.   All jointing material shall be used in accordance with the
recommendations of the manufacturer. Each pipe shall be pushed or pulled as
tightly as possible to the section in place to ensure tight joints.
      3.   Sewer pipe shall not be dropped from trucks or cars. All pipe must
be lowered into the trench with suitable apparatus for this purpose. In no case
shall it be dropped or thrown.
   E.   Connections:
      1.   Connections of new sewers to existing sewers, when encountered in
construction, shall be made where ordered by the village engineer. Such
connections shall be made within a manhole, except for house and drain
connections. When connections are made with sewers carrying sewage or water,
special care must be taken that no part of the work is built under water. A
flume or dam must be installed and pumping maintained if necessary to keep the
new work dry until completed, and concrete or mortar has been set up.
      2.   Junctions for future sewer connections shall be bricked off at the
ends, or otherwise sealed off in a manner approved by the village engineer.
   F.   Wyes:
      1.   Wyes for existing or future lateral connection shall be inserted in
the sewer at the appropriate location as required by the village engineer. Wyes
shall be constructed so as to be an integral part of the main sewer pipe. Where
risers are to be provided, the wye bell shall be placed at the top of the pipe
perpendicular to the main sewer flow line. When risers are not required, the
wye bell shall be placed midway between the top of the pipe and the horizontal
centerline of the pipe at an angle of approximately forty five degrees (45°) to
sixty degrees (60°) with the upstream face of the pipe.
      2.   Wyes not put in service at the time of construction of the sewer
shall be plugged in such a manner as to be watertight and to facilitate future
removal without injury to the wye.
   G.   Backfilling:
      1.   The contractor shall not backfill sewers above the top of the pipe
until the sewer elevations, gradient, alignment and pipe joints have been made
available for checking by the village engineer or his representative.
      2.   All trenches and excavations shall be backfilled as soon as joints
have acquired a suitable degree of hardness. Concrete joints shall be protected
to prevent drying and cracking of the joints.
      3.   All sewer pipe, as soon as laid, shall have the space between the
pipe and the bottom and sides of the trench above the pipe foundation packed
full with sand or grade 9 gravel by hand and thoroughly tamped with a shovel,
hoe or light tamper, as soon as placed, to six inches (6") above the top pipe.
The filling shall be carried up evenly on both sides. Care shall be taken that
no rock, frozen material or other hard substances are placed in contact with
the pipe. In areas where clean, fine and dry sand is used for backfill, tamping
will not be required.
      4.   The trench shall be backfilled by using the material originally
excavated from the ditch (except for conditions hereafter defined) to a height
slightly above the original elevation of the ground. Backfilling shall not be
left unfinished more than three hundred feet (300') behind the completed
masonry or pipe work.
      5.   No heavy rock shall be dropped into the trench nor placed within
three feet (3') of the sewer pipe. In depositing rock into the trench, care
must be taken that the rock does not injure the structure.
      6.   All voids existing between the outside of the pipe and the limits of
a tunnel excavation or lining shall be filled with sand, free of silt,
thoroughly rammed or flushed into place, or with concrete composed of one part
portland cement, three (3) parts fine aggregate and five (5) parts coarse
aggregate thoroughly packed into place.
      7.   Sewers constructed in open cut across any existing or proposed
pavements, driveways and sidewalks (where locations are known), and all
trenches where the inner edge of the existing or proposed pavement, shall be
backfilled with gravel (grade 9), thoroughly flushed and jetted or tamped in
nine inch (9") lifts in place.
   H.   Completion Of Work: When the work is completed, all surplus material,
earth, rubbish, etc., shall be removed, and that portion of the surface of each
street disturbed by construction shall be left in as good condition as it was
before the commencement of the work, and it shall be promptly and regularly
maintained in such condition during a period of two (2) years after the final
acceptance of the work. This work of maintenance shall apply to the items of
materials and workmanship improperly installed in the first instance, and
maintenance measures made necessary by the ordinary wear and tear occasioned by
traffic shall not be at the expense of the contractor. (2016 Code)
14-7-5: INSPECTIONS AND TESTS:
It shall be the intention of this chapter to secure a sewer system with a
minimum amount of infiltration. Maximum allowable infiltration shall be one
hundred (100) gallons per inch of diameter of sewer per mile per twenty four
(24) hour day at any time for any section of the system. The joints shall be
tight, and visible leakage in the joints, or leakage in excess of that
specified above, shall be repaired at the contractor's expense by procedures
acceptable to the village engineer. (2016 Code)
14-7-6: SEWER SERVICES:
   A.   All labor, materials, equipment, services and tools required for the
furnishing and installation of sewer services required shall be furnished and
installed in compliance with the diameter and length as required by village
plumbing regulations, title 10, chapter 5 of this code.
   B.   Sewer services pipe shall consist of clay sewer pipe, thick walled PVC
or cast iron pipe.
   C.   Sewer services from main or lateral sewers toward the property line
shall be constructed as follows:
      1.   Services shall be laid in as straight a line as possible at a
uniform gradient, except a connection at the main or lateral sewers.
      2.   The minimum gradient allowable for sewer services shall be one-
fourth inch (1/4") per foot of length. Where the elevation of the main or
lateral sewer permits, within the minimum gradient allowance, the sewer service
shall be laid on a gradient such that its terminus shall not be less than three
feet (3') below the established grade of the street. A one- eighth (1/8) bend
pipe fitting shall be used for the first length adjacent to the main or lateral
sewer when connections are made to Y branches installed in such main or lateral
sewers.
      3.   Terminus of sewer service leads shall be shown on the contract
drawings. The ends shall be sealed with a vitrified clay or concrete round disc
or equal one inch (1") in thickness and of a diameter equal to the diameter of
the bell of the sewer service pipe to be sealed. The stoppers shall be set in
the ball end of the sewer service pipe and sealed in place with material of the
kind and quality used in pipe joints. Oakum shall be placed around the
periphery of the stopper before sealing in place to facilitate removal of the
stopper without breaking the bell of the pipe.
   D.   The contractor shall furnish and place a temporary stake opposite the
terminus of each sewer service. During construction of the curb and gutter, the
contractor shall mark the location of all sewer and water service lines with an
"S" or "W" etched into the curb and gutter as a permanent record of service
location. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 8
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
14-8-1: Drainage Systems Required
14-8-2: Design
14-8-3: Construction Requirements
14-8-4: Restoration Of Excavated Areas
14-8-5: Inspections And Tests; As Built Drawings Required
14-8-6: Administration And Penalty
14-8-1: DRAINAGE SYSTEMS REQUIRED:
   A.   No subdivision, planned unit development or other development within
the corporate limits of the village shall be approved unless it is served by a
minor drainage system and a major drainage system.
   B.   The minor system shall be sized to handle the 10-year storm event and
shall consist of the storm sewer system and its appurtenances.
   C.   The major system shall consist of all the pathways that runoff takes
when the capacity of the minor system is exceeded and is composed of streets,
larger natural or manmade swales, detention and retention basins, creeks,
streams and rivers.
   D.   The major system shall be sized to handle the 100-year storm event
utilizing the "Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin 70 Rainfall DATA". The
lowest habitable floor of all structures (or the immediately adjacent ground if
a basement) shall be elevated at least one foot (1') above the calculated water
surface profile for the 100-year storm event.
   E.   All storm sewers which are installed in the public right of way or in
easements serving a central system shall be dedicated to the village. Every
subdivision or development shall have storm sewers separate and independent of
the sanitary sewer system and with an adequate outlet or connection with the
existing storm system. The outfall of said storm sewer systems shall be
designed to prevent the transportation of eroded solid and floating matter to
downstream points of discharge whether they be creeks, lakes or a municipal or
privately owned storm sewer system. (2016 Code)
14-8-2: DESIGN:
   A.   All storm sewers must be designed by the rational method on the basis
of a 10-year storm frequency utilizing "Illinois State Water Survey 70 Rainfall
DATA" and shall be sized to adequately carry all tributary areas.
   B.   Copies of the design computations for the following facilities,
together with a drawing defining each drainage area, shall be submitted with
the engineering plans under these headings:
      1.   Facilities carrying drainage from a watershed upstream of the
development if developed in accord with present zoning, yielding runoff in
cubic feet per second, taking into account applicable stormwater requirements.
      2.   On site ditches and storm sewers.
      3.   Street drainage, inlets and catch basins.
      4.   Parking lot drainage.
      5.   Sediment control basins.
      6.   Detention basins.
      7.   Overland flow routes.
   C.   Minimum grade for earth ditches shall be 1.5 percent. For lesser ditch
grade, the engineer shall submit a design for paved invert.
   D.   Street drainage design. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water
is not carried across or around any intersection of streets or parking lot
drives nor for more than a distance of four hundred feet (400'). Said inlets
shall discharge into storm sewers which shall not discharge into side lot or
rear lot drainage ditches.
   E.   Inlets shall be provided at all low points and at all points not to
exceed four hundred foot (400') intervals.
   F.   Rear yard inlets having a minimum depth of two feet (2') shall be
provided such that rear yard overland flow shall not travel more than three
hundred feet (300') or across four (4) lots, whichever is less.
   G.   Minimum cover for storm sewers shall be one and one-half feet (11/2').
Storm sewers shall be designed to flow full with a minimum velocity of two feet
(2') per second and a maximum velocity of ten feet (10') per second.
   H.   Storm sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the Illinois
department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction". The minimum inside diameter of storm sewers permitted to be used
shall be twelve inches (12"); except, that a single inlet can be connected into
a catch basin, manhole, or another inlet with a ten inch (10") diameter storm
sewer.
   I.   Building drainage design shall be as follows:
      1.   A point of discharge of sump pumps shall be shown for each building
intended to have a basement or crawl space. Positive drainage from that point
shall be provided to the storm sewer system. Such drainage shall not be across
any street, sidewalk or parking lot and shall be to the rear of the property.
If feasible, fifteen (15) minutes' retention time shall be provided upstream of
the storm sewer system for said discharge.
      2.   Runoff shall be drained away from the building to lot line swales or
ditches, which shall merge as quickly as possible and then discharge into storm
sewers. The route of flow of stormwater away from each building into swales,
ditches and storm sewers, to where it leaves the site, shall be shown. Inlets
and catch basins shall be provided.
   J.   Positive drainage design shall be established for each lot whether or
not it is the intention to construct a building on that lot at that time.
   K.   1. Flow within and from parking lots shall be shown by arrows on design
drawings. Inlets and catch basins shall be provided so that flow from said lots
is not carried across any sidewalk line or across or around any intersection.
The maximum depth for stormwater detention provided in parking lots shall be
one foot (1').
      2.   The minimum longitudinal slopes shall be 0.5 percent and the maximum
shall be five percent (5%) in the area of the parking lot that is provided. The
inlets where up to one foot (1') of water is ponded shall be located in driving
aisles wherever possible.
   L.   1. Retention-detention facilities are required for all developments
except those in which:
         a.   The parcels being redeveloped or developed total less than three
(3) acres for single-family or two-family residential land uses; or
         b.   The parcels being redeveloped or developed total less than one
acre for multiple-family or nonresidential land uses; or
         c.   The parcels being redeveloped or developed total greater than the
thresholds in subsection L1a or L1b of this section, but the new development
totals less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   The volume of detention storage required shall be calculated, using
methods outlined in the federal technical publication TR-55 as developed by the
soil conservation service, using the following criteria:
         a.   Type II storm distribution.
         b.   Provide storage for 24-hour, 100-year storm event.
         c.   "Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin 70 Rainfall DATA".
         d.   Allowable discharge of one-tenth (1/10) cubic foot per second per
acre.
      3.   Wherever feasible, dry bottom detention basins shall be designed as
backflow type facilities whereby low flows are not routed through the basin but
bypass the basin through the storm sewer system.
      4.   All detention facilities (dry basins) must be sodded or seeded and
landscaped to prevent soil erosion and weed problems. Sodding is required on
side slopes four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical and steeper
that would otherwise not be sodded. Seeding is permitted elsewhere in the
basin. Such facilities must be designed so that the cross slope is at least one
and one-half percent (11/2%), or an underdrain shall be provided if less than
one and one-half percent (11/2%). Underdrains, where needed, shall be designed
as a minimum of six inch (6") grade no. 6 stone. The underdrain shall be
installed to drain the basin below grade during periods of low flow and shall
connect to the designated storm sewer outfall pipe.
      5.   All retention facilities having a permanent water level shall be
designed with four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical side slope
from general ground level down to three feet (3') below water level. The area
between low water and high water levels must be properly riprapped with ten
inch (10") stone to act as shoreline protection and to prevent soil erosion.
Said retention facilities shall be designed with a sediment basis (with an area
of 10 percent of the basin) dug to a minimum depth of three feet (3') deeper
than eighty five percent (85%) of the depth of the proposed facility. Twenty
five percent (25%) of the surface area of all retention basins must be ten feet
(10') deep or greater to maintain fish life. The minimum side slopes of the
sediment basin shall be two feet (2') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical side
slope. The sediment basin shall be located on the upstream end of the retention
facility and shall be accessible to construction equipment for dredging as
necessary.
   M.   For depth of cover between three feet (3') and ten feet (10'), storm
sewer pipe shall be reinforced concrete pipe, CL III, conforming to ASTM
designation C-76. (10 inch diameter pipe may be concrete sewer pipe, class 3,
conforming to ASTM designation C-14.) Joints for storm sewers shall typically
be a "trowel applied" bituminous mastic compound in accordance with ASTM
designation C-76 (or C-14 as may be applicable), except where the storm sewer
crosses water mains or has less than ten feet (10') of horizontal separation
from a water main, in which case, an O-ring joint in accordance with ASTM
designation C443 shall be used. For depth of cover less than three feet (3') or
greater than ten feet (10'), class IV reinforced concrete pipe shall be used.
   N.   Driveway culverts, where applicable, shall be reinforced concrete pipe,
twelve inch (12") minimum diameter, with precast flared end sections on both
ends. (2016 Code)
14-8-3: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Construction requirements for the installation of storm sewers are
identical to sanitary sewer construction as outlined in section
14-7-4 of this title; except, that only a granular foundation is required.
   B.   Construction requirements for drainage swales, retention- detention
facilities and open channels shall be in accordance with sections 200, 500 and
600 of the state "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
current edition. (2016 Code)
14-8-4: RESTORATION OF EXCAVATED AREAS:
Restoration for storm sewer installation is the same for sanitary sewers
indicated in subsection 14-7-4H of this title. (2016 Code)
14-8-5: INSPECTIONS AND TESTS; AS BUILT DRAWINGS REQUIRED:
   A.   All storm sewers shall be properly cleaned, flushed and rodded, if
necessary, prior to acceptance by the village. If sanitary wastes are found in
the storm drainage system, the section of storm sewer suspected shall be TV
tested in order to locate the point(s) of cross connection.
   B.   Prior to acceptance of the storm sewer and drainage systems, as built
drawings of the system must be delivered to the village engineer. (2016 Code)
14-8-6: ADMINISTRATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   The oversight committee shall be the village president and board of
trustees. The administrator shall be the village engineer.
   B.   Applicants for permits for special management areas in the village
shall obtain floodplain review and approval from the administrator and wetland
review and approval from the United States army corps of engineers.
   C.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable
by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day during which such violation is committed,
continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate violation and the violator
shall be so fined. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 9
APPURTENANCES TO WATER, SANITARY SEWER AND STORM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
14-9-1: Appurtenances Required
14-9-2: Design
14-9-3: Allowable Materials
14-9-4: Construction Requirements
14-9-1: APPURTENANCES REQUIRED:
All water, sanitary and storm systems must include appurtenances, such as,
catch basins, curb inlets, manholes, valve vaults, head walls and spillways.
(2016 Code)
14-9-2: DESIGN:
   A.   All appurtenances shall be constructed of precast units or be poured in
place.
   B.   Catch basins shall be four feet (4') and inlets shall be two feet (2')
minimum in diameter.
   C.   Sanitary and storm manholes shall be four feet (4') minimum in diameter
except on sewers twenty one inches (21") to thirty six inches (36") where the
minimum diameter is five feet (5').
   D.   Valve vaults shall be four feet (4') minimum in diameter on all mains
ten inches (10") or smaller. Larger mains require a five foot (5') minimum
diameter valve vault.
   E.   Valve vaults are required on all mains. Vaults are also required on
building service lines where the main is 2.5 inches or greater.
   F.   Catch basins that discharge into outfall storm sewers or creeks shall
be forty eight inches (48") in diameter and shall have a two foot (2') sump.
Catch basins built elsewhere need not have a sump.
   G.   If casting must be adjusted to meet the finished grade line, all
adjustments are to be made with precast concrete rings. All adjusting rings
must be mortared together and must be mortared to the casting as well as to the
cone section of the structure. The maximum height of adjusting rings shall be
eighteen inches (18").
   H.   All head walls and spillways must be poured in place and shall be
designed in accordance with the state standard specifications.
   I.   Precast or poured in place flared end sections are required on all
storm sewers or culverts under driveways or roadways. (2016 Code)
14-9-3: ALLOWABLE MATERIALS:
   A.   Manholes, Vaults, Inlets, Head Walls And Catch Basins:
      1.   Reinforced concrete shall consist of portland cement, mineral
aggregates and water, in which steel has been embedded in such a manner that
the steel and concrete act together. Portland cement shall conform to the
requirements of the "Specifications For Portland Cement", ASTM C-150, any type,
unless otherwise limited in the special provisions; or it may be air entraining
portland cement conforming to ASTM C-175. Reinforcement shall consist of wire
conforming to ASTM A-185. Bar reinforcement shall conform to ASTM A-15,
intermediate grade. Aggregates shall conform to ASTM C-33; except, that the
requirements for gradation shall not apply to precast items. The aggregates
shall be so sized and graded and proportioned and thoroughly mixed in
proportions of cement and water as will produce a homogenous concrete mixture
of such quality that the manhole components will conform to the strength and
watertightness requirements of these specifications. Admixtures or blends may
be used with the written permission of the engineer. Cast in place manhole
components shall be moist cured for a period of not less than seven (7) days;
except, that when high, early strength cement is used, the curing shall not be
less than three (3) days. Pigmented membrane curing compound or other approved
method may be applied in lieu of most drying. All concrete placed under these
specifications shall have a minimum compressive strength of three thousand five
hundred (3,500) psi at twenty eight (28) days. Strength determination shall be
in accordance with ASTM C-39 unless otherwise approved by the engineer.
      2.   Precast manholes shall conform to ASTM designation C-478 and with
design dimensions. Cones and sections shall be substantially free from large or
deep cracks and surface roughness. Slabs shall be sound and free from gravel
pockets.
      3.   Monolithic concrete manholes, basins and inlets shall conform to
detailed shop drawings submitted to the village engineer for approval prior to
beginning work, and shall conform to the dimensional requirements specified.
Walls and base shall be six inches (6") minimum thickness, and space of steps
shall be sixteen inches (16").
      4.   Steps shall be furnished and installed on all sanitary sewers and on
storm manholes as required by the village engineer.
      5.   Mortar for jointing masonry manhole units shall be one part portland
cement to not less than one part nor more than two (2) parts plaster sand,
mixed with the least amount of clean water necessary to provide a workable
mortar.
      6.   Jointing materials used in laying up precast storm and sanitary
sewer structures shall be a mastic joint sealer consisting of a monogenous
blend of bitumen, inert filler and suitable solvent approved by the village
engineer. The mastic joint sealer shall be used in accordance with the
recommendations of the manufacturer.
   B.   Frames And Grates: Frames and covers for water vaults, sanitary sewer
manholes and storm sewer manholes shall be Neenah R-1031 or an approved equal.
All covers must be stamped "Village of Berkeley", as well as the name of the
utility within the manhole such as "Sanitary", "Storm" or "Water". All sanitary
sewer manholes shall have watertight lids with rubber seal and concealed
pickhole. Storm sewer grates shall be one of the following or approved equal:
      1.   Neenah R-3281-A for B 6.12 curb and gutter.
      2.   Neenah R-3501-A for rolled curb and gutter.
      3.   Neenah R-2031 or Neenah R-4340-B for ditch drainage. (2016 Code)
14-9-4: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Excavation:
      1.   The trench for the structures shall be excavated so that the bottom
of the structure shall be at the depth and grade as established on the contract
drawings.
      2.   In order to permit the joints to be made properly and to permit
proper compacting of the backfill material, the excavation shall be made to a
diameter of at least six inches (6") greater than the diameter of the
structure.
   B.   Precast Manholes: Precast manholes must be constructed with a precast
base section of a monolithic base structure. A precast section shall be
carefully placed on the prepared bedding so as to fully and uniformly support
in true alignment and making sure that all entering pipes can be inserted on
proper grade. All holes and all joints between precast elements in storm sewer
manholes shall be thoroughly wetted and then be completely filled with mortar,
smoothed and pointed both inside and out, to ensure watertightness. All lift
holes on precast elements for sanitary sewer manholes shall be completely
filled with mortar. All joints between precast elements on sanitary sewer
manholes shall be made with an approved bituminous material or an approved
rubber gasket. Bituminous material and/or rubber gaskets may be used instead of
mortar for manholes and storm sewers. The first precast section shall be placed
on the monolithic base structure before the base has taken initial set, and
shall be carefully adjusted to true grade and alignment with all inlet pipes
properly installed so as to form an integral watertight unit; or the section
shall be mortared into a suitable groove provided in the top of the monolithic
base. The first section shall be uniformly supported by the base concrete and
shall not bear directly on any of the pipes. Precast sections shall be placed
and aligned to provide vertical alignment of the ladder rungs. The completed
manhole shall be rigid, true to dimensions and watertight.
   C.   Monolithic Concrete Manholes: Monolithic concrete manholes shall be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Inlet And Outlet Pipes: Sewer pipe is to be laid through manholes where
the top section is to be broken out after the manhole is constructed and shall
be of the same specifications as designated in this title for the sewer pipe.
   E.   Channels: Channels shall be made to conform accurately to the sewer
grade and shall be brought together smoothly with well rounded junctions,
satisfactory to the village engineer.
   F.   Precast Concrete Adjusting Rings: Precast concrete rings for sewer
structures and vaults shall be laid with full mortar joints, mortar to be as
above specified or with a full mastic joint if storm sewer joints are mastic.
All sanitary sewer structures shall be laid with a full mastic joint. After
each joint is sealed, it shall be wiped clean on the inside.
   G.   Drop Pipes: Drop pipe assemblies including pipe and fittings, outlet
trap on catch basins and inlet sewers to manholes or catch basins shall be of
the same material specifications as the main sewer pipe.
   H.   Backfilling: The space between the sides of the excavation and the
outer surfaces of the manholes shall be backfilled with selected granular
backfill if the manhole is in a pavement or if the nearest point of the
excavation for the manhole falls within two feet (2') of the pavement edge. If
the structure falls beyond these limits, other backfilling materials may be
used, provided they meet with the approval of the village engineer.
   I.   Cleaning: All newly constructed manholes, inlets and catch basins shall
be cleaned of any accumulation of silt, debris or foreign matter of any kind
and shall be free from such accumulations at the time of final inspection.
   J.   Placing Castings: All castings shall be placed in full mortar beds. The
mortar shall be mixed in proportion of one part cement to three (3) parts sand
by volume, based on dry materials. Castings shall be set accurately to be
finished elevation so that no subsequent adjustment will be necessary.
   K.   Finished Grade: Structures shall be built up so the cover and frame,
when placed, will conform to the proper grade. Fractional lifts shall be made
as required at the top with precast concrete rings. Frame castings shall be set
in full mortar beds on top of masonry. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC UTILITIES
SECTION:
14-10-1: Telephone And Electric Services
14-10-2: Gas Mains
14-10-3: Utilities To Be Staked; Inspections
14-10-1: TELEPHONE AND ELECTRIC SERVICES:
   A.   All public utility lines for telephone and electric services shall be
placed in easements and entirely underground in residential subdivisions.
   B.   Where telephone and electric service lines are placed underground
entirely throughout a subdivided area, said conduits or cable shall be placed
within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict
with other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be
located so as to not be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (2016 Code)
14-10-2: GAS MAINS:
All gas mains shall be placed within the street right of way or within
easements. (2016 Code)
14-10-3: UTILITIES TO BE STAKED; INSPECTIONS:
Underground work, either the installation of or the repair of existing sewer
and water systems, cannot commence until the appropriate public utilities are
staked and the village engineer has been notified to arrange for appropriate
inspection. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 11
PROTECTION OF EXISTING TREES; LANDSCAPING; PARKWAY GRADING
SECTION:
14-11-1: Protection Of Existing Trees
14-11-2: Areas To Be Graded And Seeded Or Sodded
14-11-3: Parkway Trees On Developed Lots
14-11-4: Tree Planting Requirements
14-11-5: Existing Shrubbery And Trees; Vision Impairment Prohibited
14-11-6: Lot Grading
14-11-7: Erosion, Sedimentation And Dust Control
14-11-8: Responsibility
14-11-9: Inspections
14-11-1: PROTECTION OF EXISTING TREES:
   A.   When determining the location of improvements within a subdivision and
the location of buildings or structures on lots, the developer shall make every
reasonable effort to save healthy trees having a diameter of four inches (4")
or greater (measured at 6 inches above ground level).
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require the developer
to develop his property at a lesser density or intensity than allowed by the
zoning ordinance or elsewhere in this title.
   C.   The developer shall submit a plan certifying the location, size and
species, using botanic and common names, of all healthy trees having a diameter
of four inches (4") or greater (measured at 6 inches above the ground level)
for areas within twenty five feet (25') of any proposed improvement. For
remaining areas covered by the preliminary plan, only the general locations of
the trees is required. The developer shall indicate on such plan which trees he
proposes to save in accordance with this chapter. The trees to be saved in
accordance with this chapter shall be agreed upon as part of the preliminary
plan approval.
   D.   In addition, the developer shall submit:
      1.   A proposed grading plan for the site indicating the location, size
and species, using botanic and common names, of the trees to be saved.
      2.   A plan establishing the methods to be used for preserving the trees
that are to be saved. Such plan shall include the following provisions:
         a.   All grading and construction equipment shall be forbidden from
encroaching within the tree's drip line;
         b.   Crushed limestone or other materials detrimental to the tree
shall not be dumped within the tree's drip line or at any higher location where
drainage toward the tree could affect the health of the tree; and
         c.   Installation of snow fencing at the periphery of the tree's drip
line shall be required.
      3.   The developer's proposed methodology for saving existing trees shall
be reviewed by the village engineer. If, in the opinion of the village
engineer, the developer has not taken the necessary precautions in preserving
such existing trees, the land development permit will not be issued until such
time as the developer satisfactorily amends his plans for the preservation of
such existing trees. If the developer and the village engineer cannot agree on
a satisfactory plan, the developer can appeal the decisions of the village
engineer to the village administrator.
   E.   In the event that a tree designated on the approved plan for saving and
such healthy tree shall be destroyed or razed by the developer during the
construction process, the developer shall replace such tree with a tree of a
species listed in subsection 14-11-3C of this chapter and having a diameter not
less than the tree so destroyed or razed (not to exceed 6 inches), measured at
six inches (6") above the ground level, in the approximate location of the tree
so destroyed or razed. (2016 Code)
14-11-2: AREAS TO BE GRADED AND SEEDED OR SODDED:
   A.   All improved areas within the dedicated street area or other public use
areas shall be graded and seeded or sodded in an approved manner. Restoration
work shall be performed to the satisfaction of the village engineer.
   B.   All parkways shall be graded smooth and topped with at least four
inches (4") of black dirt after compacting and removal of stumps, trees that
cannot be saved, large rocks, and such. Such areas shall be sodded in
accordance with section 642 or 644 of the state standard specifications. (2016
Code)
14-11-3: PARKWAY TREES ON DEVELOPED LOTS:
   A.   Parkway trees are required in all subdivisions where public utilities
do not exist. Such trees shall be planted in the parkways not less than four
feet (4') from any sidewalk or curb, except as otherwise provided in this
section, and shall be spaced not less than forty feet (40') apart; provided,
that at street corners, trees shall be located at least twenty feet (20') from
the intersection of street right of way lines.
   B.   In residential districts, there shall be at least one parkway tree per
lot; except, that there shall be at least two (2) parkway trees on corner lots
(1 tree on each frontage). In all business districts, parkway trees shall be
provided and shall be spaced not more than one hundred fifty feet (150') apart.
In all industrial districts, parkway trees shall only be required when the
subject property adjoins or fronts property in a residential district, and in
such cases, parkway trees shall be spaced not more than one hundred fifty feet
(150') apart.
   C.   1. The following species of trees are prohibited in the parkways or
medians (without prior approval of the village engineer) or where such trees
will injure sewers or drains of the village.
         a.   Prohibited Plant Forms: The following plant forms are prohibited:
            (1)   Multiple stem forms: Those forms containing more than one
stem.
            (2)   Espaliers or topiary: Forms achieved through trimming or
pruning which are distorted or contrary to the natural shape of the species.
            (3)   Flowering shrubs: Those shrubs which typically grow taller
than three feet (3'), yet not tall enough to be undertrimmed to a height of six
feet (6').
            (4)   Topped or dehorned trees: Trees with most or all of the crown
removed.
         b.   Prohibited Plant Species: The following plant species are
prohibited:
Botanic Name Common Name
Botanic Name           Common Name
A. saccharinum         Silver maple
Acer negundo           Box elder
Ailanthus altissima    Tree of heaven
Beula spp.             Birch
Catalpa speciosa       Catalpa
Coniferales ord.       Coniferous order
Elaegnus spp.          Russian olive
Fraxinus               Ash
Gingko biloba (female) Female gingko
Macluna pomifera       Osage orange
Malus pumila           Apple
Morus spp.             Mulberry
P. alban nives         Silver white poplar
Populus spp.           Cottonwood, poplar, aspen
Prunus spp.            Cherry, plum
Salix spp.             Willow
Ulmus spp.             Elm
 
      2.   Various species of trees shall be planted in each block, and on the
final plat, the species of each tree shall be designated.
      3.   Parkway trees shall be balled and burlapped and shall have a minimum
trunk diameter of 2.5 inches (measured at 6 inches above the ground level).
They shall be northern grown in a nursery and shall have been transplanted
twice, the last transplanting being not less than four (4) years prior to
parkway planting. All trees shall be tagged and identified as to species
(botanic and common name), size and place of origin. Such tags shall not be
removed by the developer prior to inspection by the engineering department.
      4.   All trees (original or replacement) determined by the engineering
department not to be in vigorous growing condition after one growing season
shall be replaced at the beginning of the next succeeding planting season at no
cost to the village.
      5.   The planting of parkway trees as required by this chapter shall be a
condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building
constructed in the subject zoning lot and shall not be required prior to such
time. (2016 Code)
14-11-4: TREE PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each tree shall be planted plumb slightly lower than where it stood in
the nursery in relation to finished grade. Backfill shall be properly
fertilized with organic fertilizer in accordance with standards specified by
the nursery supplying the trees and shall be thoroughly watered when the hole
is two-thirds (2/3) full to topsoil.
   B.   After watering, the filling shall be completed and the soil thoroughly
tamped. After planting, a three inch (3") mulch of well rotted manure or peat
shall be applied over the disturbed ground and a shallow watering basin
provided around the tree.
   C.   All planting shall be done during the proper season. No planting shall
be done in frozen soil or during unfavorable weather conditions.
   D.   Each tree shall be staked with a two inch (2") square stake eight feet
(8') long. The stake shall be driven plumb 2.5 feet into the ground adjacent to
the tree; tied at top and bottom with a figure eight hitch consisting of no. 14
wire encased in a section of rubber hose. The engineering department may
specify other acceptable methods of staking.
   E.   Tree pits shall be round, at least six inches (6") wider than the
diameter of the root spread, shall have vertical sides and shall be at least
twenty four inches (24") below finished grade. (2016 Code)
14-11-5: EXISTING SHRUBBERY AND TREES; VISION IMPAIRMENT PROHIBITED:
Shrubbery, bushes or evergreens existing in the public ground or dedicated
right of way shall not exceed thirty inches (30") in height. Deciduous trees in
the public ground or dedicated right of way shall be maintained with their
branches not lower than eight feet (8') from the ground. Existing evergreen
trees shall be allowed to remain as are. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions, no planting, fence or other obstruction to vision shall be
maintained on a dedicated right of way, alley or other public ground if the
same is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. (2016 Code)
14-11-6: LOT GRADING:
   A.   Grading of lots and roadways within the village shall be accomplished
in such manner as to prevent ponding in excess of eighteen inches (18") in the
event of complete failure of the storm sewer system. The only exceptions to
allowing the maximum of eighteen inches (18") are for stormwater detention
facilities in parking lots where up to one foot (1') of ponding is permitted
and for stormwater detention/retention basins where chapter 8 of this title is
applied.
   B.   Except in special cases, longitudinal grading on all grassed areas of
lots will be kept within the range of 0.50 percent to five percent (5%).
Driveway grades on all lots, as measured from the top of curb to finished
garage floor, shall be kept within the range of two percent (2%) to ten percent
(10%). Drainage easements will be provided along the rear and/or sides of where
surface waters from more than one lot are conveyed down a property line.
   C.   All lots with side slopes three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) or
greater shall be sodded, while side slopes steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical (2:1) shall be pegged and sodded.
   D.   Where the slope between adjacent properties is one foot (1') horizontal
to one foot (1') vertical, retaining walls or other treatments approved by the
village engineer shall be required.
   E.   Residential developers constructing five (5) or more buildings in a
subdivision shall fine grade each lot (front, side and rear yards) to the
grades on the approved grading plan. In preparation for either seed or sodding,
said fine grading shall be a condition to issuance of an occupancy permit. Lots
in industrial/commercial subdivisions shall be fine graded at the time each lot
is developed.
   F.   As a condition to the issuance of an individual occupancy permit, the
developer will furnish the village engineer with a certificate stating that the
finished grades on the lot substantially conform to the approved grading plan.
The developer shall guarantee that the individual lot itself, as well as the
lot in relation to adjoining lots, will drain properly for a period of one year
from the issuance of the occupancy permit or from the date of final grading
approval, whichever is later; provided, that no alterations are made to the
finished grading that adversely affect the drainage on the lot. If an
individual lot or a series of adjoining lots does not drain properly, the
homeowner or homeowners shall so notify the village engineer in writing prior
to the expiration of the one year guarantee. The village engineer will
investigate the complaint and, if justified, will notify the developer in
writing as to the improper grading/drainage. If the corrective work has not
been performed prior to the final subdivision inspection, the subdivision
security may be used to effectuate the work.
   G.   All residential lots shall be graded smooth and topped with at least
four inches (4") of black dirt after compacting and removal of stumps, trees
that cannot be saved, boulders and such. (2016 Code)
14-11-7: EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND DUST CONTROL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to guide, regulate and control
the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or other
activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the
movement of earth on land situated in the village.
   B.   Definitions:
    BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.
   CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections
and tests, where required, have been performed and that such tests comply with
the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by
the method of "average end areas".
   EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
   FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after
the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
   GRADING: Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
   PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States Of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
   REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground, complete extraction of stumps, or
killing by spraying.
   SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
   STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including
tree removal, clearing and storage or removal of topsoil.
   VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
   C.   Principles And Standards: Except as provided below, no plat of
subdivision or development shall be approved unless the preliminary plan and/or
accompanying materials indicate that measures to be taken to control erosion
and sedimentation will be adequate to assure that sediment is not transported
from the site by a storm event of 10-year frequency or less, and that the
following principles will be applicable to all development activities in the
area to be subdivided:
      1.   Development should be related to the topography and soils of the
site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes
where high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible,
and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
      2.   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever
possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left
undisturbed wherever possible.
      3.   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the
shortest practical time during development.
      4.   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps or
filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff
waters from land undergoing development.
      5.   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should
be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion and on evaluation of the risks, costs and
benefits involved.
      6.   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices,
aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
      7.   Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused
by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant
velocities of discharges will not create additional erosion and should be
protected against erosion and sedimentation during development.
      8.   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as
practical during development.
   D.   Engineering Requirements:
      1.   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, an erosion
and sedimentation control plan showing the following must be submitted:
         a.   All erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to meet
the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction and
permanently after completion of development of the site.
         b.   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quality of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures.
         c.   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
         d.   Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance of erosion control structures and measures after
development is completed.
         e.   The proposed phasing of development of the site, including
stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas and the sequence of
clearing, installation of temporary sediment control measures, installation of
storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas, and establishment of
permanent vegetative cover.
      2.   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the standards
and requirements contained in "Procedures And Standards For Soil Erosion And
Sedimentation Control In Northeastern Illinois", prepared by the northeastern
Illinois erosion and sedimentation control steering committee and adopted by
the county soil and water conservation district, which standards and
requirements are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference.
      3.   The village engineer may waive specific requirements for the content
of submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to
show that the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this
chapter. (2016 Code)
14-11-8: RESPONSIBILITY:
Failure of the village engineering department to observe or recognize hazardous
or unsightly conditions or to deny the site grading and excavation permit shall
not relieve the permittee from the responsibility for the conditions or damage
resulting therefrom. (2016 Code)
14-11-9: INSPECTIONS:
The village engineer shall make inspections as herein required and shall either
approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
wherein the same fails to comply with the site grading and excavating plan.
Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated
or shown in the said plan, the village engineer may stop further work until
approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing
conditions. Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of the
village engineer's department, shall be maintained at the site during progress
of the grading. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following
schedule, the permittee shall notify the village engineer's department at least
two (2) working days before the said inspection is to be made: first, when
rough grading has been completed; and second, when all work, including
installation of all drainage and other structures and required planting, has
been completed. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 12
FINAL ENGINEERING APPROVAL, INSTALLATION AND ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
14-12-1: Final Engineering Approval
14-12-2: Installation Of Improvements
14-12-3: Acceptance And Approval Of Improvements
14-12-4: Permit Fees, Subdivision Improvements Security, Escrow Monies,
Guarantees And Land Development Permits
14-12-1: FINAL ENGINEERING APPROVAL:
Where a developer or owner plans for a development within the corporate limits
of the village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the unincorporated
area contiguous to the village limits, two (2) complete sets of the following
information must be submitted to the village engineer, plus an additional two
(2) sets of the engineering plans and specifications only. All documents shall
be on either eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") sheets or on
twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") drawings and shall be clearly
titled according to the headings below:
   A.   Disclosure Sheet: This sheet shall include the following information:
      1.   Name of improvement.
      2.   Location of improvement by address, if existing and by permanent
parcel number used for current tax assessment purposes and by any commonly used
name.
      3.   Name, address and telephone number of the landowner. If the land is
in trust, provide the above for all beneficiaries.
      4.   Name, address and telephone number of the developer. If the
developer is not the owner or beneficiary, provide an explanation of vested
interest along with copies of letters of intent to purchase, option to
purchase, contract to develop for owner, etc.
      5.   Name, address and telephone number of the engineer. The engineer
must be professionally registered in the state of Illinois, and the
registration number must be provided.
   B.   Survey: This drawing shall be at a minimum scale of fifty feet to the
inch (1" = 50') when the longest dimension of the tract is seven hundred feet
(700') or less, and a minimum scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100')
when the longest dimension of the tract is more than seven hundred feet (700').
The only other scales permissible are twenty feet, ten feet, five feet, or one
foot to the inch (1" = 20', 10', 5', or 1'). Where necessary, the plat may be
drawn on several sheets accompanied by a master drawing showing the entire
development. This drawing shall include the following information:
      1.   Boundary Lines: Boundary line survey which is prepared and certified
by a land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois.
      2.   Layout Of Streets: Showing right of way and street names (not
duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the village or its
environs unless such street is an extension of or in line of an already named
street, in which event, that name shall be used) and showing proposed through
streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision.
      3.   Other Rights Of Way: Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways,
and utility easements.
      4.   Acreage: Acreage.
      5.   Sites To Be Reserved Or Dedicated: Sites to be reserved or dedicated
for schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public uses, or for the exclusive use
of property owners within the subdivision. Such areas shall be designated by
letter or number and by legal description.
      6.   Accurate Dimensions: Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all
lines, angles, radii and arcs used to describe all boundaries including
perimeter survey of tract, streets, easements, areas to be reserved or
dedicated for public use and other important features. Error of closure of
boundary line surveys shall not exceed one in ten thousand (10,000) (1 foot for
each 10,000 feet of perimeter survey). Angular error shall not exceed plus or
minus twenty (±20) seconds. Lot lines shall show dimensions in feet and
hundredths, and when an angle occurs in any lot line between lot corners, the
measurement of the angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes, and seconds. The
survey shall show accurately the location of all permanent lot markers as
actually installed.
      7.   Control Points: True angles and distances to the nearest established
street lines and official monuments (not less than 3), which shall be
accurately described in the plat by location, size, and elevation, to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
      8.   Identification System: An identification system for all blocks and
lots using consecutive numbers for lots within a block and, where applicable, a
street address number in accord with current village policies.
      9.   Correlation With Existing Boundaries: Municipal, township or section
lines accurately correlated to the lines of the subdivision by distances and
angles.
      10.   Location Of Monuments:
         a.   Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all
block corners, angle points and at intermediate points as shall be required by
the village engineer, and installed in such manner that they may be located by
a licensed surveyor. All USGS, state, county, village or other official bench
marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall
be preserved in precise position. Designation of the points where monuments
marking the external boundaries of the subdivision may be found.
         b.   These monuments must be placed at all corners, at each end of all
curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in
any line and at all angle points along a meander line, the points to be not
less than twenty feet (20') back from the normal water elevation of a lake or
from the bank of a stream; except, that when such corners or points fall within
a street or proposed future street, monuments shall be placed on the right of
way line of the street.
      11.   Covenants: Protective covenants, if any, are to be placed on the
final plat or as an accompanying document in form for recording.
      12.   Setback Lines: Proposed building setback lines on all lots and
other sites.
      13.   Name: Name of subdivision.
      14.   Location: Location by section, township and range.
      15.   Title, Etc.: Title, scale, north arrow.
      16.   Certification: Certification by a registered land surveyor
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
      17.   Other Data: Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or
dedications as may be required in the enforcement of these regulations.
   C.   Description Of Use Sheet: This sheet shall be a brief description of
the use for which the property is being developed. In the case of subdivisions,
a copy of the "Notice Of Approval Of Preliminary Plan" and a copy of the
preliminary plan shall be attached. In the case of "special use" developments,
a copy of the letter from the zoning board of appeals approving such use must
be attached.
   D.   Sewer Permit Application: MSD and/or EPA sewer permit application.
   E.   Water Permit Application: EPA water permit applications.
   F.   Drainage Map: Storm sewer drainage map.
   G.   Retention/Detention Facility: Retention and/or detention facility
calculations.
   H.   Storm Sewer Size: Storm sewer size calculations.
   I.   Hydraulic Gradient Profiles: Provide hydraulic gradient profiles if the
design is based upon a hydraulic gradient.
   J.   Sanitary Sewer Size: Sanitary sewer size calculations.
   K.   Water Main Size Calculations: Provide water main size calculations for
consumption and fire flow demand when the design is less than the minimum
design required by this chapter.
   L.   Pavement: Pavement thickness calculations.
   M.   Highway Department Permits: County and state highway department
permits.
   N.   Title Search/Insurance: Provide title search/insurance in order to
verify any existence of covenants, restrictions, easements, etc.
   O.   Specifications: Specifications must be sealed and certified by the
engineer.
   P.   Landscape: Landscape plan.
   Q.   Erosion Control: Erosion control plan.
   R.   Engineering Plans: The following items shall be included in the
engineering plans. The engineering plans shall be drawn on twenty four inch by
thirty six inch (24" x 36") sheets.
      1.   Cover Sheet:
         a.   Title: Same name as in subsection A1 of this section.
         b.   Location Map: A small detail illustrating the project location
relative to the boundaries of Berkeley and surrounding villages with a north
arrow.
         c.   Benchmarks: The location and elevation of USGS benchmarks used
for reference for the development.
         d.   Index: An index of the engineering plans following the cover
sheet.
         e.   Revision Block: A block with sufficient space to record
consecutive revisions to the drawings. All revisions must be noted on this
block by indicating the type of revision, date of revision and sheet number
which was revised.
         f.   Legend: A list of symbols and definitions denoting new and
existing improvements.
         g.   Name, Address And Telephone: Provide name, address and telephone
number for the owner, developer, architect and engineer.
      2.   Overall Topography And Utility Sheet: This sheet shall be the survey
drawing described in subsection B of this section with existing topography and
sanitary, storm, and water systems overlaid. Topographic lines shall be at a
minimum of two foot (2') intervals. This topography shall extend one hundred
feet (100') past the boundaries of the survey. Sanitary, storm and water lines
and manholes should be indicated with lengths, and rim and invert elevations.
Separate overlays may be provided for each item.
      3.   Plan And Profile Sheets: Plan sheets shall be drawn at fifty feet to
the inch (1" = 50') minimum, and profile sheets shall be drawn at fifty feet to
the inch (1" = 50') horizontal minimum and five feet to the inch (1" = 5')
vertical minimum. Plan and profile may be separate or together. All existing
and proposed improvements shall be shown. The following items must be covered
on both plan and profile where applicable.
         a.   All elevations shall be referenced to the United States
geological survey datum.
         b.   Existing contours at one foot (1') intervals, indicating the
locations and elevations of bench marks used to determine said contours.
         c.   Finished grade contours at one foot (1') intervals of the
proposed site or finish grade elevations with drainage arrows for block and lot
grading.
         d.   Top of foundation elevations for existing and proposed
structures.
         e.   Block and lot numbers of permanent parcel number.
         f.   Rim and invert elevations for all existing and proposed sanitary
sewer structures and storm drainage facilities along with lengths, slopes,
diameters and locations.
         g.   Water main lengths and diameters along with valve and fire
hydrant sizes and locations.
         h.   All manholes, inlets, etc., shall have identification numbers.
         i.   Elevations shall provide for all utilities which cross each
other.
         j.   Streets shall be clearly labeled by name or designation.
      4.   Detailed Sheets: These sheets must show the following details:
         a.   Pavement cross section.
         b.   Curb, gutter and sidewalk details.
         c.   Cross section of retention facilities including sedimentation
basins.
         d.   Manholes, vaults, inlets and castings.
         e.   Hydrants.
         f.   Typical trench cross sections for sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and water mains.
         g.   Summary of all quantities.
      5.   Engineer's Estimate: This estimate is to be the total cost of all
improvements as defined by this chapter less mass grading and less the cost of
parking lot improvements. (2016 Code)
14-12-2: INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Upon approval of the detailed engineering plans by the village
engineer, appropriate improvement bonds, escrow monies and irrevocable letters
of credit for all improvements within the village, as indicated in section
14-12-4 of this chapter must be submitted to the village engineer to be
deposited with the village clerk. However, the escrow monies required in
subsection 14-12-4C of this chapter need not be deposited with the village
clerk until the time the public improvements are to be accepted or the private
improvements are to be approved by the village board. The improvement security
shall not be released until escrow monies have been deposited and approved.
Likewise, the land development permit fee must be paid before any permits will
be granted.
   B.   When the appropriate improvement security, if required, is posted and
all permit fees paid to the village and the supporting permits issued by the
MSD and EPA and highway departments or other public agencies, the installation
of the required improvements can begin.
   C.   All required improvements, public and private, shall be inspected by
the engineering department during construction for compliance with this chapter
and the approved plans and specifications. Builders and developers are required
to notify the department of engineering a minimum of twenty four (24) hours
prior to beginning any underground or surface improvements (sewer, water,
paving including parking lots, etc.) to arrange for the appropriate inspection.
(2016 Code)
14-12-3: ACCEPTANCE AND APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Each development is required by this chapter to contain the necessary
improvements as outlined herein. However, the acceptance of the required
improvements is limited to the public improvement located in dedicated and
accepted public rights of way and accepted public improvements located within
easements granted to and accepted by the village. Acceptance of public
improvements shall be in accordance with the provisions hereof.
   B.   1. When all required improvements, public and private, are completed in
their entirety, the developer or owner must formally request the village, by
letter, to accept public improvements or approve private improvements.
      2.   Upon receipt of the letter of request, the village engineer shall
authorize and schedule a final inspection to take place as soon as reasonably
possible after receipt of the letter.
      3.   Final inspections shall not be scheduled between November 15 and
April 1. All deficient improvements which do not totally conform to this
chapter (either incomplete or poor workmanship of improvements) shall be
inventoried. The inventory of deficiencies shall be forwarded to the developer
or owner for processing.
      4.   When the deficiencies are corrected, the developer or owner shall
request a second inspection. Scheduling of the second inspection shall be the
same as for the first inspection.
      5.   If the length of time between the first and second inspections is
greater than four (4) months, or if the noted deficiencies are not correct at
the time the second inspection is made, the request for acceptance shall be
canceled.
      6.   If canceled, a second request letter shall be required. The second
request for acceptance is subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The developer or owner shall be required to pay all costs
incurred by the person conducting the inspection.
         b.   The punch list of deficiencies recorded during the previous
inspections shall be voided, and a complete reinspection is required.
      7.   After the inspections have been performed as above, the village
engineer shall direct a letter to the developer or owner stating such, and upon
receipt by the village engineer of the appropriate maintenance bonds and escrow
monies, the village engineer shall make his report to the village
administrator.
      8.   Public improvements shall be approved and accepted by resolution of
the village board, and private improvements shall be approved by resolution of
the village board only after receipt by the village administrator of the
village engineer's report specifying that the improvements comply with this
chapter, approved plans and specifications, and applicable special use
ordinances, and that all required as builts have been received. (2016 Code)
14-12-4: PERMIT FEES, SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS SECURITY, ESCROW MONIES,
GUARANTEES AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
Before formal review and approval by the village engineer of any developments
to build within the village, the developer shall be responsible for the
following nonrefundable fees:
   A.   Permit Fees:
      1.   Land Developments: As part of the protective inspections policy of
the village, a land development permit fee as established in the annual fee
schedule is hereby required for all developments to cover engineering plans
review and construction inspections.
      2.   Miscellaneous Developments: Permit fees for the following are
established in the annual fee schedule: parking lots, curb cuts and street
openings.
      3.   Restriction On Building Permit Issuance: No building permits can be
issued for any phase of the development until such time as the village engineer
certifies to the director of the building department that the land development
permit and/or miscellaneous development permit has been issued.
   B.   Improvement Security:
      1.   A subdivider or developer, upon approval of the detailed engineering
plans by the village engineer, shall submit to the village engineer, for review
by the village attorney, and for deposit with the village clerk, a good and
sufficient security for the completion of all public and private common
improvements, less mass earth and parking lot improvements, in the amount of
the estimate of the village engineer of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
cost of the installation of such improvements. Said security shall provide that
monies in such estimated amounts are on deposit with a bank or other financial
institution and restricted for the purpose of the installation and completion
of said improvements.
      2.   Such security shall be evidenced by an appropriate instrument which
shall provide that no withdrawal or reduction shall be made without the written
consent of the village administrator and that in the event that said
improvements are not completed in accordance with village requirements, the
bank or other financial institution shall, upon written demand by the village
administrator, take any and all necessary steps to provide funds to the extent
of such bank's or financial institution's remaining liability on such security
for purpose of paying the cost of constructing said improvement. Such
instrument shall further provide that no more than fifty percent (50%) of the
amount deposited may be disbursed until the improvements have been completed
and accepted by the village engineer.
      3.   Approval of payments for the installation of improvements shall not
constitute acceptance of such improvements. All improvements, except the final
wearing surface of any road, to be constructed hereunder shall be completed
within two (2) years of the presentation of such guarantees or further building
permits or certificates of occupancy shall not be issued until such guarantees
or securities are updated to reflect cost escalations and completion dates.
      4.   Where such improvements are being installed by reason of an approval
of unit construction, the said security may be limited to those improvements
necessary for the unit being constructed. When the improvements have been
accepted for full ownership and maintenance by the village, all obligation for
the security set forth herein will be released by the village board; provided,
however, that the escrow monies referred to in subsection C of this section
must be submitted to the village engineer to be deposited with the village
clerk before such release. In the event that the subdivision improvements will
not ultimately be accepted by the village, the obligations hereunder will be
released when the project or phase is totally completed and an inspection is
made by the village to verify the completion of the required improvements in
accordance with the village standards and a release letter is authorized by the
village administrator.
      5.   The requirements for the improvements security set forth herein
apply to all types of developments regardless of use or ownership.
   C.   Escrow Monies: A subdivider or developer, before the public
improvements have been accepted by the village board, or before the private
improvements have been approved by the village board, shall deposit with the
village, in escrow, in cash or an irrevocable letter of credit, an amount equal
to five percent (5%) of the approved engineer's estimate as a guarantee against
any defect in the material or workmanship furnished in connection with such
improvement latent in character and not discernible at the time of the final
acceptance or approval of such improvement and to guarantee against any damage
to such improvements by reason of settling of the ground, base or foundation
thereof. Such deposit may be applied by the village for any amounts required by
the village to correct any such defects arising within any applicable guarantee
or warranty period. The balance of such deposit, if any, held at the end of
thirteen (13) months following final acceptance or approval of such
improvements shall be refunded or returned to the depositor or to the order of
the depositor.
   D.   Maintenance Bonds: A subdivider or developer, before the public
improvements have been accepted by the village board, or private common
improvements have been approved by the village board, shall provide to the
village a maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the approved
engineer's estimate for a period of two (2) years.
   E.   Expiration Of Securities, Etc.: Expiration of any securities, escrow
monies, guarantees, warranties, bonds or letters of credit, as defined in this
section shall not expire during the months of November, December, January,
February, March or April.
   F.   Land Development Permit: Construction, including earthwork and
underground and surface improvements cannot begin until the land development
permit has been issued. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 13
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
14-13-1: Administrative Officials
14-13-2: Enforcement Of Provisions
14-13-3: Variations And Exceptions
14-13-4: Appeals
14-13-5: Amendments
14-13-6: Public Utilities Permits
14-13-1: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS:
The following offices of the government of the village are concerned with the
administration of this chapter:
   A.   The village board. The village board is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to the engineering standards and specifications:
      1.   Variations: Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions
recommended by the village engineer.
      2.   Amendments: Amendment of the regulations of this title when found
necessary and desirable after review by the village engineer.
   B.   The village engineer.
      1.   Review Of Engineering: The village engineer shall review all
engineering plans and make determinations in the areas of design standards and
engineering specifications, as stipulated herein.
      2.   Inspection Of Work: The village engineer shall inspect all
improvements required by this title both during construction and after
completion to ensure compliance with this title and with good construction
practice.
      3.   Conflict Of Interest: The village engineer shall not be retained by
a subdivider or other interested party to perform engineering work in any
subdivision or development subject to the application of this title.
      4.   Variations: Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions
to this title except where herein otherwise noted.
      5.   Enforcement: Initiation of appropriate proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this title. (2016 Code)
14-13-2: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The village engineer shall administer this title and bring any
violations or lack of compliance herewith to the attention of the village
administrator.
   B.   No final plat of subdivision shall be approved which does not comply
with all the provisions of this title. (2016 Code)
14-13-3: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Hardships: Where the village engineer finds that extraordinary
hardships or particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land
may result from strict compliance with these regulations, he may recommend
variations or exceptions (except where herein otherwise noted) to the
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured; provided, that such variation or exception shall not have the effect
of nullifying the intent and purpose of this title; and further, provided, the
village engineer shall not recommend variations or exceptions to the
regulations of this title unless he shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented thereto in each specific case that:
      1.   Public Welfare Protected: The granting of the variation will not be
detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
      2.   Unique Conditions: The conditions upon which the request for a
variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought
and are not applicable, generally, to other property; and
      3.   Particular Physical Conditions: Because of the particular physical
surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property
involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried
out.
   B.   Conditions: In recommending variations and exceptions, the village
engineer may require such conditions as will, in good judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this title.
   C.   Procedure: A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the developer. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the
application and all the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
   D.   Approval By Village Administrator: All requests for variations and
exceptions greater than plus or minus ten percent (±10%) of the defined
standards and specifications and those explicitly stated by this title shall be
forwarded to the village board for approval as in subsection E of this section.
Variations and exceptions of less than plus or minus ten percent (±10%) of the
defined standards and specifications as may be recommended by the village
engineer shall be forwarded to the village administrator in writing
substantiating the recommended variations and/or exceptions. The village
administrator may approve such variations or exceptions from the requirements
of this title in specific cases which, in his/her opinion do not adversely
affect the intent and purpose of this title.
   E.   Approval By Village Board: Where required, such variations and
exceptions as may be recommended by the village engineer shall be forwarded to
the village board in writing substantiating the recommended variations and/or
exceptions. The village board may approve such variations or exceptions from
the requirements of this title in specific cases which, in its opinion, do not
adversely affect the intent and purpose of this title. (2016 Code)
14-13-4: APPEALS:
Any person or corporation may appeal, within sixty (60) days, to the village
board any final action taken by the village engineer. The village board shall
act as a board of appeals and shall hear and decide appeals from and review any
final order, requirements, decision or determination made by the village
engineer under this title. The concurring vote of the majority of trustees
present shall be necessary to reverse any final order of the village engineer
under this title. (2016 Code)
14-13-5: AMENDMENTS:
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare, the
village board may from time to time amend the regulations imposed by this
title. The village engineer may consider proposed amendments and make
recommendations thereon to the village board. (2016 Code)
14-13-6: PUBLIC UTILITIES PERMITS:
Public utilities shall obtain permits from the village engineer for the
installation of communications, electric power, gas or other utility services
before any installation work is started. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 14
STANDARD DRAWINGS
SECTION:
14-14-1: Adoption Of Standard Drawings
14-14-1: ADOPTION OF STANDARD DRAWINGS:
There are hereby adopted by reference the following standard drawings and
standards contained therein as part of the engineering standards and
specifications of this title which shall be available for public inspection at
the office of the village engineer:
Std. Auger.
Std. Curb B612.
Std. Curb M312.
Std. Curb M312 Depressed.
Std. Deciduous Tree Planting.
Std. Driveway Widen.
Std. Fence Setbacks.
Std. Mailbox, Residential - Apron And Sidewalk.
Std. Parking Lot Paving.
Std. Residential Street.
Std. Sanitary Drop Manhole.
Std. Sanitary Manhole.
Std. Sanitary Service Riser.
Std. Shrub Planting.
Std. Silt Fence.
Std. Storm Catch Basin A.
Std. Storm Catch Basin C.
Std. Storm Grate.
Std. Storm Inlet.
Std. Storm Manhole.
Std. Straw Bale.
Std. Street Cut Repair.
Std. Streetlight - Alum Pole - LED Head.
Std. Trench Sections.
Std. Water B Box.
Std. Water Conflicts.
Std. Water Fire Hydrant.
Std. Water Pressure Tap.
Std. Water Thrust Block.
Std. Water Valve Vault.
(2016 Code)
